     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Volume One
      Creator(s): Edwards, Jonathan (1703-1758)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Biography; Practical; Sermons; Theology;
      LC Call no: BX7117
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Congregationalism
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE WORKS OF

JONATHAN EDWARDS

   WITH A MEMOIR BY

   SERENO E. DWIGHT

        REVISED AND CORRECTED BY

   EDWARD HICKMAN

    VOLUME ONE

   The Banner of Truth Trust

   THE BANNER OF TRUTH TRUST

   3 Murrayfield Road, Edinburgh EH12 6EL

   PO Box 621, Carlisle, Pennsylvania 17013, USA

   First published 1834

   This edition published 1974 Reprinted 1976 Reprinted 1979 Reprinted
   1984 Reprinted 1987 Reprinted 1990 Reprinted 1992 Reprinted 1995

   Printed and bound in Great Britain at

   The Bath Press, Avon

    ADVERTISEMENT

   THE present Edition of the WORKS OF JONATHAN EDWARDS will be found more
   complete than any other previously submitted to the Public.

   1. It contains all the matter included in the first collected American
   edition that which was published at Worcester, and is regarded in the
   United States as the only one entitled to confidence.

   2. The various original extracts from the diary and papers of Edwards,
   first published in America, by his descendant Sereno E. Dwight, in the
   year 1830, are here incorporated.

   3. Several smaller pieces, printed originally in a separate form, and
   not hitherto included in any collection of the Works, are here
   introduced.

   4. The valuable notes of Dr. Williams have been added.

   5. The whole has been carefully revised by collation of all the
   previous editions

   Bungay, January 1834.

    CONTENTS

  MEMOIRS

        OF

JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER I.

   BIRTH--PARENTAGE--EARLY RELIGIOUS ADVANTAGES--SERIOUS IMPRESSIONS AND
   ACCOUNT OF HIS EXPERIENCE.

   Few individuals ever appeared in the church of God who have merited,
   and actually received, higher tributes of respect than Jonathan
   Edwards. His intellectual powers were of no common order, and his
   industry in the cultivation of those powers is strongly marked in that
   wide extent of most important knowledge which he possessed. If we
   consider him as ranking with Hartley, Locke, and Bacon, in the scale of
   intellect, we shall have little apprehension of his title to such
   distinction being disputed. His mighty mind grasped with ease those
   subjects at which others faltered. He saw truth almost intuitively, and
   was equally keen in the detection of error in all its varied
   shades.--This distinguished man claims admiration, not merely on the
   ground of uncommon strength of intellectual powers, and intense
   application of mind, rewarded by proportionate acquirements, but also
   as a most humble and devoted servant of Christ; bringing all he had
   received into his service, and living only to him. His soul was indeed
   a temple of the Holy Spirit, and his life uniformly manifested all the
   simplicity, purity, disinterestedness, and elevated character of the
   gospel of Christ. The glory of God was his supreme object, whether
   engaged in his devotional exercises, his studies, his social
   intercourse, the discharge of his public ministry, or in the
   publication of his writings. All inferior motives seem to have been
   without any discernible influence upon him. He entered fully into the
   expressive language of Paul--"The love of Christ constraineth me." "For
   me to live is Christ." His personal example will long instruct, excite,
   and encourage, and his writings will necessarily be most highly
   esteemed so long as the love of truth prevails.

   It has been justly observed, "The number of those men, who have
   produced great and permanent changes in the character and condition of
   mankind, and stamped their own image on the minds of succeeding
   generations, is comparatively small; and, even of this small number,
   the great body have been indebted for their superior efficiency, at
   least in part, to extraneous circumstances, while very few can ascribe
   it to the simple strength of their own intellect. Yet here and there an
   individual can be found, who, by his mere mental energy, has changed
   the course of human thought and feeling, and led mankind onward in that
   new and better path which he had opened to their view. Such an
   individual was Jonathan Edwards. Born in an obscure colony, in the
   midst of a wilderness, and educated at a seminary just commencing its
   existence; passing the better part of his life as the pastor of a
   frontier village, and the residue as an Indian missionary in a still
   humbler hamlet; he discovered, and unfolded, a system of the divine
   moral government, so new, so clear, so full, that while at its first
   disclosure it needed no aid from its friends and feared no opposition
   from its enemies, it has at length constrained a reluctant world to bow
   in homage to its truth." [1]

   Jonathan Edwards was born on the 5th of October, 1703, at Windsor, on
   the banks of the Connecticut. His father, the Rev. Timothy Edwards, was
   minister of that place about 60 years. [2] He died in January, 1758, in
   the 89th year of his age, not two months before this his only son. He
   was a man of great piety and usefulness. On November 6th, 1694, he
   married Esther Stoddard, daughter of the reverend and celebrated
   Solomon Stoddard, of Northampton, in the 23rd year of her age. They
   lived together in the married state above sixty-three years. Mrs.
   Edwards, our author's mother, was born June 2nd, 1672, and lived to
   about ninety years of age, (some years after her son,) a remarkable
   instance of the small decay of mental powers at so advanced an age.
   This venerable couple had eleven children; one son, the subject of
   these memoirs, and ten daughters, four of whom were older, and six
   younger, than himself.

   From the highly spiritual character and intellectual attainments of his
   parents, it might naturally be expected that his early education would
   be attended with no common advantages; this was the fact. Many were the
   prayers presented by parental affection that this only and beloved son
   might be filled with the Holy Spirit; from a child know the Holy
   Scriptures; and be great in the sight of the Lord. They who thus
   fervently and constantly commended him to God, manifested equal
   diligence in training him up for God. Prayer excited to exertion, and
   exertion again was encouraged by prayer. The domestic circle was a
   scene of supplication, and it was a scene of instruction. In the abode
   of such exemplary servants of God, instruction abounded; that which the
   eye saw, as well as that which the ear heard, formed a lesson. There
   was nothing in the example of those who taught to diminish the force of
   instruction; there was nothing in social habits which counteracted the
   lessons of wisdom, and infused those principles which in after-years
   produced the fruit of folly and sin. On the contrary, there was every
   thing to enlarge, to purify, and to elevate the heart, and at the same
   time to train the mind, to those exercises of thought from which alone
   eminent attainments can be expected.

   The faithful religious instructions of his parents "rendered him when a
   child familiarly conversant with God and Christ, with his own character
   and duty, with the way of salvation, and with the nature of that
   eternal life which, begun on earth, is perfected in heaven." Their
   prayers were not forgotten, and their efforts did not remain without
   effect. In the progress of childhood he was in several instances the
   subject of strong religious impressions. "This was particularly true
   some years before he went to college, during a powerful revival of
   religion in his father's congregation. He, and two other lads of his
   own age, who had the same feelings with himself, erected a booth in a
   very retired spot in a swamp, for an oratory, and resorted to it
   regularly for social prayer. This continued for a long period; but the
   impressions ultimately disappeared, and in his own view, were followed
   by no permanent effects of a salutary nature." The precise period when
   he regarded himself as entering on a religious life he no where
   mentions, nor has any record been found of the time when he made a
   publick profession of religion. Even the church with which he became
   connected would not certainly be known, were it not that on one
   occasion he alludes to himself as a member of the church in East
   Windsor. From various circumstances, it seems that the time of his
   uniting himself to it was not far from the time of his leaving college.
   Of the views and feelings of his mind, on this most important subject,
   both before and after this event, there is a most satisfactory and
   instructive account which was found among his papers in his own
   hand-writing, and which was written near twenty years afterwards for
   his own private benefit. It is as follows:

   "I had a variety of concerns and exercises about my soul from my
   childhood; but I had two more remarkable seasons of awakening, before I
   met with that change by which I was brought to those new dispositions,
   and that new sense of things, that I have since had. The first time was
   when I was a boy some years before I went to college, [3] at a time of
   remarkable awakening in my father's congregation. I was then very much
   affected for many months, and concerned about the things of religion,
   and my soul's salvation; and was abundant in religious duties. I used
   to pray five times a day in secret, and to spend much time in religious
   conversation with other boys; and used to meet with them to pray
   together. I experienced I know not what kind of delight in religion. My
   mind was much engaged in it, and had much self-righteous pleasure, and
   it was my delight to abound in religious duties. I, with some of my
   school-mates, joined together and built a booth in a swamp, in a very
   retired spot, for a place of prayer. [4] And besides, I had particular
   secret places of my own in the woods, where I used to retire by myself;
   and was from time to time much affected. My affections seemed to be
   lively and easily moved, and I seemed to be in my element when I
   engaged in religious duties. And I am ready to think, many are deceived
   with such affections, and such a kind of delight as I then had in
   religion, and mistake it for grace.

   "But, in progress of time, my convictions and affections wore off, and
   I entirely lost all those affections and delights, and left off secret
   prayer, at least as to any constant preference of it; and returned like
   a dog to his vomit, and went on in the ways of sin. Indeed, I was at
   times very uneasy, especially towards the latter part of my time at
   college, when it pleased God to seize me with a pleurisy; in which he
   brought me nigh to the grave, and shook me over the pit of hell. And
   yet it was not long after my recovery, before I fell again into my old
   ways of sin. But God would not suffer me to go on with any quietness; I
   had great and violent inward struggles, till after many conflicts with
   wicked inclinations, repeated resolutions, and bonds that I laid myself
   under by a kind of vows to God, I was brought wholly to break off all
   former wicked ways, and all ways of known outward sin; and to apply
   myself to seek salvation, and practise many religious duties, but
   without that kind of affection and delight which I had formerly
   experienced. My concern now wrought more inward struggles and
   conflicts, and self-reflection. I made seeking my salvation the main
   business of my life. But yet, it seems to me, I sought it after a
   miserable manner which has made me sometimes since to question, whether
   ever it issued in that which was saving; being ready to doubt whether
   such miserable seeking ever succeeded. I was indeed brought to seek
   salvation, in a manner that I never was before; I felt a spirit to part
   with all things in the world, for an interest in Christ. My concern
   continued, and prevailed, with many exercising thoughts and inward
   struggles; but yet it never seemed to be proper, to express that
   concern by the name of terror.

   "From my childhood up, my mind had been full of objections against the
   doctrine of God's sovereignty, in choosing whom he would to eternal
   life; and rejecting whom he pleased; leaving them eternally to perish,
   and be everlastingly tormented in hell. It used to appear like a
   horrible doctrine to me. But I remember the time very well when I
   seemed to be convinced, and fully satisfied, as to this sovereignty of
   God, and his justice in thus eternally disposing of men, according to
   his sovereign pleasure. But never could give an account how, or by what
   means, I was thus convinced, not in the least imagining at the time,
   nor a long time after, that there was any extraordinary influence of
   God's Spirit in it; but only that now I saw further, and my reason
   apprehended the justice and reasonableness of it. However, my mind
   rested in it; and it put an end to all those cavils and objections. And
   there has been a wonderful alteration in my mind, with respect to the
   doctrine of God's sovereignty, from that day to this; so that I scarce
   ever have found so much as the rising of an objection against it, in
   the most absolute sense, in God showing mercy to whom he will show
   mercy, and hardening whom he will. God's absolute sovereignty and
   justice, with respect to salvation and damnation, is what my mind seems
   to rest assured of, as much as of any thing that I see with my eyes; at
   least it is so at times. But I have often, since that first conviction,
   had quite another kind of sense of God's sovereignty than I had then. I
   have often since had not only a conviction, but a delightful
   conviction. The doctrine has very often appeared exceedingly pleasant,
   bright, and sweet. Absolute sovereignty is what I love to ascribe to
   God. But my first conviction was not so.

   "The first instance, that I remember, of that sort of inward, sweet
   delight in God and divine things, that I have lived much in since, was
   on reading those words, 1 Tim. i. 17.. Now unto the King eternal,
   immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever
   and ever. Amen. As I read the words, there came into my soul, and was
   as it were diffused through it, a sense of the glory of the Divine
   Being; a new sense, quite different from any thing I ever experienced
   before. Never any words of Scripture seemed to me as these words did. I
   thought with myself, how excellent a Being that was, and how happy I
   should be, if I might enjoy that God, and be rapt up to him in heaven;
   and be as it were swallowed up in him for ever! I kept saying, and as
   it were singing, over these words of Scripture to myself; and went to
   pray to God that I might enjoy him; and prayed in a manner quite
   different from what I used to do, with a new sort of affection. But it
   never came into my thought, that there was any thing spiritual, or of a
   saving nature, in this.

   "From about that time I began to have a new kind of apprehensions and
   ideas of Christ, and the work of redemption, and the glorious way of
   salvation by him. An inward, sweet sense of these things, at times,
   came into my heart; and my soul was led away in pleasant views and
   contemplations of them. And my mind was greatly engaged to spend my
   time in reading and meditating on Christ, on the beauty and excellency
   of his person, and the lovely way of salvation by free grace in him. I
   found no books so delightful to me, as those that treated of these
   subjects. Those words Cant. ii. 1.. used to be abundantly with me, I am
   the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys. The words seemed to me
   sweetly to represent the loveliness and beauty of Jesus Christ. The
   whole book of Canticles used to be pleasant to me, and I used to be
   much in reading it, about that time; and found from time to time an
   inward sweetness, that would carry me away in my contemplations. This I
   know not how to express otherwise, than by a calm, sweet abstraction of
   soul from all the concerns of this world; and sometimes a kind of
   vision, or fixed ideas and imaginations, of being alone in the
   mountains, or some solitary wilderness, far from all mankind, sweetly
   conversing with Christ, and wrapt and swallowed up in God. The sense I
   had of divine things, would often of a sudden kindle up, as it were, a
   sweet burning my heart, an ardour of soul, that I know not how to
   express.

   "Not long after I first began to experience these things, I gave an
   account to my father of some things that had passed in my mind. I was
   pretty much affected by the discourse we had together; and when the
   discourse was ended, I walked abroad alone, in a solitary place in my
   father's pasture, for contemplation. And as I was walking there, and
   looking upon the sky and clouds, there came into my mind so sweet a
   sense of the glorious majesty and grace of God, as I know not how to
   express.--I seemed to see them both in a sweet conjunction; majesty and
   meekness joined together: it was a sweet, and gentle, and holy majesty;
   and also a majestic meekness; an awful sweetness; a high, and great,
   and holy gentleness.

   "After this my sense of divine things gradually increased, and became
   more and more lively, and had more of that inward sweetness. The
   appearance of every thing was altered; there seemed to be, as it were,
   a calm, sweet cast or appearance of divine glory, in almost every
   thing. God's excellency, his wisdom, his purity, and love, seemed to
   appear in every thing; in the sun, moon, and stars; in the clouds and
   blue sky; in the grass, flowers, trees; in the water and all nature;
   which used greatly to fix my mind. I often used to sit and view the
   moon for a long time; and in the day, spent much time in viewing the
   clouds and sky, to behold the sweet glory of God in these things: in
   the mean time singing forth, with a low voice, my contemplations of the
   Creator and Redeemer. And scarce any thing, among all the works of
   nature, was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning: formerly nothing
   had been so terrible to me. Before, I used to be uncommonly terrified
   with thunder, and to be struck with terror when I saw a thunder-storm
   rising; but now, on the contrary, it rejoiced me. I felt God, if I may
   so speak, at the first appearance of a thunderstorm; and used to take
   the opportunity, at such times, to fix myself in order to view the
   clouds, and see the lightnings play, and hear the majestic and awful
   voice of God's thunders, which oftentimes was exceedingly entertaining,
   leading me to sweet contemplations of my great and glorious God. While
   thus engaged, it always seemed natural for me to sing or chant forth my
   meditations; or, to speak my thoughts in soliloquies with a singing
   voice.

   "I felt then great satisfaction as to my good estate; but that did not
   content me. I had vehement longings of soul after God and Christ, and
   after more holiness, wherewith my heart seemed to be full, and ready to
   break; which often brought to my mind the words of the psalmist, Ps.
   cxix. 28. My soul breaketh for the longing it hath. I often felt a
   mourning and lamenting in my heart, that I had not turned to God
   sooner, that I might have had more time to grow in grace. My mind was
   greatly fixed on divine things; almost perpetually in the contemplation
   of them. I spent most of my time in thinking of divine things, year
   after year; often walking alone in the woods, and solitary places, for
   meditation, soliloquy, and prayer, and converse with God; and it was
   always my manner, at such times, to sing forth my contemplations. I was
   almost constantly in ejaculatory prayer, wherever I was. Prayer seemed
   to be natural to me, as the breath by which the inward burnings of my
   heart had vent. The delights which I now felt in the things of
   religion, were of an exceedingly different kind from those before
   mentioned, that I had when a boy; and what then I had no more notion
   of, than one born blind has of pleasant and beautiful colours. They
   were of a more inward, pure, soul-animating, and refreshing nature.
   Those former delights never reached the heart; and did not arise from
   any sight of the divine excellency of the things of God; or any taste
   of the soul-satisfying and life-giving good there was in them.

   My sense of divine things seemed gradually to increase, till I went to
   preach at New York; which was about a year and a half after they began:
   and while I was there I felt them very sensibly, in a much higher
   degree than I had done before. My longings after God and holiness were
   much increased. Pure and humble, holy and heavenly, Christianity
   appeared exceedingly amiable to me. I felt a burning desire to be, in
   every thing, a complete Christian; and conformed to the blessed image
   of Christ; and that I might live, in all things, according to the pure,
   sweet, and blessed rules of the gospel. I had an eager thirsting after
   progress in these things; which put me upon pursuing and pressing after
   them. It was my continual strife, day and night, and constant inquiry,
   how I should be more holy, and live more holily, and more becoming a
   child of God, and a disciple of Christ. I now sought an increase of
   grace and holiness, and a holy life, with much more earnestness than
   ever I sought grace before I had it. I used to be continually examining
   myself, and studying and contriving for likely ways and means how I
   should live holily, with far greater diligence and earnestness than
   ever I pursued any thing in my life; but yet with too great a
   dependence on my own strength; which afterwards proved a great damage
   to me. My experience had not then taught me, as it has done since, my
   extreme feebleness and impotence, every manner of way; and the
   bottomless depths of secret corruption and deceit there was in my
   heart. However, I went on with my eager pursuit after more holiness and
   conformity to Christ.

   "The heaven I desired was a heaven of holiness; to be with God, and to
   spend my eternity in divine love, and holy communion with Christ. My
   mind was very much taken up with contemplations on heaven, and the
   enjoyments there; and living there in perfect holiness, humility, and
   love; and it used at that time to appear a great part of the happiness
   of heaven, that there the saints could express their love to Christ. It
   appeared to me a great clog and burden, that what I felt within I could
   not express as I desired. The inward ardour of my soul seemed to be
   hindered and pent up, and could not freely flame out as it would. I
   used often to think, how in heaven this principle should freely and
   fully vent and express itself. Heaven appeared exceedingly delightful,
   as a world of love; and that all happiness consisted in living in pure,
   humble, heavenly, divine love.

   "I remember the thoughts I used then to have of holiness; and said
   sometimes to myself, I do certainly know that I love holiness, such as
   the gospel prescribes.' It appeared to me, that there was nothing in it
   but what was ravishingly lovely; the highest beauty and amiableness--a
   divine beauty; far purer than any thing here upon earth; and that every
   thing else was like mire and defilement in comparison of it.

   "Holiness, as I then wrote down some of my contemplations on it,
   appeared to me to be of a sweet, pleasant, charming, serene, calm
   nature; which brought an inexpressible purity, brightness,
   peacefulness, and ravishment to the soul. In other words, that it made
   the soul like a field or garden of God, with all manner of pleasant
   flowers; enjoying a sweet calm, and the gently vivifying beams of the
   sun. The soul of a true Christian, as I then wrote my meditations,
   appeared like such a little white flower as we see in the spring of the
   year; low and humble on the ground, opening its bosom to receive the
   pleasant beams of the sun's glory; rejoicing, as it were, in a calm
   rapture; diffusing around a sweet fragrancy; standing peacefully and
   lovingly, in the midst of other flowers round about; all in like manner
   opening their bosoms to drink in the light of the sun. There was no
   part of creature-holiness that I had so great a sense of its
   loveliness, as humility, brokenness of heart, and poverty of spirit;
   and there was nothing that I so earnestly longed for. My heart panted
   after this--to lie low before God, as in the dust; that I might be
   nothing, and that God might be all, that I might become as a little
   child.

   "While at New York, I sometimes was much affected with reflections on
   my past life, considering how late it was before I began to be truly
   religious; and how wickedly I had lived till then: and once so as to
   weep abundantly, and for a considerable time together.

   "On January 12, 1723, I made a solemn dedication of myself to God, and
   wrote it down; giving up myself, and all that I had, to God; to be for
   the future in no respect my own; to act as one that had no right to
   himself, in any respect. And solemnly vowed to take God for my whole
   portion and felicity, looking on nothing else as any part of my
   happiness, nor acting as it were; and his law for the constant rule of
   my obedience; engaging to fight with all my might against the world,
   the flesh, and the devil, to the end of my life. But I have reason to
   be infinitely humbled, when I consider how much I have failed of
   answering my obligation.

   "I had, then, abundance of sweet religious conversation, in the family
   where I lived, with Mr. John Smith, and his pious mother. My heart was
   knit in affection to those in whom were appearances of true piety; and
   I could bear the thoughts of no other companions, but such as were
   holy, and the disciples of the blessed Jesus. I had great longings for
   the advancement of Christ's kingdom in the world; and my secret prayers
   used to be, in great part, taken up in praying for it. If I heard the
   least hint of any thing that happened in any part of the world, that
   appeared, in some respect or other, to have a favourable aspect on the
   interests of Christ's kingdom, my soul eagerly catched at it, and it
   would much animate and refresh me. I used to be eager to read public
   news-letters, mainly for that end; to see if I could not find some news
   favourable to the interest of religion in the world.

   "I very frequently used to retire into a solitary place on the banks of
   Hudson's river, at some distance from the city, for contemplation on
   divine things and secret converse with God; and had many sweet hours
   there. Sometimes Mr. Smith and I walked there together, to converse on
   the things of God; and our conversation used to turn much on the
   advancement of Christ's kingdom in the world, and the glorious things
   that God would accomplish for his church in the latter days. I had
   then, and at other times, the greatest delight in the Holy Scriptures
   of any book whatsoever. Oftentimes in reading it every word seemed to
   touch my heart. I felt a harmony between something in my heart, and
   those sweet and powerful words. I seemed often to see so much light
   exhibited by every sentence, and such a refreshing food communicated,
   that I could not get along in reading; often dwelling long on one
   sentence, to see the wonders contained in it; and yet almost every
   sentence seemed to be full of wonders.

   "I came away from New York in the month of April, 1723, and had a most
   bitter parting with Madam Smith and her son. My heart seemed to sink
   within me, at leaving the family and city, where I had enjoyed so many
   sweet and pleasant days. I went from New York to Wethersfield by water;
   and as I sailed away, I kept sight of the city as long as I could.
   However, that night, after this sorrowful parting, I was greatly
   comforted in God at West Chester, where we went ashore to lodge: and
   had a pleasant time of it all the voyage to Saybrook. It was sweet to
   me to think of meeting dear Christians in heaven, where we should never
   part more. At Saybrook we went ashore to lodge on Saturday, and there
   kept the sabbath; where I had a sweet and refreshing season walking
   alone in the fields.

   "After I came home to Windsor, I remained much in a like frame of mind
   as when at New York; only sometimes I felt my heart ready to sink with
   the thoughts of my friends at New York. My support was in
   contemplations on the heavenly state; as I find in my diary of May 1,
   1723. It was a comfort to think of that state, where there is fulness
   of joy; where reigns heavenly, calm and delightful love, without alloy;
   where there are continually the dearest expressions of this love; where
   is the enjoyment of the persons loved, without ever parting; where
   those persons who appear so lovely in this world will really be
   inexpressibly more lovely, and full of love to us. And how secretly
   will the mutual lovers join together, to sing the praises of God and
   the Lamb! How will it fill us with joy to think, that this enjoyment,
   these sweet exercises, will never cease, but will last to all
   eternity!"

   Thus deep, decided, and powerful were the operations of divine grace
   upon the mind of this eminent servant of Christ. That his understanding
   was much enlightened in the things of God, and his heart deeply
   affected by them, are circumstances which will immediately strike the
   attention of every serious observer. There was in him a holy anxiety to
   obtain the most satisfactory testimony to a change of heart: for this
   purpose he closely and diligently examined himself; he had no
   inclination to shun this self-inquiry. Personal examination seems to
   have been considered by him as a pleasing as well as a momentous
   exercise. Many professors revolt at the thought of such inward survey;
   they content themselves with looking (and that hastily) at external
   matters, but they will not look within, though this neglect be at the
   peril of eternal good. The feelings with which men regard the duty of
   personal examination, may justly be viewed as an accurate criterion of
   their spiritual state, for in proportion to their concern for eternity,
   will be their disposition to try themselves; or in other words, in the
   same measure in which grace exists, will there be a desire of fully
   ascertaining its existence and progress. Upon a review of the statement
   given by Mr. Edwards as to his early religious experience, it is
   evident that he was not one who could satisfy himself upon any
   insufficient grounds: not a symptom of carelessness or of presumption
   can be discerned; he looked upon himself with a holy jealousy; he
   thought, he read, he conversed, and above all he prayed, that he might
   be enabled more accurately to search his own heart, and thus escape the
   danger of self-deception, and be convinced by proofs which would stand
   the test of the judgment of God, that he was a child of light, a
   subject of holiness, and an heir of glory. And thus studying himself
   under the penetrating light of the word, and the gracious influences of
   the Spirit of God, he acquired that exact knowledge of the various
   inward exercises and outward displays of the christian character, which
   enabled him in after-years, with such skill, to separate delusive
   appearances from those which are solid, and to mark the strong
   difference between the mere professor of the name of Christ, and the
   actual partaker of the power of the gospel. It was in these early years
   of his life that those correct views were formed which afterwards
   expanded in his admirable treatise on Religious Affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Life prefixed to the American edition of the Works of Jonathan
   Edwards, 1830.

   [2] Appendix. No. I.

   [3] As he entered college at twelve years of age, this was probably
   when he was seven or eight.

   [4] The place where the booth was built is known at East Windsor
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER II.

   INTELLECTUAL PROGRESS--EARLIEST PRODUCTIONS--ENTRANCE AT
   COLLEGE--MENTAL HABITS.

   A Statement has been given principally from the pen of Mr. Edwards
   himself of his religious views in youth, and it will be proper before
   that subject be resumed, to advert to his intellectual progress at the
   same period. It is delightful to contemplate the simultaneous
   advancement of knowledge in the mind and of piety in the heart None can
   reasonably imagine that there is an opposition between these things;
   and all whose minds are open to conviction will be persuaded, that the
   growth of piety is most conducive to the increase of the best treasures
   of earthly wisdom. Religion strengthens the powers of man; it never
   enfeebles them. It at once cuts off those guilty pleasures, and those
   unworthy pursuits, which not merely impede the progress of the
   understanding, but in many cases are absolutely fatal to its energies;
   and it forms those mental habits, as well as produces that outward
   propriety of conduct, which are most favourable to the cultivation of
   man's noblest faculties. It would be easy to record a lengthened list
   of names enrolled with never-fading honour, both in the schools of
   science, and in the church of God. The gospel of Christ has uniformly
   been the friend of solid learning, nor are those persons the judicious
   friends of the gospel, who are disposed to disparage the exertions and
   acquirements of intellect. The christian church dreads the veil of
   darkness, but it rejoices in the light.

   The same parental kindness and wisdom, which, under God, guided the
   mind of Jonathan Edwards to the knowledge and love of things eternal,
   were also much discovered in the direction of his powers to useful
   objects of earthly science. When only six years of age, the study of
   the Latin language engaged his attention under the care of his father,
   and occasionally that of his elder sisters. No account is preserved of
   his progress in his studies at that early period, but his high standing
   as a scholar on his admission to college, as well as afterwards, and
   his thorough knowledge of the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, prove at once
   his own diligence as a student at this time, and the accuracy and
   fidelity of his father's instructions.

   "From his remaining manuscripts, it is evident that his father's family
   were fond of the use of the pen, and that he and his sisters were early
   encouraged by their parents to make attempts, not only in letter
   writing, but in other species of composition. This course, though
   rarely pursued with children, is eminently advantageous; and in the
   case before us, was obviously followed by the best results. While it
   increased the mutual affection of the brother and the sisters, it also
   served to strengthen their minds, and to impart exactness both of
   thought and expression. The earliest effort of his pen appears to have
   been written on the following occasion. Some one in the vicinity,
   probably an older boy than himself, had advanced the opinion, that the
   soul was material, and remained with the body till the resurrection;
   and had endeavoured to convince him of its correctness. Struck with the
   absurdity of the notion, he sat down and wrote the following reply;
   which, as a specimen both of wit and reasoning in a child of about ten
   years of age, may fairly claim to be preserved. It is without date, and
   without pointing, or any division into sentences; and has every
   appearance of having been written by a boy just after he had learned to
   write.

   "I am informed that you have advanced a notion, that the soul is
   material, and attends the body till the resurrection; as I am a
   professed lover of novelty, you must imagine I am very much entertained
   by this discovery; (which, however old in some parts of the world, is
   new to us;) but suffer my curiosity a little further. I would know the
   manner of the kingdom before I swear allegiance: 1st, I would know
   whether this material soul keeps with (the body) in the coffin, and if
   so, whether it might not be convenient to build a repository for it; in
   order to which I would know what shape it is of, whether round,
   triangular, or four-square; or whether it is a number of long fine
   strings reaching from the head to the foot; and whether it does not
   live a very discontented life. I am afraid when the coffin gives way,
   the earth will fall in and crush it; but if it should choose to live
   above-ground, and hover about the grave, how big is it?--whether it
   covers all the body; what it does when another body is laid upon it:
   whether the first gives way; and if so where is the place of retreat.
   But suppose that souls are not so big but that ten or a dozen of them
   may be about one body; whether they will not quarrel for the highest
   place; and, as I insist much upon my honour and property, I would know
   whether I must quit my dear head, if a superior soul comes in the way:
   but above all, I am concerned to know what they do, where a
   burying-place has been filled twenty, thirty, or an hundred times. If
   they are a-top of one another, the uppermost will be so far off, that
   it can take no care of the body. I strongly suspect they must march off
   every time there comes a new set. I hope there is some other place
   provided for them but dust. The undergoing so much hardship, and being
   deprived of the body at last, will make them ill-tempered. I leave it
   with your physical genius to determine, whether some medicinal
   applications might not be proper in such cases, and subscribe your
   proselyte, when I can have solution of these matters."

   The following letter to one of his sisters, written at twelve years of
   age, is the earliest dated effort of his pen which has been discovered.

   "To Miss Mary Edwards, at Hadley.

   "Windsor, May 10, 1716.

   "Dear sister,

   "Through the wonderful goodness and mercy of God, there has been in
   this place a very remarkable outpouring of the Spirit of God. It still
   continues, but I think I have reason to think is in some measure
   diminished, yet I hope not much. Three have joined the church since you
   last heard; five now stand propounded for admission; and I think above
   thirty persons come commonly on Mondays to converse with father about
   the condition of their souls. It is a time of general health here.
   Abigail, Hannah, and Lucy have had the chicken pox and are recovered.
   Jerusha is almost well. Except her, the whole family is well.

   "Sister, I am glad to hear of your welfare so often as I do, I should
   be glad to hear from you by letter, and therein how it is with you as
   to your crookedness.

   "Your loving brother,

   "jonathan e."

   He was educated, until he entered college, at home, and under his
   father's personal instruction; while his older sisters were daily
   pursuing their respective branches of study in his immediate presence.
   Their father having been distinguished as a scholar, was able to give
   them, and actually gave them, a superior education. In all their
   various pursuits, the mind of their brother, as it opened, would of
   course be more and more interested; and thus at length he would easily
   and insensibly acquire a mass of information far beyond his years. The
   course of his education may in this way have been less systematic,
   indeed, and less conformed to rule, than that ordinarily given in the
   school. At the same time it was more safe; forming him to softer
   manners, gentler feelings, and purer affections. In his circumstances,
   also, it was obviously more comprehensive and universal; and while it
   brought him acquainted with many things which are not usually
   communicated until a later period, it also served to unfold the
   original traits of his mind, and to give it that expansion, which is
   the result of information alone. One characteristic, of which he has
   not generally been suspected, but which he possessed in an unusual
   degree, was a fondness minutely and critically to investigate the works
   of nature. This propensity was not only discovered in youth and
   manhood, but was fully developed in childhood, and at that early period
   was encouraged and cherished by the fostering hand of parental care.

   He entered Yale college in New-Haven, in September, 1716, before he was
   thirteen years of age. The college was then in its infancy, and various
   untoward circumstances had greatly impeded its growth. It was first
   planted at Saybrook, and then partially removed to Kenilworth, to the
   house of its first rector, until his death in 1707. From that time the
   Rev. Mr. Andrews, of Milford, one of the trustees, was rector pro
   tempore, upwards of twelve years; and the location of the college was a
   constant theme of contention between the towns of New-Haven, Saybrook,
   Wethersfield, and Hartford, until 1716; when the vote of the trustees,
   the donation of Mr. Yale, and the vote of the legislature of the
   colony, fixed it permanently at New-Haven. In the collegiate year
   1716-1717, thirteen of the students resided at New-Haven, fourteen at
   Wethersfield, and four at Saybrook. The temporary presidency of Mr.
   Andrews continued until 1719; and as he was the acting minister of
   Milford, his oversight of the college, and his influence over the
   students, must of course have been exceedingly imperfect. The
   government of the institution, virtually and necessarily, was chiefly
   in the hands of the tutors: who, as young men without experience and a
   knowledge of mankind, could not usually be found qualified for so
   difficult a trust. Some time in the year 1717, the extreme unpopularity
   of one of the tutors occasioned a general insurrection of the students,
   who were at New-Haven, against the government of the college: and in
   one body they withdrew from New-Haven, and joined their companions at
   Wethersfield. At the commencement in that year, eight of the senior
   class returned to New-Haven, to receive their degrees of the regular
   college government; while five received theirs irregularly at
   Wethersfield. There is no evidence that Jonathan Edwards took part in
   these disturbances. He went however with his companions to
   Wethersfield, and continued there until 1719. While there, he gained a
   high character and standing in his class. His father, writing to one of
   his daughters, under date of Jan. 27, 1718, says, "I have not heard but
   that your brother Jonathan is also well. He has a very good name at
   Wethersfield, both as to his carriage and his learning." While at
   Wethersfield, he wrote to one of his sisters the following letter;
   which, as it is a document relating to an interesting event in the
   history of the college, may not improperly be preserved.

   "To Miss Mary Edwards at Northampton.

   "Wethersfield, March 26, 1719

   "dear sister,

   "Of all the many sisters I have, I think I never had one so long out of
   my hearing as yourself; inasmuch as I cannot remember, that I ever
   heard one tittle from you, from the time you last went up the country,
   until the last week, by Mr. B. who then came from Northampton. When he
   came in, I truly rejoiced to see him, because I fully expected to
   receive a letter from you by him. But being disappointed, and that not
   a little, I was willing to make that, which I hoped would be an
   opportunity of receiving, the same of sending. For I thought it was a
   pity, that there should not be the least correspondence between us, or
   communication from one to another, when at no farther distance. I hope
   also that this may be a means of exciting the same in yourself; and so,
   having more charity for you than to believe that I am quite out of your
   mind, or that you are not at all concerned for me, I think it fit that
   I should give you some account of my condition, relative to the school.
   I suppose you are fully acquainted with our coming away from New-Haven,
   and the circumstances of it. Since then we have been in a more
   prosperous condition, as I think, than ever. But the council and
   trustees, having lately had a meeting at New-Haven concerning it, have
   removed that which was the cause of our coming away, viz. Mr. Johnson,
   from the place of a tutor, and have put in Mr. Cutler, pastor of
   Canterbury, president; who, as we hear, intends very speedily to be
   resident at Yale college, so that all the scholars belonging to our
   school expect to return there, as soon as our vacancy after the
   election is over.

   "I am your loving brother in good health,

   "jonathan edwards."

   While a member of college, he was distinguished for the uniform
   sobriety and correctness of his behaviour, for diligent application to
   his studies, and for rapid and thorough attainments in learning. In the
   second year of his collegiate course, while at Wethersfield, he read
   Locke on the Human Understanding, with peculiar pleasure. The uncommon
   strength and penetration of his mind, which admirably qualified him for
   profound thought and metaphysical investigation, began to be discovered
   and exerted even at this early age. From his own account of the
   subject, he was inexpressibly entertained and delighted with that
   profound work, when he read it at the age of fourteen, enjoying a far
   higher pleasure in the perusal of its pages, "than the most greedy
   miser finds, when gathering up handfuls of silver and gold, from some
   newly discovered treasure." To studies of this class he from that time
   devoted himself, as to those in which he felt the most intense
   interest. Still, however, he applied himself, with so much diligence
   and success, to the performance of his assigned duties, as to sustain
   the first standing in his class, and to secure the highest approbation
   of his instructors.

   Mr. Cutler went to New-Haven early in June 1719, at the opening of the
   summer term, to enter on the duties of his office as rector; and the
   students, among whom was Jonathan Edwards, returned to the college. The
   following letter from the rector to his father, will show the character
   which he had acquired while at Wethersfield, and the trying
   circumstances of the college.

   "New-Haven, June 30, 1719.

   "rev. sir,

   "Your letter came to my hands by your son. I congratulate you upon his
   promising abilities and advances in learning. He is now under my care,
   and probably may continue so, and doubtless will so do if he should
   remain here, and I be settled in the business I am now in. I can
   assure, Rev. Sir, that your good affection to me in this affair, and
   that of the ministers around you, is no small inducement to me; and if
   I am prevailed on thereby, it shall be a strong motive to me to improve
   my poor abilities, in the service of such hopeful youths as are with
   us. They may suffer much from my weakness, but they shall not from my
   neglect. I am no party man, but shall carry it, with an equal hand and
   affection, to the whole college; and I doubt not, but the difficulty
   and importance of the business will secure me your prayers, and those
   of all good men, which I do much value and desire.

   "I remain, under the earnest hope and expectation

   of your prayers,

   "Your humble servant

   "t. cutler."

   The following characteristical letter, written to his father in his
   third collegiate year, will not be uninteresting to the reader.

   "To the Rev. Timothy Edwards, Pastor of the Church

   at East Windsor.

   "New-Haven, July 21, 1719.

   "ever honoured sir,

   "I received, with two books, a letter from yourself, bearing the date
   of July 7th; and therein I received, with the greatest gratitude, your
   wholesome advice and counsel; and I hope I shall, God helping of me,
   use my utmost endeavours to put the same in practice. I am sensible of
   the preciousness of my time, and am resolved it shall not be through
   any neglect of mine, if it slips without the greatest advantage. I take
   very great content under my present tuition, as all the rest of the
   scholars seem to do under theirs. Mr. Cutler is extraordinarily
   courteous to us, has a very good spirit of government, keeps the school
   in excellent order, seems to increase in learning, is loved and
   respected by all who are under him; and when he is spoken of in the
   school or town, he generally has the title of President. The scholars
   all live in very good peace with the people of the town, and there is
   not a word said about our former carryings on, except now and then by
   aunt Mather. I have diligently searched into the circumstances of
   Stiles's examination, which was very short, and as far as I can
   understand, was to no other disadvantage than that he was examined in
   Tully's Orations; in which, though he had never construed before he
   came to New-Haven, yet he committed no error in that or any other book,
   whether Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, except in Virgil, wherein he could not
   tell the preteritum of requiesco. He is very well treated among the
   scholars, and accepted in the college as a member of it by every body,
   and also as a freshman; neither, as I think, is he inferior, as to
   learning, to any of his classmates. I have inquired of Mr. Cutler what
   books we shall have need of the next year. He answered, he would have
   me to get against that time, Alstead's Geometry and Gassendus's
   Astronomy; with which I would entreat you to get a pair of dividers, or
   mathematician's compasses, and a scale, which are absolutely necessary
   in order to learning mathematics; and also the Art of Thinking, which,
   I am persuaded, would be no less profitable, than the other necessary,
   to me who am

   "Your most dutiful son,

   "jonathan edwards."

   "P. S. What we give a week for our board is £ 5s. d."

   "The habits of study, which Edwards formed in very early youth, were
   not only strict and severe, and this in every branch of literature, but
   in one respect peculiar. Even while a boy, he began to study with his
   pen in his hand; not for the purpose of copying off the thoughts of
   others, but for the purpose of writing down, and preserving, the
   thought suggested to his own mind, from the course of study which he
   was pursuing. This most useful practice he commenced in several
   branches of study very early; and he steadily pursued it in all his
   studies through life. His pen appears to have been in a sense always in
   his hand. From this practice steadily persevered in, he derived the
   very great advantages of thinking continually during each period of
   study; of thinking accurately; of thinking connectedly; of thinking
   habitually at all times; of banishing from his mind every subject,
   which was not worthy of continued and systematic thought; of pursuing
   each given subject of thought as far as he was able, at the happy
   moment when it opened spontaneously on his mind; of pursuing every such
   subject afterwards, in regular sequence, starting anew from the point
   where he had previously left off, when again it opened upon him in some
   new and interesting light; of preserving his best thoughts,
   associations, and images, and then arranging them under their proper
   heads, ready for subsequent use; of regularly strengthening the faculty
   of thinking and reasoning, by constant and powerful exercise; and above
   all, of gradually moulding himself into a thinking being--a being, who
   instead of regarding thinking and reasoning as labour, could find no
   high enjoyment but in intense, systematic, and certain thought. In this
   view of the subject, when we remember how few students comparatively,
   from want of this mental discipline, think at all; how few of those who
   think at all, think habitually; how few of those who think habitually,
   think to purpose; and how few of those who think to purpose, attain to
   the fulness of the measure of the stature, to which, as thinking
   beings, they might have attained; it will not I think be doubted, that
   the practice in question was the principal means of the ultimate
   development of his mental superiority." [5]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5] For a specimen of the early papers of Jonathan Edwards, see
   Appendix, No. IV.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER III.

   EARLY RELIGIOUS PRODUCTIONS--"MISCELLANIES"--NOTES ON THE
   SCRIPTURES--COMMENCEMENT OF HIS PREACHING--RESOLUTIONS.

   A Conscientious regard to duty appeared greatly in the early as well as
   in the latter days of Jonathan Edwards. As a child, the spirit of love
   and obedience uniformly guided him; and as a pupil, he discovered every
   disposition honourable to himself, encouraging to those who anxiously
   watched over his progress, and which was justly considered as the
   earnest of uncommon attainments. The child, the youth, the man, all
   presented to view the same superior mind, in different degrees of
   advancement, but still alike indicative of the same general
   excellencies.

   While at college, he paid a most assiduous and successful attention to
   his assigned duties, and particularly to the study of mental and
   physical philosophy; yet he still found time for pursuits of a more
   elevated and spiritual character. His whole education from early
   infancy, and the counsels of his parents, as well as his own feelings,
   prompted him to these pursuits. "To read the Bible daily, and to read
   it in connexion with other religious books, diligently and attentively,
   on the sabbath, was made, in the earlier days of New England, the
   habitual duty of every child; and his father's family, though not
   inattentive to the due cultivation of mind and manners, had lost none
   of the strictness, or conscientiousness, which characterized the
   pilgrims. The books which he found in his father's house, the
   conversation of ministers often resorting to the house, the custom of
   the times, as well as the more immediate influence of parental
   instruction and example, naturally prompted a mind like his to the
   early contemplation and investigation of many of the truths and
   principles of theology. He had also witnessed in his father's
   congregation, before his admission to college, several extensive
   revivals of religion; and in two of them the impressions made on his
   own mind had been unusually deep and solemn. The name familiarly given
   by the plain people of New England to these events--"A religious
   attention," and " A general attention to religion"--indicates their
   nature; and those personally acquainted with them need not be informed,
   that during their progress, the great truths of religion, as taught in
   the Scriptures, and as explained in the writings of theologians, become
   the objects of general and intense interest, and of close practical
   study; or that the knowledge, acquired by a whole people at such a
   time, in a comparatively little period, often exceeds the acquisitions
   of many previous years. With all these things in view, it is not
   surprising, that, to these two kinds of reading, he devoted himself
   early, with great diligence and with great success."

   Two of his early "Resolutions" relate to this subject, in which he
   proposes "to study the Scriptures so steadily, constantly, and
   frequently, as that I may find and plainly perceive myself to grow in
   the knowledge of the same." He never lost sight of this resolution. On
   the 8th of June, 1723, he also proposes, whenever he finds himself in a
   dull, listless frame, to read over his own "Remarks and Reflections of
   a Religious Nature," in order to quicken him in his duty. These
   "Remarks and Reflections" were very numerous. The first manuscript of
   his "Miscellanies" is in folio, and consists of forty-four sheets of
   foolscap, written separately, and stitched together. When he began the
   work, he had obviously no suspicion of the size to which it was to
   grow, nor had he formed his ultimate plan of arrangement. He headed his
   first article, "Of Holiness;" and having finished it, and drawn a line
   of separation across the page, he commenced the second, "Of Christ's
   mediation and satisfaction." The same is done with the third and
   fourth. The fifth he writes, without a line of separation, in larger
   letters, "Spiritual Happiness." After that the subject of each new
   article is printed, or written, in larger letters. His first article
   was written on the second page of a loose sheet of paper; and having
   written over the second, third, and fourth pages, he went back to the
   first. He began to number his articles by the letters of the alphabet,
   a, b, c, and having gone through, he commenced with a double alphabet,
   aa, bb, cc; when this was finished, finding his work enlarge, he took
   the regular numbers, 1, 2, 3, &c. and this plan, both as to subjects
   and numbers, is afterwards continued.

   The beginning of the work is written in a remarkably small round hand,
   nearly the same with that in which his earliest productions are
   written. This extends through about the first 150 articles, and is soon
   after perceptibly changed, into a hand somewhat more formed and
   flowing. These appear obviously to have been written during the last
   years of his college life, and the two years of his residence at
   college as Bachelor of Arts. Large extracts from this work will be
   found in the present edition of his Works, and a number of them from
   the earlier articles. Such are the Miscellaneous Observations, and the
   Miscellaneous Remarks, vol. ii. page 459. and the Miscellanies, page
   525. In these will be found many of his most original and most profound
   thoughts and discussions on theological subjects.

   "His regular and diligent study of the sacred Scriptures, led him early
   to discover, that they opened before him an almost boundless field of
   investigation and inquiry. Some passages he found to be incorrectly
   rendered; many were very obscure, and difficult in explanation; in many
   there were apparent inconsistencies and contradictions; many had been
   long employed, as proofs of doctrines and principles, to which they had
   no possible reference; the words and phrases, as well as the sentiments
   and narratives, on one part, he saw illustrated, and interpreted those
   of another. The Old Testament, in its language, history, doctrines, and
   worship, in its allusions to manners and customs, in its prophecies,
   types, and images, he perceived to be introductory and explanatory of
   the New; while the New, by presenting the full completion of the whole
   plan and design of their common Author, unfolded the real drift and
   bearing of every part of the Old. Regarding the sacred volume with the
   highest veneration, he appears to have resolved, while a member of
   college, that he would, as far as possible, possess himself, in every
   part of it which he read, of the true meaning of its Author. With this
   view he commenced his "Notes on the Scriptures;" obviously making it
   his standing rule, to study every passage which he read which presented
   the least difficulty to his own mind, or which he had known to be
   regarded as difficult by others, until such difficulty was
   satisfactorily removed. The result of his investigations he regularly,
   and at the time, committed to writing; at first in separate
   half-sheets, folded in 4to; but having found the inconvenience of this
   in his other juvenile writings, he soon formed small pamphlets of
   sheets, which were ultimately made into volumes. A few of the articles,
   to the number of about fifty, appear to have been written while he was
   in college; the rest, while preparing for the ministry, and during his
   subsequent life. That he had no suspicion when he began of the size to
   which the work would grow, is plain, and whether he afterwards formed
   the design of publishing it, as an illustration of the more difficult
   and obscure passages of the Bible, perhaps cannot be determined with
   certainty. A few of the articles of an historical or mythological
   nature, are marked as quotations from the writings of others, and are
   omitted in the present edition of his Works. The reader, after perusing
   the work, will be satisfied that they are the fruit of his own
   investigations; and that his mode of removing difficulties was,--not as
   it too often is, by disguising or misstating them, but by giving them
   their full force, and meeting them with fair argument. Perhaps no
   collection of notes on the Scriptures so entirely original can be
   found. From the number prefixed to each article, it will be found easy
   to select those which were the result of his early labours. Such a plan
   of investigating and explaining the difficulties of the sacred volume,
   at so early a period of life, was probably never formed in any other
   instance, and evinces a maturity of intellectual and moral attainments,
   not often paralleled. Among the most interesting and able of these
   investigations, will be found the discussion of the sacrifice of the
   daughter of Jephtha, Judg. xi. 29-40.; and that on the principle
   advanced by Paul, in Romans viii. 28. That all things work together for
   good to them that love God; which as being contained in his letter to
   Mr. Gillespie, of Sept. 4, 1747, is omitted in the notes on the
   Scriptures."

   The class of which Edwards was a member, finished their regular
   collegiate course, in Sept. 1720, before he was seventeen years of age.
   At that period, and for a long time afterwards, the only exercise,
   except the Latin Theses, given at the public commencement, to the class
   of Bachelors, was the Salutatory, which was also a Valedictory, Oration
   in Latin. This exercise was awarded to Edwards, as sustaining the
   highest rank as a scholar among the members of the class.

   He resided at college nearly two years after he took his first degree,
   preparing himself for the work of the ministry; after which, having
   passed the customary trials, he received a licence to preach: this was
   in the nineteenth year of his age. In consequence of an application
   from a number of ministers in New England, who were intrusted to act in
   behalf of the presbyterians in New York, he went to that city in the
   beginning of August, 1722, and preached there with great acceptance,
   about eight months. While there he found a most happy residence in the
   house of a Mrs. Smith; whom, as well as her son Mr. John Smith, he
   regarded as persons of uncommon piety and purity of life, and with whom
   he formed an intimate christian friendship. There also he found a
   considerable number of persons, among the members of that church,
   exhibiting the same character; with whom he enjoyed, in a high degree,
   all the pleasures and advantages of christian intercourse. His personal
   attachment to them became strong; and their interest in him as a man
   and a preacher was such, that they warmly solicited him to remain with
   them for life. To decline their candid invitation was most distressing
   to his feelings; but on account of the smallness of that congregation,
   and some peculiar difficulties which attended it, he did not think
   there was a rational prospect of usefulness and comfort. After a most
   painful parting with the kind friends, under whose hospitable roof he
   had so long and happily resided, he left the city on Friday, the 26th
   of April, by water, and reached his father's house on Wednesday, the
   1st of May. Here he spent the summer in close study, during which he
   was again earnestly requested, by the congregation in New York, to
   return to that city, and settle among them; but his former views were
   not altered; and therefore, though strongly inclined from his own
   feelings to gratify them, he could not comply with their wishes.
   Probably in no part of his life had he higher advantage for spiritual
   contemplation and enjoyment, than in the period first mentioned. He
   went to New York in a delightful frame of mind. He found there a little
   flock of Christ, constrained from a sense of their own weakness to
   "dwell together in unity," and to feel a practical sense of their
   dependence on God. He was in the midst of a family, whose daily
   influence served only to refresh and to sanctify. He had also much
   leisure for religious reading, meditation, and prayer. In these
   circumstances the presence of the Comforter appears to have been a
   daily reality; the evidence of which he found in that purity of heart
   which enables its possessor to see God, in the peace which passeth all
   understanding, and the joy with which a stranger intermeddleth not.

   During his preparation for the ministry, his residence in New York, and
   his subsequent residence in his father's house, he formed a series of
   resolutions, to the number of seventy, intended obviously for himself
   alone, to regulate his own heart and life, but fitted also, from their
   christian simplicity and spiritual-mindedness, to be eminently useful
   to others. Of these the first thirty-four [6] were written before Dec.
   18, 1722, the time in which his Diary, as it now exists, commences. The
   particular time and occasion of making many of the rest, will be found
   in that most interesting narrative, in which also are many other rules
   and resolutions, intended for the regulation of his own affections, of
   perhaps equal excellence. It should be remembered they were all written
   before he was twenty years of age. As he was wholly averse to all
   profession and ostentation; and as these resolutions themselves were
   plainly intended for no other eye than his own, except the eye that is
   omniscient; they may be justly considered as the basis of his conduct
   and character, the plan by which he governed the secret as well as the
   publick actions of his life. As such they will deeply interest the
   reader, not only as they unfold the inmost mind of their author, but as
   they also show, in a manner most striking and convincing to the
   conscience, what is the true foundation of great and distinguished
   excellence.

   He was too well acquainted with human weakness and frailty, even where
   the intentions are most sincere, to enter on any resolutions rashly, or
   from a reliance on his own strength. He therefore in the outset looked
   to God for aid, who alone can afford success in the use of the best
   means, and in the intended accomplishment of the best purposes. This he
   places at the head of all his other important rules, that his whole
   dependence was on the grace of God, while he still proposes to recur to
   a frequent and serious perusal of them, in order that they might become
   the habitual directory of his life.

      RESOLUTIONS

   "Being sensible that I am unable to do any thing without God's help, I
   do humbly entreat him, by his grace, to enable me to keep these
   Resolutions, so far as they are agreeable to his will, for Christ's
   sake.

   Remember to read over these Resolutions once a week.

   1. Resolved, That I will do whatsoever I think to be most to the glory
   of God, and my own good, profit, and pleasure, in the whole of my
   duration; without any consideration of the time, whether now, or never
   so many myriads of ages hence. Resolved, to do whatever I think to be
   my duty, and most for the good and advantage of mankind in general.
   Resolved, so to do, whatever difficulties I meet with, how many soever,
   and how great soever.

   2. Resolved, To be continually endeavouring to find out some new
   contrivance and invention to promote the forementioned things.

   3. Resolved, If ever I shall fall and grow dull, so as to neglect to
   keep any part of these Resolutions, to repent of all I can remember,
   when I come to myself again.

   4. Resolved, Never to do any manner of thing, whether in soul or body,
   less or more, but what tends to the glory of God, nor be, nor suffer
   it, if I can possibly avoid it.

   5. Resolved, Never to lose one moment of time, but to improve it in the
   most profitable way I possibly can.

   6. Resolved, To live with all my might, while I do live.

   7. Resolved, Never to do any thing, which I should be afraid to do if
   it were the last hour of my life.

   8. Resolved, To act, in all respects, both speaking and doing, as if
   nobody had been so vile as I, and as if I had committed the same sins,
   or had the same infirmities or failings, as others; and that I will let
   the knowledge of their failings promote nothing but shame in myself,
   and prove only an occasion of my confessing my own sins and misery to
   God. Vid. July 30.

   9. Resolved, To think much, on all occasions, of my dying, and of the
   common circumstances which attend death.

   10. Resolved, when I feel pain, to think of the pains of martyrdom, and
   of hell.

   11. Resolved, When I think of any theorem in divinity to be solved,
   immediately to do what I can towards solving it, if circumstances do
   not hinder.

   12. Resolved, If I take delight in it as a gratification of pride, or
   vanity, or on any such account, immediately to throw it by.

   13. Resolved, To be endeavouring to find out fit objects of liberality
   and charity.

   14. Resolved, Never to do any thing out of revenge.

   15. Resolved, Never to suffer the least motions of anger towards
   irrational beings.

   16. Resolved, Never to speak evil of any one, so that it shall tend to
   his dishonour, more or less, upon no account except for some real good.

   17. Resolved, That I will live so, as I shall wish I had done when I
   come to die.

   18. Resolved, To live so, at all times, as I think is best in my most
   devout frames, and when I have the clearest notions of the things of
   the gospel, and another world.

   19. Resolved, Never to do any thing, which I should be afraid to do, if
   I expected it would not be above an hour before I should hear the last
   trump.

   20. Resolved, To maintain the strictest temperance in eating and
   drinking.

   21. Resolved, Never to do any thing, which if I should see in another,
   I should count a just occasion to despise him for, or to think any way
   the more meanly of him.

   22. Resolved, To endeavour to obtain for myself as much happiness in
   the other world as I possibly can, with all the power, might, vigour,
   and vehemence, yea violence, I am capable of, or can bring myself to
   exert, in any way that can be thought of.

   23. Resolved, Frequently to take some deliberate action, which seems
   most unlikely to be done, for the glory of God, and trace it back to
   the original intention, designs, and ends of it; and if I find it not
   to be for God's glory, to repute it as a breach of the fourth
   Resolution.

   24. Resolved, Whenever I do any conspicuously evil action, to trace it
   back, till I come to the original cause; and then, both carefully
   endeavour to do so no more, and to fight and pray with all my might
   against the original of it.

   25. Resolved, To examine carefully and constantly, what that one thing
   in me is, which causes me in the least to doubt of the love of God; and
   so direct all my forces against it.

   26. Resolved, To cast away such things as I find do abate my assurance.

   27. Resolved, Never wilfully to omit any thing, except the omission be
   for the glory of God; and frequently to examine my omissions.

   28. Resolved, To study the Scriptures so steadily, constantly, and
   frequently, as that I may find, and plainly perceive, myself to grow in
   the knowledge of the same.

   29. Resolved, Never to count that a prayer, nor to let that pass as a
   prayer, nor that as a petition of a prayer, which is so made, that I
   cannot hope that God will answer it; nor that as a confession which I
   cannot hope God will accept.

   30. Resolved, To strive every week to be brought higher in religion,
   and to a higher exercise of grace, than I was the week before.

   31. Resolved, Never to say any thing at all against any body, but when
   it is perfectly agreeable to the highest degree of christian honour,
   and of love to mankind, agreeable to the lowest humility, and sense of
   my own faults and failings, and agreeable to the golden rule; often,
   when I have said any thing against any one, to bring it to, and try it
   strictly by, the test of this Resolution.

   32. Resolved, To be strictly and firmly faithful to my trust, that
   that, in Prov. xx. 6. A faithful man, who can find?' may not be partly
   fulfilled in me.

   33. Resolved, To do always what I can towards making, maintaining, and
   preserving peace, when it can be done without an overbalancing
   detriment in other respects. Dec. 26, 1722.

   34. Resolved, In narrations, never to speak any thing but the pure and
   simple verity.

   35. Resolved, Whenever I so much question whether I have done my duty,
   as that my quiet and calm is thereby disturbed, to set it down, and
   also how the question was resolved. Dec. 18, 1722.

   36. Resolved, Never to speak evil of any, except I have some particular
   good call to it. Dec. 19, 1722.

   37. Resolved, To inquire every night, as I am going to bed, wherein I
   have been negligent,--what sin I have committed,--and wherein I have
   denied myself;--also, at the end of every week, month, and year. Dec.
   22 and 26, 1722.

   38. Resolved, Never to utter any thing that is sportive, or matter of
   laughter, on a Lord's day. Sabbath evening, Dec. 23, 1722.

   39. Resolved, Never to do any thing, of which I so much question the
   lawfulness, as that I intend, at the same time, to consider and examine
   afterwards, whether it be lawful or not; unless I as much question the
   lawfulness of the omission.

   40. Resolved, To inquire every night before I go to bed, whether I have
   acted in the best way I possibly could, with respect to eating and
   drinking. Jan. 7, 1723.

   41. Resolved, to ask myself, at the end of every day, week, month, and
   year, wherein I could possibly, in any respect, have done better. Jan.
   11, 1723.

   42. Resolved, Frequently to renew the dedication of myself to God,
   which was made at my baptism, which I solemnly renewed when I was
   received into the communion of the church, and which I have solemnly
   re-made this 12th day of January, 1723.

   43. Resolved, Never, henceforward, till I die, to act as if I were any
   way my own, but entirely and altogether God's; agreeably to what is to
   be found in Saturday, Jan. 12th. Jan. 12, 1723.

   44. Resolved, That no other end but religion shall have any influence
   at all on any of my actions; and that no action shall be, in the least
   circumstance, any otherwise than the religious end will carry it. Jan.
   12, 1723.

   45. Resolved, Never to allow any pleasure or grief, joy or sorrow, nor
   any affection at all, nor any degree of affection, nor any circumstance
   relating to it, but what helps religion. Jan. 12 and 13, 1723.

   46. Resolved, Never to allow the least measure of any fretting or
   uneasiness at my father or mother. Resolved, to suffer no effects of
   it, so much as in the least alteration of speech, or motion of my eye;
   and to be especially careful of it with respect to any of our family.

   47. Resolved, To endeavour, to my utmost, to deny whatever is not most
   agreeable to a good and universally sweet and benevolent, quiet,
   peaceable, contented and easy, compassionate and generous, humble and
   meek, submissive and obliging, diligent and industrious, charitable and
   even, patient, moderate, forgiving, and sincere, temper; and to do, at
   all times, what such a temper would lead me to; and to examine
   strictly, at the end of every week, whether I have so done. Sabbath
   morning, May 5, 1723.

   48. Resolved, Constantly, with the utmost niceness and diligence, and
   the strictest scrutiny, to be looking into the state of my soul, that I
   may know whether I have truly an interest in Christ or not; that when I
   come to die, I may not have any negligence respecting this to repent
   of. May 26, 1723.

   49. Resolved, That this never shall be, if I can help it.

   50. Resolved, That I will act so, as I think I shall judge would have
   been best, and most prudent, when I come into the future world. July 5,
   1723.

   51. Resolved, That I will act so, in every respect, as I think I shall
   wish I had done, if I should at last be damned. July 8, 1723.

   52. I frequently hear persons in old age say how they would live, if
   they were to live their lives over again: Resolved, That I will live
   just so as I can think I shall wish I had done, supposing I live to old
   age. July 8, 1723.

   53. Resolved, To improve every opportunity, when I am in the best and
   happiest frame of mind, to cast and venture my soul on the Lord Jesus
   Christ, to trust and confide in him, and consecrate myself wholly to
   him; that from this I may have assurance of my safety, knowing that I
   confide in my Redeemer. July 8, 1723.

   54. Resolved, Whenever I hear anything spoken in commendation of any
   person, if I think it would be praiseworthy in me, that I will
   endeavour to imitate it. July 8, 1723.

   55. Resolved, To endeavour, to my utmost, so to act, as I can think I
   should do, if I had already seen the happiness of heaven and hell
   torments. July 8, 1723.

   56. Resolved, Never to give over, nor in the least to slacken, my fight
   with my corruptions, however unsuccessful I may be.

   57. Resolved, When I fear misfortunes and adversity, to examine whether
   I have done my duty, and resolve to do it and let the event be just as
   Providence orders it. I will, as far as I can, be concerned about
   nothing but my duty and my sin. June 9, and July 13, 1723.

   58. Resolved, Not only to refrain from an air of dislike, fretfulness,
   and anger in conversation, but to exhibit an air of love, cheerfulness,
   and benignity. May 27, and July 13, 1723.

   59. Resolved, When I am most conscious of provocations to ill nature
   and anger, that I will strive most to feel and act good-naturedly; yea,
   at such times, to manifest good nature, though I think that in other
   respects it would be disadvantageous, and so as would be imprudent at
   other times. May 12, July 11, and July 13.

   60. Resolved, Whenever my feelings begin to appear in the least out of
   order, when I am conscious of the least uneasiness within, or the least
   irregularity without, I will then subject myself to the strictest
   examination. July 4 and 13, 1723.

   61. Resolved, That I will not give way to that listlessness which I
   find unbends and relaxes my mind from being fully and fixedly set on
   religion, whatever excuse I may have for it--that what my listlessness
   inclines me to do, is best to be done, &c. May 21, and July 13, 1723.

   62. Resolved, Never to do any thing but my duty, and then, according to
   Eph. vi. 6-8. to do it willingly and cheerfully, as unto the Lord, and
   not to man: knowing that whatever good thing any man doth, the same
   shall be receive of the Lord. June 25, and July 13, 1723.

   63. On the supposition, that there never was to be but one individual
   in the world, at any one time, who was properly a complete Christian,
   in all respects of a right stamp, having Christianity always shining in
   its true lustre, and appearing excellent and lovely, from whatever part
   and under whatever character viewed: Resolved, To act just as I would
   do, if I strove with all my might to be that one, who should live in my
   time. Jan. 14, and July 13, 1723.

   64. Resolved, When I find those "groanings which cannot be uttered," of
   which the apostle speaks, and those "breathings of soul for the longing
   it hath," of which the psalmist speaks, Psalm cxix. 20. that I will
   promote them to the utmost of my power; and that I will not be weary of
   earnestly endeavouring to vent my desires, nor of the repetitions of
   such earnestness. July 23, and Aug. 10, 1723.

   65. Resolved, Very much to exercise myself in this, all my life long,
   viz. with the greatest openness of which I am capable, to declare my
   ways to God, and lay open my soul to him, all my sins, temptations,
   difficulties, sorrows, fears, hopes, desires, and every thing, and
   every circumstance, according to Dr. Manton's Sermon on the 119th
   Psalm,. July 26, and Aug. 10, 1723.

   66. Resolved, That I will endeavour always to keep a benign aspect, and
   air of acting and speaking, in all places, and in all companies, except
   it should so happen that duty requires otherwise.

   67. Resolved, After afflictions, to inquire, what I am the better for
   them; what good I have got by them; and, what I might have got by them.

   68. Resolved, To confess frankly to myself, all that which I find in
   myself, either infirmity or sin; and, if it be what concerns religion,
   also to confess the whole case to God, and implore needed help. July
   23, and August 10, 1723.

   69. Resolved, Always to do that, which I shall wish I had done when I
   see others do it. Aug. 11, 1723.

   70. Let there be something of benevolence in all that I speak. Aug. 17,
   1723."

   Such were the excellent Resolutions formed by Jonathan Edwards at an
   early period of life, and which in succeeding years were regarded by
   him, not as unimportant records, but as containing the great principles
   of the spiritual life. A deep and extensive knowledge of the heart is
   manifest in these Resolutions, a conviction of its defects, a lively
   apprehension of its dangers, and an intense concern that all its
   tendencies should be towards God, and towards every thing required by
   his holy will. There is a remarkable tenderness of conscience
   discovered in every particular which has been stated. The man who could
   thus write, was not one who could easily trifle with sin, or who could
   enter any of its paths without the immediate reproofs of an offended
   conscience. This holy man trembled even at the distant view of sin; he
   could not willingly come near and survey its enticements. Accustomed to
   breathe in a holy atmosphere, the least taint of corruption immediately
   affected his spiritual frame. He knew no happiness except that
   connected with a conscience void of offence. All these rules were the
   suggestions of a conscience of a highly enlightened character.--They
   also indicate a constant sense of the presence and exact observations
   of the Searcher of all hearts. The writer lived as seeing him who is
   invisible; he set the Lord always before him; encouraging upon all
   occasions an earnest concern for the glory of God, the grand object for
   which he desired to live both upon earth and in heaven, an object
   compared with which all other things seemed in his view but trifles. If
   this were attained, all his desires were satisfied; but if this were
   lost or imperfectly gained, his soul was filled with anguish. These
   Resolutions afford ample testimony how much the author had entered into
   the spirit of 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or
   whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. They also illustrate his
   views of the importance of consistency of character. He was not content
   with accurate views of truth, or any kind of outward profession, apart
   from holy consistency of character. He studied, he admired, and he
   exhibited the influence of the gospel; a walk "worthy of the vocation
   wherewith he was called" was the elevated object at which he ardently
   aimed. He well knew that the followers of Christ are required "to hold
   forth the word of life," to shine as lights in the world, to instruct
   by their examples as well as by their words; and he desired to honour
   God by presenting to the view of the members of the spiritual kingdom,
   and also of the world, an example which might declare the reality and
   the beauty of religion. It is further manifest from these Resolutions,
   that his mind was most anxious for daily advancement in every branch of
   holiness. An active spiritual principle existed in him, which caused
   him to press forward, whatever might be the obstacles in his way. He
   could not be contented while one sin remained in him, while one grace
   was defective, or a single duty engaged in but imperfectly. He longed
   for the holy perfection of the heavenly world, and anticipated with joy
   that day when he should awake with the Divine likeness. It cannot be a
   matter of surprise, that with these sentiments and feelings he attained
   an exaltation of character seldom equalled and perhaps never surpassed.

   The Resolutions which have given rise to these reflections are
   probably, "to persons of every age, but especially to the young, the
   best uninspired summary of christian duty, the best directory to high
   attainment in evangelical virtue, which the mind of man has hitherto
   been able to form." They disclose the writer's own character, and they
   are admirably calculated to improve the character of every reader who
   fears to sin, and rejoices in the purity of the Divine will.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [6] The first twenty-one were written at once; as were the next ten, at
   a subsequent sitting. The rest were written occasionally. They are all
   on two detached pieces of paper.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER IV.

   HIS DIARY.

   The views and practices of men of equal excellence have differed
   considerably in regard to the keeping of a diary. Many have never
   attempted it; some who at one period of life commenced it have
   afterwards from various causes declined it; and others have steadily
   adhered to a custom which certainly has the sanction of some of the
   most eminent names in the church of God. It is at once admitted that
   many diaries have been kept in the most injudicious manner, and it is
   still more an object of deep regret that these records have in some
   instances been published, not merely to the grief of serious and
   intelligent minds, but to the injury of religion itself, and the
   exciting a prejudice against all similar records. There are, however,
   some published journals of excellent men which evince so much solid
   judgment as well as fervent piety, and have been the sources of so much
   usefulness, that a more than equal balance is presented against works
   in part of an opposite description. No one is disposed to lament the
   publication of parts of the Diaries of Philip and Matthew Henry,
   Brainerd, Doddridge, or Joseph Williams and some others; writings which
   illustrate the inward and outward power of godliness, reflect honour
   upon the individuals themselves, and yield a powerful and holy stimulus
   to the minds of other Christians. The Diary of Jonathan Edwards
   corresponds in its excellencies with those to which reference is thus
   made, and will be perused with the same feelings, and lead it is hoped
   to the like beneficial effects.--This Diary begins Dec. 18, 1722, when
   he was nineteen years of age. As far as to Jan. 15th, at night, it is
   written on two detached slips of paper; and the remainder in a book.
   [7] As it commences abruptly, and as near as possible to the top of
   that paper, the beginning of it is undoubtedly lost; and it is not
   improbable, that, as he originally wrote it, it may have reached back,
   at least to the period of his preparation for the ministry. It was
   intended, as will at once be perceived, for his own private use
   exclusively; and had it been with him at the close of life, it is not
   unlikely it might have been destroyed. "Still, whatever is calculated
   to do good, and is perfectly consistent with an author's real
   reputation, may be published with honour, whatever his design might be
   while writing. The best of men, indeed, have thoughts, and opinions,
   and feelings, which are perfectly proper and right in themselves, which
   yet it would be wholly improper for them to disclose to others. But a
   man of sound discretion will take care that nothing of this nature is
   placed within the reach of accident. What Mr. Edwards wished to have
   concealed from every eye but his own, he wrote in short hand; and on
   one occasion, after having written to a considerable extent in that
   character, he adds this remark in his customary hand, Remember to act
   according to Prov. xii. 23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge.'

   [8] "The reader, while perusing the Diary in its various parts, will be
   struck with it as possessing the following characteristics. It consists
   of facts; and of solid thought, dictated by deep religious feeling; and
   not of the mere expressions of feeling, or of common-place moral
   reflections or exhortations. It was intended for his own eyes
   exclusively; and not chiefly for those of his friends and of the
   public. It is an exhibition of the simple thinking, feeling, and acting
   of a man, who is unconscious how he appears, except to himself and to
   God; and not the remarks of one, who is desirous of being thought
   humble, respecting his own humility. If we suppose a man of christian
   simplicity and godly sincerity to bring all the secret movements of his
   own soul under the clear, strong light of heaven, and there to survey
   them with a piercing and an honest eye, and a contrite heart, in order
   to humble himself, and make himself better; it is just the account
   which such a man would write."

   diary.--December, 1722

   "Dec. 18. This day made the 35th Resolution. The reason why I in the
   least question my interest in God's love and favour, is,--1. Because I
   cannot speak so fully to my experience of that preparatory work, of
   which divines speak:--2. I do not remember that I experienced
   regeneration, exactly in those steps, in which divines say it is
   generally wrought:--3. I do not feel the christian graces sensibly
   enough, particularly faith. I fear they are only such hypocritical
   outside affections, which wicked men may feel as well as others. They
   do not seem to be sufficiently inward, full, sincere, entire, and
   hearty. They do not seem so substantial, and so wrought into my very
   nature, as I could wish.--4. Because I am sometimes guilty of sins of
   omission and commission. Lately I have doubted, whether I do not
   transgress in evil speaking. This day, resolved, No.

   Dec. 19. This day made the 36th Resolution. Lately I have been very
   much perplexed, by seeing the doctrine of different degrees in glory
   questioned; but now have almost got over the difficulty.

   Dec. 20. This day somewhat questioned, whether I had not been guilty of
   negligence yesterday, and this morning; but resolved, No.

   Dec. 21, Friday. This day and yesterday, I was exceedingly dull, dry,
   and dead.

   Dec. 22, Saturday. This day, revived by God's Holy Spirit; affected
   with the sense of the excellency of holiness; felt more exercise of
   love to Christ, than usual. Have, also, felt sensible repentance for
   sin, because it was committed against so merciful and good a God. This
   night made the 37th Resolution.

   Sabbath night, Dec. 23. Made the 38th Resolution.

   Monday, Dec. 24. Higher thoughts than usual of the excellency of Christ
   and his kingdom.--Concluded to observe, at the end of every month, the
   number of breaches of resolutions, to see whether they increase or
   diminish, to begin from this day, and to compute from that the weekly
   account my monthly increase, and out of the whole, my yearly increase,
   beginning from new-year days.

   Wednesday, Dec. 26. Early in the morning yesterday, was hindered by the
   head-ache all day; though I hope I did not lose much. Made an addition
   to the 37th Resolution, concerning weeks, months, and years.--At night.
   Made the 33d Resolution.

   Saturday, Dec. 29. About sunset this day, dull and lifeless.

   1722-23, Tuesday, Jan. 1. Have been dull for several days. Examined
   whether I have not been guilty of negligence to-day; and resolved, No.

   Wednesday, Jan. 2. Dull. I find, by experience, that, let me make
   resolutions, and do what I will, with never so many inventions, it is
   all nothing, and to no purpose at all, without the motions of the
   Spirit of God; for if the Spirit of God should be as much withdrawn
   from me always, as for the week past, notwithstanding all I do, I
   should not grow, but should languish, and miserably fade away. I
   perceive, if God should withdraw his Spirit a little more, I should not
   hesitate to break my resolutions, and should soon arrive at my old
   state. There is no dependence on myself. Our resolutions may be at the
   highest one day, and yet, the next day, we may be in a miserable dead
   condition, not at all like the same person who resolved. So that it is
   to no purpose to resolve, except we depend on the grace of God. For, if
   it were not for his mere grace, one might be a very good man one day,
   and a very wicked one the next. I find also by experience, that there
   is no guessing out the ends of Providence, in particular dispensations
   towards me--any otherwise than as afflictions come as corrections for
   sin, and God intends when we meet with them, to desire us to look back
   on our ways, and see wherein we have done amiss, and lament that
   particular sin, and all our sins, before him:--knowing this, also, that
   all things shall work together for our good; not knowing in what way,
   indeed, but trusting in God.

   Saturday evening, Jan. 5. A little redeemed from a long dreadful
   dulness, about reading the Scriptures. This week, have been unhappily
   low in the weekly account:--and what are the reasons of it?--abundance
   of listlessness and sloth; and if this should continue much longer, I
   perceive that other sins will begin to discover themselves. It used to
   appear to me, that I had not much sin remaining; but now, I perceive
   that there are great remainders of sin. Where may it not bring me to,
   if God should leave me? Sin is not enough mortified. Without the
   influences of the Spirit of God, the old serpent would begin to rouse
   up himself from his frozen state, and would come to life again.
   Resolved, that I have been negligent in two things:--in not striving
   enough in duty; and in not forcing myself upon religious thoughts.

   Sabbath, Jan. 6. At night. Much concerned about the improvement of
   precious time. Intend to live in continual mortification, without
   ceasing, and even to weary myself thereby as long as I am in this
   world, and never to expect or desire any worldly ease or pleasure.

   Monday, Jan. 7. At night, made the 40th Resolution.

   Tuesday, Jan. 8. In the morning, had higher thoughts than usual of the
   excellency of Christ, and felt an unusual repentance of sin therefrom.

   Wednesday, Jan. 9. At night. Decayed. I am sometimes apt to think, that
   I have a great deal more of holiness than I really have. I find now and
   then that abominable corruption, which is directly contrary to what I
   read of eminent Christians. I do not seem to be half so careful to
   improve time, to do every thing quick, and in as short a time as I
   possibly can, nor to be perpetually engaged to think about religion, as
   I was yesterday and the day before, nor indeed as I have been at
   certain times, perhaps a twelvemonth ago. If my resolutions of that
   nature, from that time, had always been kept alive and awake, how much
   better might I have been than I now am! How deceitful is my heart! I
   take up a strong resolution, but how soon doth it weaken!

   Thursday, Jan. 10. About noon. Recovering. It is a great dishonour to
   Christ, in whom I hope I have an interest, to be uneasy at my worldly
   state and condition; or when I see the prosperity of others, and that
   all things go easy with them, the world is smooth to them, and they are
   very happy in many respects, and very prosperous, or are advanced to
   much honour; to grudge them their prosperity, or envy them on account
   of it, or to be in the least uneasy at it, to wish and long for the
   same prosperity, and to desire that is should ever be so with me.
   Wherefore, concluded always to rejoice in every one's prosperity, and
   not to pretend to expect or desire it for myself; and to expect no
   happiness of that nature, as long as I live; but to depend on
   afflictions, and to betake myself entirely to another happiness.--I
   think I find myself much more sprightly and healthy, both in body and
   mind, for my self-denial in eating, drinking, and sleeping. I think it
   would be advantageous, every morning to consider my business and
   temptations, and the sins to which I shall be exposed on that day, and
   to make a resolution how to improve the day, and avoid those sins; and
   so at the beginning of every week, month, and year. I never knew before
   what was meant, by not setting our hearts on those things. It is, not
   to care about them, nor to depend upon them, nor to afflict ourselves
   with the fear of losing them, nor to please ourselves with the
   expectation of obtaining them, or with the hopes of their
   continuance.--At night. Made the 41st Resolution.

   Saturday, Jan. 12. In the morning. I have, this day, solemnly renewed
   my baptismal covenant and self-dedication, which I renewed when I was
   taken into the communion of the church. I have been before God, and
   have given myself, all that I am and have, to God; so that I am not, in
   any respect, my own. I can challenge no right in this understanding,
   this will, these affections, which are in me. Neither have I any right
   to this body, or any of its members--no right to this tongue, these
   hands, these feet; no right to these senses, these eyes, these ears,
   this smell, or this taste. I have given myself clear away, and have not
   retained any thing as my own. I gave myself to God in my baptism, and I
   have been this morning to him, and told him, that I gave myself wholly
   to him. I have given every power to him; so that, for the future, I'll
   challenge no right in myself, in no respect whatever. I have expressly
   promised him, and I do now promise Almighty God, that by his grace I
   will not. I have this morning told him that I did take him for my whole
   portion and felicity, looking on nothing else as any part of my
   happiness, nor acting as if it were; and his law, for the constant rule
   of my obedience; and would fight with all my might against the world,
   the flesh, and the devil, to the end of my life; and that I did believe
   in Jesus Christ, and did receive him as a Prince and Saviour; and that
   I would adhere to the faith and obedience of the gospel, however
   hazardous and difficult the confession and practice of it may be; and
   that I did receive the blessed Spirit as my Teacher, Sanctifier, and
   only Comforter, and cherish all his motions to enlighten, purify,
   confirm, comfort, and assist me. This, I have done; and I pray God, for
   the sake of Christ, to look upon it as a self-dedication, and to
   receive me now as entirely his own, and to deal with me, in all
   respects, as such, whether he afflicts me or prospers me, or whatever
   he pleases to do with me, who am his. Now, henceforth, I am not to act,
   in any respect, as my own.--I shall act as my own, if I ever make use
   of any of my powers to any thing that is not to the glory of God, and
   do not make the glorifying of him my whole and entire business:--if I
   murmur in the least at affliction; if I grieve at the prosperity of
   others; if I am in any way uncharitable; if I am angry because of
   injuries; if I revenge them; if I do any thing purely to please myself,
   or if I avoid any thing for the sake of my own ease; if I omit any
   thing because it is great self-denial; if I trust to myself; if I take
   any of the praise of the good that I do, or that God doth by me; or if
   I am in any way proud. This day, made the 42nd and 43rd
   Resolutions.--Whether or no, any other end ought to have any influence
   at all on any of my actions; or whether any action ought to be any
   otherwise, in any respect, than it would be, if nothing else but
   religion had the least influence on my mind. Wherefore I make the 44th
   Resolution.

   Query: Whether any delight or satisfaction ought to be allowed, because
   any other end is obtained beside a religious one.--In the afternoon. I
   answer, Yes, because, if we should never suffer ourselves to rejoice,
   but because we have obtained a religious end, we should never rejoice
   at the sight of friends, we should not allow ourselves any pleasure in
   our food, whereby the animal spirits would be withdrawn, and good
   digestion hindered. But the query is to be answered thus:--We never
   ought to allow any joy or sorrow, but what helps religion. Wherefore, I
   make the 45th Resolution.

   The reason why I so soon grow lifeless, and unfit for the business I am
   about, I have found out, is only because I have been used to suffer
   myself to leave off, for the sake of ease, and so I have acquired a
   habit of expecting ease; and therefore, when I think I have exercised
   myself a great while, I cannot keep myself to it any longer, because I
   expect to be released, as my due and right. And then I am deceived, as
   if I were really tired and weary, whereas, if I did not expect ease,
   and was resolved to occupy myself by business as much as I could, I
   should continue with the same vigour at my business, without vacation
   time to rest. Thus I have found it in reading the Scriptures; and thus
   I have found it in prayer; and thus I believe it to be in getting
   sermons by heart, and in other things.

   At night. This week, the weekly account rose higher than ordinary. It
   is suggested to me, that too constant a mortification, and too vigorous
   application to religion, may be prejudicial to health; but
   nevertheless, I will plainly feel it and experience it, before I cease
   on this account. It is no matter how much tired and weary I am, if my
   health is not impaired.

   Sabbath day, Jan. 13. I plainly feel, that if I should continue to go
   on, as from the beginning of the last week hitherto, I should
   continually grow and increase in grace. After the afternoon meeting,
   made an addition to the 45th Resolution.--At noon. I remember I thought
   that I loved to be a member of Christ, and not any thing distinct, but
   only a part, so as to have no separate interest or pleasure of my
   own.--At night. Resolved to endeavour fully to understand 1 Cor. vii.
   29-32. and to act according to it.

   Monday, Jan. 14. About 10 o'clock in the morning made this book, and
   put these papers in it. [9] The dedication, which I made of myself to
   God on Saturday last, has been exceedingly useful to me. I thought I
   had a more spiritual insight into the Scriptures, when reading the 8th
   of Romans, than ever before.--At night. Great instances of
   mortification are deep wounds given to the body of sin; hard blows,
   which make him stagger and reel. We thereby get strong ground and
   footing against him, he is the weaker ever after, and we have easier
   work with him the next time. He grows cowardly; and we can easily cause
   him to give way, until at length we find it easy work with him, and can
   kill him at pleasure. While we live without great instances of
   mortification and self-denial, the old man keeps about where he was;
   for he is sturdy and obstinate, and will not stir for small blows.
   This, without doubt, is one great reason why many Christians do not
   sensibly increase in grace. After the greatest mortifications, I always
   find the greatest comfort. Wrote the 63rd Resolution. Such little
   things as Christians commonly do, will not evince much increase of
   grace. We must do great things for God.--It will be best, when I find
   that I have lost any former ancient good motions or actions, to take
   notice of it, if I can remember them.

   Tuesday, Jan. 15. About two or three o'clock. I have been all this time
   decaying. It seemed yesterday, the day before, and Saturday, that I
   should always retain the same resolutions to the same height. But alas!
   how soon do I decay! O how weak, how infirm, how unable to do any thing
   of myself! What a poor inconsistent being! What a miserable wretch,
   without the assistance of the Spirit of God! While I stand, I am ready
   to think that I stand by my own strength, and upon my own legs; and I
   am ready to triumph over my spiritual enemies, as if it were I myself
   that caused them to flee:--when alas! I am but a poor infant, upheld by
   Jesus Christ; who holds me up, and gives me liberty to smile to see my
   enemies flee, when he drives them before me. And so I laugh, as though
   I myself did it, when it is only Jesus Christ leads me along, and
   fights himself against my enemies. And now the Lord has a little left
   me, how weak do I find myself! O let it teach me to depend less on
   myself, to be more humble, and to give more of the praise of my ability
   to Jesus Christ! The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
   desperately wicked; who can know it?--The occasion of my decaying, is a
   little melancholy. My spirits are depressed, because I fear that I lost
   some friendship the last night; and, my spirits being depressed, my
   resolutions have lost their strength. I differ to-day from yesterday in
   these things: I do not resolve anything to-day half so strongly. I am
   not so perpetually thinking of renewing my resolutions as I was then. I
   am not half so vigorous as I was then; nor am I half so careful to do
   every thing with vigour. Then, I kept continually acting; but now, I do
   things slowly, and satisfy myself by thinking of religion in the mean
   time. I am not so careful to go from one business to another.--I felt
   humiliation about sun-set. What shall I do, in order that I may, with a
   good grace, fall into christian discourse and conversation?--At night.
   The next time I am in such a lifeless frame, I will force myself to go
   rapidly from one thing to another, and to do those things with vigour,
   in which vigour would ever be useful. The things which take off my
   mind, when bent on religion, are commonly some remarkable change or
   alteration--journeys, change of place, change of business, change of
   studies, and change of other circumstances; or something that makes me
   melancholy; or some sin.

   Thursday, Jan. 17. About three o'clock, overwhelmed with melancholy.

   Friday, Jan. 18. At night. Beginning to endeavour to recover out of the
   death I have been in for these several days.

   Sabbath day, Jan. 20. At night. The last week I was sunk so low, that I
   fear it will be a long time before I am recovered. I fell exceedingly
   low in the weekly account. I find my heart so deceitful, that I am
   almost discouraged from making any more resolutions.--Wherein have I
   been negligent in the week past; and how could I have done better, to
   help the dreadful low estate in which I am sunk?

   Monday, Jan. 21 Before sunrise, answered the preceding questions thus:
   I ought to have spent my time in bewailing my sins, and in singing
   psalms--especially psalms or hymns of penitence; these duties being
   most suited to the frame I was in. I do not spend time enough in
   endeavouring to affect myself with the glories of Christianity.--Fell
   short in the monthly account. It seems to me, that I am fallen from my
   former sense of the pleasantness of religion.

   Tuesday, Feb. 5. At night. I have thought that this being so
   exceedingly careful, and so particularly anxious, to force myself to
   think of religion at all times, has exceedingly distracted my mind, and
   made me altogether unfit for that and every thing else. I have thought
   that this caused the dreadful low condition I was in on the 15th of
   January. I think that I stretched myself further than I could bear, and
   so broke.--But now it seems to me, though I know not why, that I do not
   do enough to prepare for another world. I do not seem to press forward,
   to fight and wrestle, as the apostles used to speak. I do not seem so
   greatly and constantly to mortify and deny myself, as the mortification
   of which they speak represents. Therefore, wherein ought I to do more
   in this way?--I answer: I am again grown too careless about eating,
   drinking, and sleeping--not careful enough about evil-speaking.

   Saturday, Feb. 16. I do certainly know that I love holiness, such as
   the gospel prescribes.--At night. For the time past of my life, I have
   been negligent, in that I have not sufficiently kept up that part of
   divine worship. singing the praise of God in secret and with
   company.--I have been negligent this month past, in these three things:
   I have not been watchful enough over my appetites, in eating and
   drinking; in rising too late in the morning; and in not applying myself
   with sufficient application to the duty of secret prayer.

   Sabbath day, Feb. 17. Near sunset. Renewedly promised, that I will
   accept of God for my whole portion, and that I will be contented,
   whatever else I am denied. I will not murmur, nor be grieved, whatever
   prosperity upon any account I see others enjoy and I am denied. To this
   I have lately acted contrary.

   Thursday, Feb. 21. I perceive that I never yet have adequately known
   what was meant by being weaned from the world, by not laying up
   treasure on earth, but in heaven, by not having our portion in this
   life, by making the concerns of another life our whole business, by
   taking God for our whole portion. I find my heart in great part yet
   adheres to the earth. O that it might be quite separated from thence. I
   find when I have power and reputation as others, I am uneasy, and it
   does not satisfy me to tell me, that I have chosen God for my whole
   portion, and that I have promised to rest entirely contented with him.

   Saturday, Feb. 23. I find myself miserably negligent, and that I might
   do twice the business that I do, if I were set upon it. See how soon my
   thoughts of this matter will be differing from what they are now. I
   have been indulging a horrid laziness a good while, and did not know
   it. I can do seven times as much in the same time now, as I can at
   other times, not because my faculties are in better tune; but because
   of the fire of diligence that I feel burning within me. If I could but
   always continue so, I should not meet with one quarter of the trouble.
   I should run the christian race much better, and should go out of the
   world a much better man.

   Saturday, March 2. O how much more base and vile am I, when I feel
   pride working in me, than when I am in a more humble disposition of
   mind! How much, how exceedingly much, more lovely is an humble than a
   proud disposition! I now plainly perceive it, and am really sensible of
   it. How immensely more pleasant is an humble delight, than a high
   thought of myself! How much better do I feel, when I am truly humbling
   myself, than when I am pleasing myself with my own perfections! O how
   much pleasanter is humility than pride! O that God would fill me with
   exceeding great humility, and that he would evermore keep me from all
   pride! The pleasures of humility are really the most refined, inward,
   and exquisite delights in the world. How hateful is a proud man! How
   hateful is a worm, that lifts up itself with pride! What a foolish,
   silly, miserable, blind, deceived poor worm am I, when pride works.--At
   night. I have lately been negligent as to reading the Scriptures.
   Notwithstanding my resolutions on Saturday was se'night, I have not
   been sedulous and diligent enough.

   Wednesday, March 6. Near sunset. Regarded the doctrines of election,
   free grace, our inability to do any thing without the grace of God, and
   that holiness is entirely, throughout, the work of the Spirit of God,
   with greater pleasure than ever before.

   Thursday, March 7. I think I now suffer from not forcing myself enough
   on religious thoughts.

   Saturday night, March 24. I intend, if I am ever settled, to concert
   measures, and study methods, of doing good in the world, and to draw up
   rules of acting in this matter, in writing, of all the methods I can
   possibly devise, by which I can in any respect do good.

   Saturday night, March 31. This week I have been too careless about
   eating.

   Monday morning, April 2. I think it best not to allow myself to laugh
   at the faults, follies, and infirmities of others.

   Saturday night, April 7. This week I found myself so far gone, that it
   seemed to me I should never recover more. Let God of his mercy return
   unto me, and no more leave me thus to sink and decay! I know, O Lord,
   that without thy help I shall fall, innumerable times, not withstanding
   all my resolutions, how often soever repeated.

   Saturday night, April 14. I could pray more heartily this night for the
   forgiveness of my enemies, than ever before.--I am somewhat apt, after
   having asked one petition over many times, to be weary of it; but I am
   now resolved not to give way to such a disposition.

   Wednesday forenoon, May 1. Last night I came home, after my melancholy
   parting from New York.

   I have always in every different state of life I have hitherto been in,
   thought that the troubles and difficulties of that state were greater
   than those of any other state that I proposed to be in; and when I have
   altered, with assurance of mending myself, I have still thought the
   same, yea that the difficulties of that state are greater than those of
   that I left last. Lord, grant that from hence I may learn to withdraw
   thoughts, affections, desires, and expectations entirely from the
   world, and may fix them upon the heavenly state, where there is fulness
   of joy; where reigns heavenly, sweet, calm, and delightful love without
   alloy; where there are continually the dearest expressions of this
   love; where there is the enjoyment of this love without ever parting;
   and where those persons, who appear so lovely in this world, will be
   inexpressibly more lovely, and full of love to us. How sweetly will
   those, who thus mutually love, join together in singing the praises of
   God and the Lamb. How full will it fill us with joy, to think that this
   enjoyment, these sweet exercises, will never cease or come to an end,
   but will last to all eternity. Remember after journeys, removals,
   overturnings, and alterations in the state of my life, to reflect and
   consider, whether therein I have managed the best way possible
   respecting my soul; and before such alterations, if foreseen, to
   resolve how to act.

   Thursday, May 2. Afternoon. I observe this, that when I was at New
   York, when I meditated on things of a religious nature, I used to
   conceive of myself as walking in the fields at home; but now I am at
   home, I conceive of myself as walking in the fields which I used to
   frequent at New York. I think it a very good way, to examine dreams
   every morning when I awake; what are the nature, circumstance,
   principles, and ends of my imaginary actions and passions in them; in
   order to discern what are my prevailing inclinations, &c.

   Saturday night, May 4. Although I have, in some measure, subdued a
   disposition to chide and fret, yet I find a certain inclination, which
   is not agreeable to christian sweetness of temper and conversation:
   either too much dogmaticalness or too much egotism; a disposition to
   manifest my own dislike and scorn, and my own freedom from those which
   are innocent, sinless, yea common infirmities of men, and many other
   such like things. O that God would help me to discover all the flaws
   and defects of my temper and conversation, and help me in the difficult
   work of amending them; and that he would grant me so full a measure of
   vital Christianity, that the foundation of all those disagreeable
   irregularities may be destroyed, and the contrary sweetnesses and
   beauties may of themselves naturally follow.

   Sabbath morning, May 5. Made the 47th Resolution.

   Monday morning, May 6. I think it best commonly to come before God
   three times in a day, except I find a great inaptitude to that duty.

   Saturday night, May 11. I have been to blame, the month past, in not
   laying violence enough to my inclination, to force myself to a better
   improvement of time. Have been tardy with respect to the 47th
   Resolution. Have also been negligent about keeping my thoughts, when
   joining with others in prayer.

   Sabbath-day morning, May 12. I have lost that relish of the Scriptures,
   and other good books, which I had five or six months ago. Resolved,
   When I find in myself the least disposition to exercise good nature,
   that I will then strive most to feel good-naturedly.--At noon. Observe
   to remember the meditations which I had at West Chester, as I was
   coming from New York; and those which I had in the orchard; and those
   under the oak-tree. This day, and the last night, I read over and
   reviewed those reflections and remarks, which I find to be a very
   beneficial thing to me.--After the afternoon meeting. I think I find in
   my heart to be glad from the hopes I have, that my eternity is to be
   spent in spiritual and holy joys, arising from the manifestation of
   God's love, and the exercise of holiness, and burning love to him.

   Saturday night, May 18. This week past, spent in journeying to Norwich,
   and the towns thereabouts. This day returned, and received a letter
   from my dear friend, Mr. John Smith.--The last Wednesday, took up a
   resolution to refrain from all manner of evil speaking, for one week to
   try it, and see the effect of it: hoping, if that evil speaking, which
   I used to allow myself in, and to account lawful, agreeably to the
   resolutions I have formed concerning it, were not lawful, or best, I
   should hereby discover it, and get the advantage of temptations to it,
   and so deceive myself into a strict adherence to my duty, respecting
   that matter;--that that corruption, which I cannot conquer by main
   strength, I may get the victory of by stratagem. I find the effect of
   it already to be, to make me apt to take it for granted, that what I
   have resolved on this week, is a duty to be observed for ever.

   I now plainly perceive, what great obligations I am under to love and
   honour my parents. I have great reason to believe, that their counsel
   and education have been my making: though, in the time of it, it seemed
   to do me so little good. I have good reason to hope, that their prayers
   for me have been, in many things, very powerful and prevalent, that God
   has, in many things, taken me under his care and guidance, provision
   and direction, in answer to their prayers for me. I was never made so
   sensible of it as now.

   I think it the best way, in general, not to seek for honour, in any
   other way, than by seeking to be good and to do good. I may pursue
   knowledge, religion, the glory of God, and the good of mankind with the
   utmost vigour; but am to leave the honour of it entirely at God's
   disposal, as a thing with which I have no immediate concern; no, not
   although, by possessing that honour, I have the greater opportunity to
   do good.

   Mem. To be particularly careful, lest I should be tardy in any point
   wherein I have been negligent, or have erred, in days, weeks, months,
   or years past.

   Sabbath-day morning, May 19. With respect to my journey last week, I
   was not careful enough to watch opportunities of solemnly approaching
   to God three times a day. The last week, when I was about to take up
   the Wednesday Resolution, it was proposed to me, in my thought, to omit
   it till I got home again, because there would be a more convenient
   opportunity. Thus am I ready to look at any thing as an excuse, to grow
   slack in my christian course.--At night. Concluded to add to my
   inquiries, as to the spending of time.--At the beginning of the day, or
   the period, What can I do for the good of men?--and at the end, What
   have I done for their good?

   Tuesday morning, May 21. My conscience is, undoubtedly, more calm,
   since my last Wednesday Resolution, than it was before.

   Wednesday morning, May 22. Memorandum. To take special care of the
   following things: evil speaking, fretting, eating, drinking, and
   sleeping, speaking simple verity, joining in prayer, slightiness in
   secret prayer, listlessness and negligence, and thoughts that cherish
   sin.

   Saturday morning, May 25. As I was this morning reading the 17th
   Resolution, it was suggested to me, that if I were now to die, I should
   wish that I had prayed more that God would make me know my state,
   whether it be good or bad, and that I had taken more pains and care, to
   see and narrowly search into that matter. Wherefore, Mem, for the
   future, most nicely and diligently to look into the opinions of our old
   divines, concerning conversion. This morning made the 48th Resolution.

   Monday afternoon, May 27. Memorandum. Not only to keep from an air of
   dislike, anger, and fretfulness, in discourse or conversation; but, let
   me also have as much of an appearance of love, cheerfulness, and
   benignity, as may be, with a good grace. These following things
   especially to beware of, in order to the better observation of the 47th
   Resolution: distrust, discontent, uneasiness and a complaining temper,
   self-opinion, self-confidence, melancholy, moroseness, slight
   antipathy, privacy, indolence, and want of resolution--to beware of any
   thing in discourse or conversation that savours of these.

   Saturday night, June 8. At Boston. When I find myself listless and
   dull, and not easily affected by reading religious books, then to read
   my resolutions, remarks, reflections, &c.--One thing that would be of
   great advantage to me, in reading to my profit, would be, the
   endeavouring, with all my might, to keep the image and picture of the
   thing in my mind, and be careful that I do not lose it in the chain of
   the discourse.

   Sabbath day, June 9, after the afternoon meeting. Mem. When I fear
   misfortune, to examine whether I have done my duty; and at the same
   time, to resolve to do it, and let it go, and be concerned about
   nothing, but my duty and my sin.

   Saturday morning, June 15. At Windsor. Have been to blame, this
   journey, with respect to strict temperance, in eating, drinking, and
   sleeping, and in suffering too small matters to give interruption to my
   wonted chain of religious exercises.--Concluded to protract the
   Wednesday Resolution to the end of my life.

   Tuesday morning, June 18. Mem. To do that part, which I conveniently
   can, of my stated exercise, while about other business, such as
   self-examination, resolutions, &c. that I may do the remainder in less
   time.

   Friday afternoon, June 21. I have abundant cause, O my merciful Father,
   to love thee ardently, and greatly, to bless and praise thee, that thou
   hast heard me, in my earnest request, and so hast answered my prayer,
   for mercy, to keep me from decay and sinking. O, graciously of thy mere
   goodness, still continue to pity my misery, by reason of my sinfulness.
   O, my dear Redeemer, I commit myself, together with my prayer and
   thanksgiving, into thine hand.

   Saturday morning, June 22. Altered the 36th Resolution, to make it the
   same with the Wednesday Resolution. If I should take special care,
   every day, to rise above, or not to fall below, or to fall as little as
   I possibly could below, what I was the day before, it would be of great
   advantage to me.--I take notice that most of these determinations, when
   I first resolve them, seem as if they would be much more beneficial
   than I find them.

   Tuesday morning, June 25. Last sabbath, at Boston, reading the 6th,
   7th, and 8th verses of the 6th to the Ephesians, concluded that it
   would be much to my advantage, to take the greatest care, never to do
   any thing but my duty, and then to do it willingly, cheerfully, and
   gladly, whatever danger or unpleasant circumstances it may be attended
   with; with good-will doing it, as to the Lord, not as pleasing man, or
   myself; knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doth, the same shall
   he receive of the Lord.

   Saturday morning, June 29. It is best to be careful in prayer, not to
   put up those petitions, of which I do not feel a sincere desire:
   thereby my prayer is rendered less sincere, less acceptable to God, and
   less useful to myself.

   Monday noon, July 1. I find I am not careful enough, to keep out all
   thoughts but religious ones on the sabbath. When I find the least
   uneasiness in doing my duty, to fly to the 43rd Resolution.

   Wednesday night, July 3. I am too negligent, with respect to improving
   petty opportunities of doing good; thinking, that the good will be very
   small and unextended, and not worth the pains. Resolved, to regulate
   this, as that which is wrong, and what ought not to be.--Again
   confirmed by experience, of the happy effects of a strict temperance,
   with respect both to body and mind.

   Thursday morning, July 4. The last night, in bed, when thinking of
   death, I thought if I was then to die, that which would make me die in
   the least degree fearfully, would be the want of a trusting and relying
   on Jesus Christ, so distinctly and plainly, as has been described by
   divines; my not having experienced so particular a venturing, and
   entirely trusting my soul on Christ, after the fears of hell, and
   terrors of the Lord, encouraged by the mercy, faithfulness, and
   promises of God, and the gracious invitations of Christ. Then I thought
   I could go out of the world, as much assured of my salvation, as I was
   of Christ's faithfulness, knowing that if Christ did not fail me, he
   would save me who had trusted in him on his word.--At night. Whenever
   things begin to seem to be in the least out of order, when things begin
   to feel uneasy within, or irregular without, then to examine myself by
   the strictest examination.--Resolved, for the future to observe rather
   more of meekness, moderation, and temper in disputes.

   Friday morning, July 5. Last night, when thinking what I should wish I
   had done, that I had not done, if I was then to die; I thought I should
   wish, that I had been more importunate with God to fit me for death,
   and lead me into all truth, and that I might not be deceived about the
   state of my soul.--In the forenoon made the 50th Resolution.

   Thursday night, July 11. This day, too impatient at the church meeting.
   Snares and briers have been in my way this afternoon. It is good at
   such times for one to manifest good nature, even to one's disadvantage,
   and so as would be imprudent at other times.

   Saturday morning, July 13. Transferred the conclusion of June 9, to the
   Resolution, No. 57; and the conclusion of May 27, to No. 58; and May
   12, and July 11, to No. 59; and of July 4, at night, to No. 60; and of
   May 24, to No. 61; and of June 25, to No. 62; and about noon, the
   Resolution of January 14, to No. 63.--In times past, I have been too
   free in judging of the hearts of men from their actions.

   Thursday, July 18. Near sunset. Resolved, to make sure of that sign,
   which the apostle James gives of a perfect man: James iii. 2. "If any
   man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able, also, to
   bridle the whole body."

   Friday afternoon, July 19. 1 Peter ii. 18.. "Servants, be subject to
   your masters, with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also
   to the froward:" how then ought children to honour their parents!--This
   verse, together with the two following, viz. "For this is thankworthy,
   if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
   For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall
   take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take
   it patiently, this is acceptable with God."

   Saturday noon, July 20. Dr. Manton's Sermon, on the 119th Psalm. pp.
   140, 141. Of Evil-speaking, Use 2d. To them that either devise or
   receive reproaches. Both are very sinful. Hypocrites, and men that put
   themselves into a garb of religion, are all for censuring, take a
   mighty freedom that way: these men betray the rottenness of their
   hearts.--Alas, in our own sight, we should be the worst of men. The
   children of God do ever thus speak of themselves, as the least of
   saints, the greatest of sinners--"more brutish than any man"--"of
   sinners, whereof I am the chief." You rob them of the most precious
   treasure. He that robs thee of thy name, is the worst kind of thief.
   Prov. xxii. 1.. "A good name is rather to be chosen than great
   riches."--Object. But must we, in no case, speak evil of another; or
   may we not speak of another's sin in any case?--Solution 1. It is a
   very hard matter to speak evil of another without sin.--In one way or
   another, we shall dash upon the command: better let it alone.--If you
   speak of the failings of another, it should be with tenderness and
   grief; as, when they are incorrigible, and likely to infect others; or
   when it is for the manifest glory of God.--To them that receive the
   slander, he is a slanderer, who wrongs his neighbour's credit, by
   upholding an ill report against him.

   Monday afternoon, July 22. I find it would be desirable, on many
   accounts, always to endeavour to wear a benign aspect and air of acting
   and speaking, in all companies, except it should so happen, that duty
   requires it otherwise.--I am afraid I am now defective, in not doing
   whatever my hand finds to do, with my might, with respect to my
   particular affairs. Remember to watch, see, and know how it is. Vid.
   Aug. 31.--I see there is danger, of my being drawn into transgression,
   by the power of such temptations, as the fear of seeming uncivil, and
   of offending friends. Watch against it.--I might still help myself, and
   yet not hurt myself, by going with greater expedition from one thing to
   another, without being quite so nice.

   Tuesday afternoon, July 23. When I find those groanings which cannot be
   uttered, of which the apostle speaks, and those soul-breakings for the
   longing it hath, of which the psalmist speaks, (Ps. cxix. 20.)
   Resolved, to favour and promote them, to the utmost of my power, and
   not to be weary of earnestly endeavouring to vent my desires, and not
   to be weary of the repetitions of such earnestness.

   To count it all joy, when I have occasions of great self-denial;
   because, then, I have a glorious opportunity of giving deadly wounds to
   the body of sin, and of greatly confirming and establishing the new
   creature. I seek to mortify sin, and increase in holiness. These are
   the best opportunities, according to Jan. 14.

   To improve afflictions, of all kinds, as blessed opportunities of
   forcibly bearing on, in my christian course, notwithstanding that which
   is so very apt to discourage me, and to damp the vigour of my mind, and
   to make me lifeless; also, as opportunities of trusting and confiding
   in God, and getting a habit of so doing, according to the 57th
   Resolution; and as an opportunity of rending my heart off from the
   world, and setting it on heaven alone, according to Jan. 10. and the
   43d and 45th Resolutions; and according to Jan. 12 Feb. 17 and 21. and
   May 1.--To improve them, also, as opportunities to repent of and bewail
   my sin, and abhor myself; and as a blessed opportunity to exercise
   patience, to trust in God, and divest my mind from the affliction, by
   fixing myself in religious exercises. Also, let me comfort myself, that
   it is the very nature of afflictions, to make the heart better; and, if
   I am made better by them, what need I be concerned, however grievous
   they seem for the present.

   Wednesday night, July 24. I begin to find the success of my striving,
   in joining with others, in the worship of God; insomuch that there is a
   prospect of making it easy and delightful, and very profitable, in
   time. Wherefore, Resolved not to cease striving, but to continue it,
   and redouble it.

   Thursday morning, July 25. Altered, and anew established, the 8th
   Resolution; also established my determination of April 1.--Memorandum.
   At a convenient time, to make an alphabet of these Resolutions and
   Remarks, that I may be able to educe them on proper occasions, suitable
   to the condition I am in, and the duty I am engaged in.

   Friday afternoon, July 26. To be particularly careful, to keep up,
   inviolably, a trust and reliance, ease and entire rest in God, in all
   conditions, according to the 57th Resolution; for this I have found to
   be wonderfully advantageous to me.--At night. Resolved, very much to
   exercise myself in this, all my life long: viz. with the greatest
   openness, of which I am capable, to declare my ways to God, and lay
   open my soul to him:--all my sins, temptations, difficulties, sorrows,
   fears, hopes, desires, and every thing and every circumstance,
   according to Dr. Manton's 27th Sermon, on the 119th Psalm.

   Saturday forenoon, July 27. When I am violently beset with temptation,
   or cannot rid myself of evil thoughts, to do something in arithmetic,
   or geometry, or some other study, which necessarily engages all my
   thoughts, and unavoidably keeps them from wandering.

   Monday afternoon, July 29. When I am concerned how I shall prepare any
   thing to public acceptance, to be very careful that I have it very
   clear to me, to do what is duty and prudence in the matter.--I
   sometimes find myself able to trust God, and to be pretty easy when the
   event is uncertain, but I find it difficult when I am convinced
   beforehand, that the event will be adverse. I find that this arises, 1.
   From my want of faith, to believe that that particular advantage will
   be more to my advantage than disadvantage: 2. From the want of a due
   sense of the real preferableness of that good, which will be obtained
   to that which is lost: 3. From the want of a spirit of adoption.

   Tuesday night, July 30. Have concluded to endeavour to work myself into
   duties by searching and tracing back all the real reasons why I do them
   not, and narrowly searching out all the subtle subterfuges of my
   thoughts, and answering them to the utmost of my power, that I may know
   what are the very first originals of my defect, as with respect to want
   of repentance, love to God, loathing of myself,--to do this sometimes
   in sermons.--Vid. Resolution 8. Especially, to take occasion therefrom,
   to bewail those sins of which I have been guilty, that are akin to
   them; as for instance, from pride in others, to take occasion to bewail
   my pride; from their malice, to take occasion to bewail my evil
   speaking: and so of other sins. Mem. To receive slanders and
   reproaches, as glorious opportunities of doing this.

   Wednesday afternoon, July 31. After afflictions, to inquire what I am
   the better for them; what good I have got by them; and what I might
   have got by them.--Never in the least to seek to hear sarcastical
   relations of others' faults. Never to give credit to any thing said
   against others, except there is very plain reason for it; nor to behave
   in any respect otherwise for it.

   Sabbath morning, Aug. 4. Concluded at last, at those times when I am in
   the best frames, to set down the aspirations of my heart, as soon as I
   can get time.

   Tuesday afternoon, Aug. 6. Very much convinced of the extraordinary
   deceitfulness of the heart, and how exceedingly affection or appetite
   blinds the mind, and brings it into entire subjection. There are many
   things which I should really think to be my duty, if I had the same
   affections, as when I first came from New York; which now I think not
   to be so. How doth appetite stretch the reason, to bring both ends
   together.

   Wednesday forenoon, Aug. 7. To esteem it as some advantage, that the
   duties of religion are difficult, and that many difficulties are
   sometimes to be gone through, in the way of duty. Religion is the
   sweeter, and what is gained by labour is abundantly more precious, as a
   woman loves her child the more for having brought it forth with
   travail; and even to Christ Jesus himself his mediatorial glory, his
   victory and triumph, the kingdom which he hath obtained, how much more
   glorious is it, how much more excellent and precious, for his having
   wrought it out with such agonies.

   Friday afternoon, Aug. 9. With respect to the important business which
   I have now in hand [10] , Resolved, To do whatever I think to be duty,
   prudence, and diligence in the matter, and to avoid ostentation; and if
   I succeed not, and how many disappointments soever I meet with, to be
   entirely easy; only to take occasion to acknowledge my unworthiness;
   and if it should actually not succeed, and should not find acceptance,
   as I expected, yet not to afflict myself about it, according to the
   57th Resolution.--At night. One thing that may be a good help towards
   thinking profitably in times of vacation, is, when I find a profitable
   thought that I can fix my mind on, to follow it as far as I possibly
   can to advantage.--I missed it when a graduate at college, both in
   point of duty and prudence, in going against a universal benevolence
   and good nature.

   Saturday morning, Aug. 10. Transferred my determination of July 23, to
   the 64th Resolution, and that of July 26, to the 65th.--About sunset.
   As a help against that inward shameful hypocrisy, to confess frankly to
   myself all that which I find in myself, either infirmity or sin; also
   to confess to God, and open the whole case to him, when it is what
   concerns religion, and humbly and earnestly implore of him the help
   that is needed; not in the least to endeavour to smother what is in my
   heart, but to bring it all out to God and my conscience. By this means,
   I may arrive at a greater knowledge of my own heart.--When I find
   difficulty in finding a subject of religious meditation, in vacancies,
   to pitch at random on what alights to my thoughts, and to go from that
   to other things which that shall bring into my mind, and follow this
   progression as a clue, till I come to what I can meditate on with
   profit and attention, and then to follow that, according to last
   Thursday's determination.

   Sabbath afternoon, Aug. 11. Resolved always to do that, which I shall
   wish I had done when I see others do it; as for instance, sometimes I
   argue with myself, that such an act of good nature, kindness,
   forbearance, or forgiveness, &c. is not my duty, because it will have
   such and such consequences: yet when I see others do it, then it
   appears amiable to me, and I wish I had done it, and see that none of
   these feared inconveniences follow.

   Monday morning, Aug. 12. The chief thing, that now makes me in any
   measure to question my good estate, is my not having experienced
   conversion in those particular steps, wherein the people of New
   England, and anciently the dissenters of Old England, used to
   experience it. Wherefore, now resolved, never to leave searching, till
   I have satisfyingly found out the very bottom and foundation, the real
   reason, why they used to be converted in those steps.

   Tuesday morning, Aug. 13. Have sinned, in not being careful enough to
   please my parents.--Afternoon. I find it would be very much to my
   advantage, to be thoroughly acquainted with the Scriptures. When I am
   reading doctrinal books, or books of controversy, I can proceed with
   abundantly more confidence; can see on what footing and foundation I
   stand.

   Saturday noon, Aug. 17. Let there, in the general, be something of
   benevolence in all that I speak.

   Tuesday night, Aug. 20. Not careful enough in watching opportunities of
   bringing in christian discourse with a good grace. Do not exercise
   myself half enough in this holy art; neither have I courage enough to
   carry it on with a good grace. Vid Sept. 2.

   Saturday morning, Aug. 24. Have not practised quite right about
   revenge; though I have not done any thing directly out of revenge, yet
   I have perhaps omitted some things that I should otherwise have done;
   or have altered the circumstances and manner of my actions, hoping for
   a secret sort of revenge thereby. I have felt a little sort of
   satisfaction, when I thought that such an evil would happen to them by
   my actions, as would make them repent what they have done. To be
   satisfied for their repenting, when they repent from a sense of their
   error, is right. But a satisfaction in their repentance, because of the
   evil that is brought upon them, is revenge. This is in some measure a
   taking the matter out of God's hands when he was about to manage it,
   who is better able to plead it for me. Well, therefore, may he leave me
   to boggle at it.--Near sunset. I yet find a want of dependence on God,
   to look unto him for success, and to have my eyes unto him for his
   gracious disposal of the matter; for want of a sense of God's
   particular influence, in ordering and directing all affairs and
   businesses, of whatever nature, however naturally, or fortuitously,
   they may seem to succeed; and for want of a sense of those great
   advantages, that would follow therefrom: not considering that God will
   grant success, or make the contrary more to my advantage; or will make
   the advantage accruing from the unsuccessfulness more sensible and
   apparent; or will make it of less present and outward disadvantage; or
   will some way so order the circumstances, as to make the
   unsuccessfulness more easy to bear: or several, or all of these. This
   want of dependence, is likewise for want of the things mentioned, July
   29.--Remember to examine all narrations I can call to mind; whether
   they are exactly according to verity.

   Wednesday night, Aug. 28. When I want books to read; yea, when I have
   not very good books, not to spend time in reading them, but in reading
   the Scriptures, in perusing Resolutions, Reflections, &c. in writing on
   types of the Scripture, and other things, in studying the languages,
   and in spending more time in private duties. To do this, when there is
   a prospect of wanting time for the purpose. Remember, as soon as I can
   to get a piece of slate, or something, whereon I can make short
   memorandums while travelling.

   Thursday, Aug. 29. Two great quaerenda with me now are: How shall I make
   advantage of all the time I spend in journeys? and how shall I make a
   glorious improvement of afflictions?

   Saturday night, Aug. 31. The objection which my corruptions make
   against doing whatever my hands find to do with my might, is, that it
   is a constant mortification. Let this objection by no means ever
   prevail.

   Sabbath morning, Sept. 1. When I am violently beset with worldly
   thoughts, for a relief, to think of death, and the doleful
   circumstances of it.

   Monday afternoon, Sept. 2. To help me to enter with a good grace into
   religious conversation; when I am conversing on morality, to turn it
   over by application, exemplification, or otherwise, to Christianity.
   Vid. Aug. 28, and Jan. 15.--At night. There is much folly, when I am
   quite sure I am in the right, and others are positive in contradicting
   me, in entering into a vehement or long debate upon it.

   Saturday, Sept. 7. Concluded no more to suffer myself to be
   interrupted, or diverted from important business, by those things from
   which I expect, though some, yet but little, profit.

   Sabbath morning, Sept. 8. I have been much to blame, for expressing so
   much impatience for delays in journeys, and the like.

   Sabbath evening, Sept. 22. To praise God by singing psalms in prose,
   and by singing forth the meditations of my heart in prose.

   Monday, Sept. 23. I observe that old men seldom have any advantage of
   new discoveries, because they are beside the way of thinking to which
   they have been so long used. Resolved, if ever I live to years, that I
   will be impartial to hear the reasons of all pretended discoveries, and
   receive them if rational, how long soever I have been used to another
   way of thinking. My time is so short, that I have not time to perfect
   myself in all studies; wherefore resolved, to omit and put off all but
   the most important and needful studies."

   Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
   life,--was the maxim of the wisest of men, and it was founded upon the
   most solid reason. This maxim has ever been considered as most
   important by all the possessors of true wisdom and piety who have
   strenuously aimed at daily spiritual advancement. It has never been
   regarded without the greatest advantages, nor neglected without the
   most extensive injury. The views which were entertained of this lesson
   of spiritual wisdom by Jonathan Edwards are sufficiently apparent in
   all the extracts now presented from his Diary, and the advantages which
   he derived from its practice are equally manifest. He lived in the
   sight of God; he lived in the constant and faithful survey of his own
   heart and conduct, and he arose to the highest class of the followers
   of Christ, whose religion is eminently that of the heart. Let others
   pursue the same steps, and they will surely find the same precious
   results.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [7] He mentions, Jan. 14, his making the book, and annexing the loose
   reports to it.

   [8] Dwight

   [9] He refers to slips of paper on which the first part of the Diary is
   written; as far as Jan. 15, at night.

   [10] Perhaps the preparation of a public exercise for the college
   commencement, when ye received his Master's degree.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER V.

   HIS TUTORSHIP--SICKNESS--INVITATION TO NORTHAMPTON--PERSONAL NARRATIVE
   CONTINUED--DIARY CONCLUDED.

   In Sept. 1723, Mr. Edwards went to New-Haven, and received his degree
   of Master of Arts, when he was elected a tutor in the college. About
   this time, several congregations invited him to become their minister;
   but being fond of study, and conscious how much it would promote his
   usefulness, he declined their proposals. As there was no immediate
   vacancy in the office of tutor, he passed the ensuing winter and spring
   at New-Haven, in study, and in the occasional discharge of the active
   duties of his profession, and in the beginning of June, 1724, entered
   on the instruction of a class in the college.

   The period of his tutorship was a period of great difficulty. For a
   long time before the election of Mr. Cutler to the office of rector,
   the college had been in a state of open revolt against the legal
   government, and had withdrawn from New-Haven. Two years after his
   election, in Jan. 1721, there was an universal insurrection of the
   students, which though, after considerable effort, apparently quieted,
   resulted in a state of extreme disorder and insubordination, beyond any
   thing that had been known before. In 1722, Mr. Cutler, one of the
   tutors, and two of the neighbouring ministers, renounced their
   connexion with the presbyterian church, and publicly declared
   themselves episcopalians. The shock, occasioned by this event, was very
   great in the college, in the town, and throughout the colony; and a
   series of controversies grew out of it, which lasted for many years. In
   consequence of this, the offices of these gentlemen were vacated, and
   the college was left for four years without a head; the trustees
   residing by turns at the college, and each in rotation acting as
   vice-rector for a month. Fortunately however for the institution,
   during this bereavement, it had three gentlemen in the office of tutor,
   of distinguished talents and scholarship, and of great resolution and
   firmness of character:--Mr. William Smith, of the class of 1719, and
   chosen tutor in 1722; Mr. Edwards; and Mr. Daniel Edwards, his uncle,
   class-mate and room-mate, who was chosen in Sept. 1724. On these three
   gentlemen, all of whom were young men, devolved almost exclusively the
   government and instruction of the college; yet, by their union, energy,
   and faithfulness, they introduced among the students, in the room of
   their former negligence and misrule, habits of close study and exact
   subordination; and in no great length of time, rendered the institution
   flourishing and prosperous beyond what it had long been. The late
   President Stiles, who, though a member of college a considerable time
   after this period, was personally acquainted with the three gentlemen,
   and knew well the history of their administration, has left an eulogy
   on the three united, of the highest character. "The Honourable William
   Smith, the Honourable Daniel Edwards, and the Rev. President Edwards,
   were the pillar tutors, and the glory of the college, at the critical
   period between Rector Cutler and Rector Williams. Their tutorial renown
   was great and excellent. They filled and sustained their offices with
   great ability, dignity, and honour. For the honour of literature these
   things ought not to be forgotten."

   Sept. 1725, immediately after the commencement, as he was preparing to
   set out for his father's house, he was taken suddenly ill, at
   New-Haven; but hoping that the illness was not severe, and anxious to
   be at home if he was to be sick, he set out for Windsor. The fatigue of
   travelling only increased his illness, and he was compelled to stop at
   North-Haven, at the house of the Rev. Mr. Stiles, where he was
   confined, by severe sickness, about three months: during the greater
   part of this time, his mother was constantly with him. Her husband,
   writing to her on the 20th of October, begs her to spare herself. "I am
   afraid you are taking too great a burden on yourself, in tending your
   son both day and night. I beg of you, therefore, not only to take care
   of him, but of yourself also. Accept, rather, of the kindness of
   neighbours, in watching over again, than outbid your own strength,
   which is but small, by overdoing." She could not leave him till about
   the middle of November; and it was some time in the winter before he
   could go to his father's house. In this sickness, he speaks of himself
   as having enjoyed new, and most refreshing, manifestations of the
   presence and grace of God.

   After he had held the office of tutor upwards of two years, with the
   highest reputation, he received proposals from the people of
   Northampton to become their minister. Many circumstances conspired to
   prompt his acceptance. He was familiarly acquainted with the place and
   people. The Rev. Mr. Stoddard, his grandfather, a man of great dignity,
   and of singular weight and influence in the churches, in consequence of
   his advanced age, stood in need of his assistance, and wished him to be
   his colleague. His parents and his other friends all desired it. The
   situation was in itself respectable, and the town unusually pleasant.
   He therefore resigned his tutorship, in Sept. 1726, and accepted of the
   invitation.

   "Those who are conversant with the instruction and government of a
   college, will readily be aware that the period, of which we have now
   been speaking, was a very busy portion of Mr. Edwards's life; and if
   they call to mind the circumstances of the institution, and the habits
   of the students, when he entered on his office, they will not need to
   be informed, that the discharge of his official duties must have been
   accompanied with painful anxiety. It is a rare event in Providence,
   that so heavy a responsibility is thrown on three individuals so young,
   so destitute of experience, and of the knowledge of mankind; and the
   business of instruction and government must have occupied their whole
   time, and exhausted their whole strength."

   "In such a state of things, it was not possible that he should find the
   same leisure for spiritual exercises as he had found at New York. There
   his business was chiefly to enjoy; here it was to act. There the
   persons with whom he continually associated were possessed of uncommon
   excellence; here their characters were very different. There his
   attention was drawn, by the objects around him, to heavenly things;
   here it was necessarily confined almost all the time to this world.
   There, when retiring for prayer and heavenly contemplation, his mind
   sought communion with God in all its energy and freshness; here, when
   it was worn out by toil and exhausted by perplexities. The change in
   the current of thought and feeling must, therefore, have been great;
   and (so much is the mind prone to measure its religious state by the
   amount of daily enjoyment, and so little by the readiness to encounter
   trials, and to perform laborious and self-denying duties) it is not
   surprising, that he should have regarded this change, as evidence of
   perceptible and lamentable declension in religion. Such he in fact
   regarded it; as we shall find, both from his Narrative and Diary; yet
   it is by no means certain, that his views of the subject were
   altogether correct."

   "The young Christian has usually a season of leisure, given him in the
   providence of God, in which to become acquainted with the members of
   that family into which he has lately been introduced, and with those
   objects with which as a spiritual being he is in future to be
   conversant. His time and his strength are given chiefly to the
   Scriptures, to prayer, to meditation, and to religious conversation;
   and he is delightfully conscious that his communion is with the Father,
   and the Son Jesus Christ, through the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, as
   well as with the whole family both on earth and in heaven.' The design
   of this is to open to him his new state of existence, to enable him to
   understand its relations and duties, and to give him an earnest of
   better things in reversion. It is a most refreshing and happy period of
   his life, and, were he designed for contemplation merely, might well be
   protracted to its close. But, as we are taught most explicitly, in the
   word and Providence of God, his great worth lies in action--in
   imitating him whose rule it was--I must do the work of him that sent me
   while it is day;' and whose practice it was that he went about doing
   good.' The Scriptures are given by the inspiration of God, and are
   profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
   instruction in righteousness.--Wherefore? that the man of God may be
   perfected, being thoroughly furnished unto every good work. Probably no
   year in the life of Mr. Edwards was spent more usefully, than that in
   which he was occupied, with his associated, in laying the foundation of
   sober habits and sound morals, in the seminary now intrusted to their
   care. Probably in no equal period did he more effectually serve God and
   his generation. And if, in its progress, he found less of that
   enjoyment which grows out of spiritual contemplation; he must have had
   the more delightful consciousness, that in the midst of great
   difficulties and crosses, he had honestly endeavoured to serve God, and
   to perform his duty."

   There may therefore be reason for doubt, whether the change in his
   feelings, of which he speaks in the succeeding parts of his Narrative
   and Diary, was not a declension in this particular species of religious
   enjoyment, necessarily growing out of the circumstances in which he was
   placed, rather than a declension in the life and power of religion.

   "I continued," he observes, "much in the same frame, in the general, as
   when at New York, till I went to New-Haven as tutor of the college;
   particularly once at Bolton, on a journey from Boston, while walking
   out alone in the fields. After I went to New-Haven, I sunk in religion,
   my mind being diverted from my eager pursuits after holiness, by some
   affairs that greatly perplexed and distracted my thoughts.

   "In September, 1725, I was taken ill at New-Haven, and while
   endeavouring to go home to Windsor, was so ill at the North Village,
   that I could go no further; where I lay sick, for about a quarter of a
   year. In this sickness, God was pleased to visit me again with the
   sweet influences of his Spirit. My mind was greatly engaged there, on
   divine and pleasant contemplations, and longings of soul. I observed,
   that those who watched with me, would often be looking out wishfully
   for the morning; which brought to my mind those words of the psalmist,
   and which my soul with delight made its own language; My soul waiteth
   for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning; I say, more
   than they that watch for the morning;' and when the light of day came
   in at the window, it refreshed my soul, from one morning to another. It
   seemed to be some image of the light of God's glory."

   "I remember, about that time, I used greatly to long for the conversion
   of some that I was concerned with; I could gladly honour them, and with
   delight be a servant to them, and lie at their feet, if they were but
   truly holy. But some time after this, I was again greatly diverted with
   some temporal concerns, that exceedingly took up my thoughts, greatly
   to the wounding of my soul; and went on, through various exercises,
   that it would be tedious to relate, which gave me much more experience
   of my own heart than I ever had before."

   That the mind of Mr. Edwards was not injured as to its spirituality, by
   his official engagements and trials, is sufficiently evident from these
   extracts. He was still a holy man of God, whose heart was in heaven,
   and with whom converse with God was the highest delight.--The remainder
   of his Diary is chiefly confined to the period of his life which has
   now been reviewed, and is therefore inserted here. It is only to be
   regretted, that through the multiplicity of his affairs, he should have
   found it necessary to discontinue it.

      REMAINDER OF DIARY.

   "Thursday forenoon, Oct. 4, 1723. Have this day fixed and established
   it, that Christ Jesus has promised me faithfully, that, if I will do
   what is my duty, and according to the best of my prudence in the
   matter, that my condition in this world shall be better for me than any
   other condition whatever, and more to my welfare to all eternity. And,
   therefore, whatever my condition shall be, I will esteem it to be such:
   and if I find need of faith in the matter, that I will confess it as
   impiety before God. Vid. Resolution 57, and June 9.

   Sabbath night, Oct. 7. Have lately erred, in not allowing time enough
   for conversation.

   Friday night, Oct. 12. I see there are some things quite contrary to
   the soundness and perfection of Christianity, in which almost all good
   men do allow themselves, and where innate corruption has an
   unrestrained secret vent, which they never take notice of, or think to
   be no hurt, or cloak under the name of virtue; which things exceedingly
   darken the brightness, and hide the loveliness, of Christianity. Who
   can understand his errors? O that I might be kept from secret faults!

   Sabbath morning, Oct. 14. Narrowly to observe after what manner I act
   when I am in a hurry, and to act as much so at other times as I can
   without prejudice to the business.

   Monday morning, Oct. 15. I seem to be afraid, after errors and decays,
   to give myself the full exercise of spiritual meditation:--Not to give
   way to such fears.

   Thursday, Oct. 18. To follow the example of Mr. B. who though he meets
   with great difficulties, yet undertakes them with a smiling
   countenance, as though he thought them but little; and speaks of them
   as if they were very small.

   Friday night, Nov. 1. When I am unfit for other business to perfect
   myself in writing characters.*

   Friday afternoon, Nov. 22. For the time to come, when I am in a
   lifeless frame in secret prayer, to force myself to expatiate, as if I
   were praying before others, more than I used to do.

   Tuesday forenoon, Nov. 26. It is a most evil and pernicious practice,
   in meditations on afflictions, to sit ruminating on the aggravations of
   the affliction, and reckoning up the evil, dark circumstances thereof,
   and dwelling long on the dark side: it doubles and trebles the
   affliction. And so when speaking of them to others, to make them as bad
   as we can, and use our eloquence to set forth our own troubles, is to
   be all the while making new trouble, and feeding and pampering the old;
   whereas the contrary practice would starve our affliction. If we dwelt
   on the bright side of things in our thoughts, and extenuated them all
   that we possibly could, when speaking of them, we should think little
   of them ourselves, and the affliction would really, in a great measure,
   vanish away.

   Friday night, Nov. 29. As a help to attention in social prayer, to take
   special care to make a particular remark at the beginning of every
   petition, confession, &c.

   Monday morning, Dec. 9. To observe, whether I express any kind of
   fretting emotion, for the next three weeks.

   Thursday night, Dec. 12. If, at any time, I am forced to tell others
   wherein I think they are somewhat to blame; in order to avoid the
   important evil that would otherwise ensue, not to tell it to them so,
   that there shall be a probability of their taking it as the effect of
   little, fretting, angry emotions of mind.--Vid. Aug. 28. When I do
   want, or am likely to want, good books, to spend time in studying
   mathematics, and in reviewing other kinds of old learning; to spend
   more time in visiting friends, in the more private duties of a pastor,
   in taking care of worldly business, in going abroad, and other things
   that I may contrive.

   Friday morning, Dec. 27. At the end of every month, to examine my
   behaviour strictly by some chapter in the New Testament, more
   especially made up of rules of life.--At the end of the year, to
   examine my behaviour by the rules of the New Testament in general,
   reading many chapters. It would also be convenient some time at the end
   of the year, to read for this purpose in the book of Proverbs.

   Tuesday night, Dec. 31. Concluded never to suffer nor express any angry
   emotions of mind, more or less, except the honour of God calls for it
   in zeal for him, or to preserve myself from being trampled on.

   1724. Wednesday, Jan. 1. Not to spend too much time in thinking, even
   of important and necessary worldly business, and to allow every thing
   its proportion of thought, according to its urgency and importance.

   Thursday night, Jan. 2. These things established,--That time gained in
   things of lesser importance, is as much gained in things of greater;
   that a minute gained in times of confusion, conversation, or in a
   journey, is as good as minute gained in my study, at my most retired
   times; and so, in general, that a minute gained at one time is as good
   as at another.

   Friday night, Jan. 3. The time and pains laid out in seeking the world,
   is to be proportioned to the necessity, usefulness, and importance of
   it, with respect to another world, together with the uncertainty of
   living, and of retaining; provided, that nothing that our duty enjoins,
   or that is amiable, be omitted, and nothing sinful or unbecoming be
   done for the sake of it.

   Friday, Jan. 10. (After having written to a considerable extent in
   short hand, which he used, when he wished what he wrote to be
   effectually concealed from every one but himself, he adds the
   following.) Remember to act according to Prov. xii. 23. A prudent man
   concealeth knowledge.

   Monday, Jan. 20. I have been very much to blame, in that I have not
   been as full, and plain, and downright, in my standing up for virtue
   and religion, when I have had fair occasion, before those who seemed to
   take no delight in such things. If such conversation would not be
   agreeable to them, I have in some degree minced the matter, that I
   might not displease, and might not speak against the grain, more than I
   should have loved to have done with others, to whom it would be
   agreeable to speak for religion. I ought to be exceedingly bold with
   such persons, not talking in a melancholy strain, but in one confident
   and fearless, assured of the truth and excellence of the cause.

   Monday, Feb. 3. Let every thing have the value now which it will have
   upon a sick bed: and frequently, in my pursuits of whatever kind, let
   this question come into my mind. How much shall I value this upon my
   death-bed?'

   Wednesday, Feb. 5. I have not in times past, in my prayers, enough
   insisted on the glorifying of God in the world, on the advancement of
   the kingdom of Christ, the prosperity of the church, and the good of
   man. Determined that this objection is without weight, viz. that it is
   not likely that God will make great alterations in the whole world, and
   overturnings in kingdoms and nations, only for the prayers of one
   obscure person, seeing such things used to be done in answer to the
   united prayers of the whole church; and that if my prayers should have
   some influence, it would be but imperceptible and small.

   Thursday, Feb. 6. More convinced than ever, of the usefulness of free
   religious conversation. I find by conversing on natural philosophy,
   that I gain knowledge abundantly faster, and see the reasons of things
   much more clearly, than in private study: wherefore, earnestly to seek
   at all times for religious conversation; for those with whom I can at
   all times, with profit and delight, and with freedom, so converse.

   Friday, Feb. 7. Resolved, If God will assist me to it, that I will not
   care about things, when, upon any account, I have prospect of ill
   success or adversity; and that I will not think about it, any further
   than just to do what prudence directs to for prevention, according to
   Phil. iv. 6. Be careful for nothing; to 1 Pet. v. 7. Cast all your care
   upon God, for he careth for you; and again, Take no thought for the
   morrow; and again, Take no thought, saying, What shall I eat, and what
   shall I drink , and wherewithal shall I be clothed: seek ye first the
   kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you.

   Saturday night, Feb. 15. I find that when eating, I cannot be convinced
   in the time of it, that if I should eat more, I should exceed the
   bounds of strict temperance, though I have had the experience of two
   years of the like; and yet as soon as I have done, in three minutes I
   am convinced of it. But yet when I eat again, and remember it, still
   while eating I am fully convinced that I have not eaten what is but for
   nature, nor can I be convinced, that my appetite and feeling is as it
   was before. It seems to me that I shall be somewhat faint if I leave
   off then; but when I have finished, I am convinced again, and so it is
   from time to time.--I have observed that more really seems to be truth,
   when it makes for my interest, or is in other respects according to my
   inclination, than it seems if it be otherwise; and it seems to me, that
   the words in which I express it are more than the thing will properly
   bear. But if the thing be against my interest, the words of different
   import seem as much as the thing will properly bear.--Though there is
   some little seeming indecorum, as if it looked like affectation, in
   religious conversation as there is also in acts of kindness, yet this
   is to be broke through.

   Tuesday, Feb. 18. Resolved, to act with sweetness and benevolence, and
   according to the 47th Resolution, in all bodily dispositions,--sick or
   well, at ease or in pain, sleepy or watchful; and not to suffer
   discomposure of body to discompose my mind.

   Saturday, Feb. 22. I observe that there are some evil habits, which do
   increase and grow stronger, even in some good people, as they grow
   older; habits that much obscure the beauty of Christianity: some things
   which are according to their natural tempers, which in some measure
   prevail when they are young in Christ, and the evil disposition having
   an unobserved control, the habit at last grows very strong, and
   commonly regulates the practice until death. By this means, old
   Christians are very commonly, in some respects, more unreasonable than
   those who are young. I am afraid of contracting such habits,
   particularly of grudging to give, and to do, and of procrastinating.

   Sabbath, Feb. 23. I must be contented, where I have any thing strange
   or remarkable to tell, not to make it appear so remarkable as it is
   indeed; lest through fear of this, and the desire of making a thing
   appear very remarkable, I should exceed the bounds of simple verity.
   When I am at a feast, or a meal, that very well pleases my appetite, I
   must not merely take care to leave off with as much of an appetite as
   at ordinary meals; for when there is a great variety of dishes, I may
   do that, after I have eaten twice as much as at other meals is
   sufficient. If I act according to my resolution, I shall desire riches
   no otherwise, than as they are helpful to religion. But this I
   determine, as what is really evident from many parts of Scripture, that
   to fallen man, they have a greater tendency to hurt religion.

   Monday, March 16. To practise this sort of self-denial, when, as
   sometimes on fair days, I find myself more particularly disposed to
   regard the glories of the world, than to betake myself to the study of
   serious religion.

   Saturday, May 23. How it comes about I know not, but I have remarked it
   hitherto, that at those times when I have read the Scriptures most, I
   have evermore been most lively and in the best frame.

   at yale college.

   Saturday night, June 6. This week has been a very remarkable week with
   me, with respect to despondencies, fears, perplexities, multitudes of
   cares, and distraction of mind: it being the week I came hither to
   New-Haven, in order to entrance upon the office of tutor of the
   college. I have now abundant reason to be convinced of the
   troublesomeness and vexation of the world, and that it will never be
   another kind of world.

   Tuesday, July 7. When I am giving the relation of a thing, remember to
   abstain from altering either in the matter or manner of speaking, so
   much, as that if every one, afterwards, should alter as much, it would
   at last come to be properly false.

   Tuesday, Sept. 2. By a sparingness in diet, and eating as much as may
   be what is light and easy of digestion, I shall doubtless be able to
   think more clearly, and shall gain time; 1. By lengthening out my life;
   2. Shall need less time for digestion, after meals; 3. Shall be able to
   study more closely, without injury to my health; 4. Shall need less
   time for sleep; 5. Shall more seldom be troubled with the head-ache.

   Saturday night, Sept. 12. Crosses of the nature of that which I met
   with this week, thrust me quite below all comforts in religion. They
   appear no more than vanity and stubble, especially when I meet with
   them so unprepared for them. I shall not be fit to encounter them,
   except I have a far stronger and more permanent faith, hope, and love.

   Wednesday, Sept. 30. It has been a prevailing thought with me, to which
   I have given place in practice, that it is best sometimes to eat or
   drink, when it will do me no good, because the hurt that it will do me,
   will not be equal to the trouble of denying myself. But I have
   determined to suffer that thought to prevail no longer. The hurries of
   commencement and diversion of the vacancy, has been the occasion of my
   sinking so exceedingly, as in the last three weeks.

   Monday, Oct. 5. I believe it is a good way, when prone to unprofitable
   thoughts, to deny myself and break off my thoughts by keeping
   diligently to my study, that they may not have time to operate to work
   me to such a listless frame. I am apt to think it a good way when I am
   indisposed to reading and study, to read of my own remarks, the fruit
   of my study in divinity, &c. to set me a going again.

   Friday, Nov. 6. Felt sensibly somewhat of that trust and affiance in
   Christ, and with delight committing of my soul to him, of which our
   divines used to speak, and about which I have been somewhat in doubt.

   Tuesday, Nov. 10. To mark all that I say in conversation merely to
   beget in others a good opinion of myself, and examine it.

   Sabbath, Nov. 15. Determined, when I am indisposed to prayer, always to
   premeditate what to pray for; and that it is better, that the prayer
   should be of almost any shortness, than that my mind should be almost
   continually off from what I say.

   Sabbath, Nov. 22. Considering that by-standers always copy some faults,
   which we do not see ourselves, or of which at least we are not so fully
   sensible; and that there are many secret workings of corruption, which
   escape our sight, and of which others only are sensible: Resolved,
   therefore, that I will if I can by any convenient means, learn what
   faults others find in me, or what things they see in me, that appear
   any way blameworthy, unlovely, or unbecoming.

   Friday, Feb. 12, 1725. The very thing I now want, to give me a clearer
   and more immediate view of the perfections and glory of God, is as
   clear a knowledge of the manner of God's exerting himself, with respect
   to spirits and mind, as I have of his operations concerning matter and
   bodies.

   Tuesday, Feb. 16. A virtue which I need in a higher degree, to give a
   beauty and luster to my behaviour, is gentleness. If I had more of an
   air of gentleness, I should be much mended.

   Friday, May 21. If ever I am inclined to turn to the opinion of any
   other sect: Resolved, beside the most deliberate consideration, earnest
   prayer, &c. privately to desire all the help that can possibly be
   afforded me, from some of the most judicious men in the country,
   together with the prayers of wise and holy men, however strongly
   persuaded I may seem to be that I am in the right.

   Saturday, May 22. When I reprove for faults, whereby I am in any way
   injured, to defer till the thing is quite over and done with; for that
   is the way, both to reprove aright, and without the least mixture of
   spirit, or passion, and to have reproofs effectual, and not suspected.

   Friday, May 28. It seems to me, that whether I am now converted or not,
   I am so settled in the state I am in, that I shall go on it all my
   life. But, however settled I may be, yet I will continue to pray to
   God, not to suffer me to be deceived about it, nor to sleep in an
   unsafe condition; and ever and anon, will call all into question and
   try myself, using for helps some of our old divines, that God may have
   opportunities to answer my prayers, and the Spirit of God to show me my
   error, if I am in one.

   Saturday night, June 6. I am sometimes in a frame so listless, that
   there is no other way of profitably improving time, but conversation,
   visiting, or recreation, or some bodily exercise. However, it may be
   best in the first place, before resorting to either of these, to try
   the whole circle of my mental employments.

   Nov. 16. When confined at Mr. Stiles's. I think it would be of special
   advantage to me, with respect to my truer interest, as near as I can in
   my studies, to observe this rule: To let half a day's, or at most a
   day's, study in other things, be succeeded by half a day's or a day's
   study in divinity.

   One thing wherein I have erred, as I would be complete in all social
   duties, is, in neglecting to write letters to friends. And I would be
   forewarned of the danger of neglecting to visit my friends and
   relations when we are parted.

   When one suppresses thoughts that tend to divert the run of the mind's
   operations from religion, whether they are melancholy, or anxious, or
   passionate, or any others; there is this good effect of it, that it
   keeps the mind in its freedom. Those thoughts are stopped in the
   beginning, that would have set the mind a going in that stream.

   There are a great many exercises, that for the present seem not to
   help, but rather impede, religious meditation and affections, the fruit
   of which is reaped afterwards, and is of far greater worth than what is
   lost; for thereby the mind is only for the present diverted; but what
   is attained is, upon occasion, of use for the whole life-time.

   Sept. 26, 1726. Tis just about three years, that I have been for the
   most part in a low sunk estate and condition, miserably senseless, to
   what I used to be, about spiritual things. Twas three years ago, the
   week before commencement; just about the same time this year, I began
   to be somewhat as I used to be.

   Jan. 1728. I think Christ has recommended rising early in the morning,
   by his rising from the grave very early.

   Jan. 22, 1734. I judge that it is best, when I am in a good frame for
   divine contemplation, or engaged in reading the Scriptures, or any
   study of divine subjects, that, ordinarily, I will not be interrupted
   by going to dinner, but will forego my dinner, rather than be broke
   off.

   April 4, 1735. When at any time I have a sense of any divine thing,
   then to turn it in my thoughts to a practical improvement. As for
   instance, when I am in my mind, on some argument for the truth of
   religion, the reality of a future state, and the like, then to think
   with myself, how safely I may venture to sell all, for a future good.
   So when at any time I have a more than ordinary sense of the glory of
   the saints in another world, to think how well it is worth my while to
   deny myself, and to sell all that I have, for this glory, &c.

   May 18. My mind at present is, never to suffer my thoughts and
   meditations at all to ruminate.

   June 11. To set apart days of meditation on particular subjects; as,
   sometimes to set apart a day for the consideration of the greatness of
   my sins; at another, to consider the dreadfulness and certainty of the
   future misery of ungodly men; at another, the truth and certainty of
   religion; and so, of the great future things promised and threatened in
   the Scriptures."
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER VI.

   SETTLEMENT IN THE MINISTRY AT NORTHAMPTON--SITUATION OF THINGS AT THE
   TIME OF HIS SETTLEMENT--ATTENTION TO RELIGION IN THE PARISH--COURSE OF
   STUDY--HABITS OF LIFE--MARRIAGE--DEATH AND CHARACTER OF MR.
   STODDARD--SICKNESS OF MR. EDWARDS--DEATH AND CHARACTER OF HIS SISTER
   JERUSHA--HIS FIRST PUBLICATION.

   On the 15th of February, 1727, Mr. Edwards was ordained as a minister
   of the gospel, and placed over the church and congregation at
   Northampton, as the colleague of his grandfather, the Rev. Mr.
   Stoddard. He was now entering on the business of life, in a profession
   attended with many difficulties, and presenting a field sufficiently
   ample for the employment of the highest faculties ever conferred on
   man. It may not be improper, therefore, to stop a moment, and review
   the circumstances in which he was placed.

   He was twenty-three years of age. His constitution was naturally so
   tender and feeble, as to be preserved, even in tolerable health, only
   with unceasing care. He had passed through the successive periods of
   childhood, youth, and early manhood, not only without reproach, but in
   such a manner, as to secure the high esteem and approbation of all who
   knew him. His filial piety, and fraternal affection, had been most
   exemplary, and had rendered him a centre for strong attraction to the
   united family. Originally of a grave and sober character, he had been
   the subject of early, frequent, and strong religious impressions;
   which, if they did not result in saving conversion in his childhood,
   yet rendered him conscientious, and solemnly and habitually mindful of
   eternal things. For a considerable period, he had not only felt the
   life and power of religion, but had appeared imbued with an unusually
   large measure of the grace of God. Few persons, of the same age,
   discover a piety so pure, so practical, or so pervading.

   He had been devoted to books from his infancy, and appears of his own
   accord, from an early period, to have formed habits of severe and
   successful application. His mind, originally possessed of uncommon
   powers, and fraught with an intense desire of knowledge, was qualified
   for eminence, as we have already seen, not in a single pursuit merely,
   but in every walk of literature and science. Though probably the
   youngest member of his class, he had been acknowledged as its first
   scholar, in the distribution of its honours. He had not been
   distinguished for his attainments in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew literature
   only, but still more in those studies which require the application of
   stronger powers--in mathematics and logic, in natural and mental
   philosophy, and the higher principles of theology. In these, he had not
   simply proved himself capable of comprehending the discoveries of
   others, but had ventured out, where there was no path nor guide, into
   new and unexplored regions of the spiritual [11] world, with a success,
   which might well have prompted him to bold and fearless enterprise. As
   officers of the college, the peculiar difficulties in which they were
   placed, had given him, and his associates, an opportunity to acquire
   uncommon reputation, not only as instructors and governors of youths,
   but as men of unshaken firmness, and unwavering integrity. His mind was
   now rich in its attainments; its views were already, for the period in
   which he lived, singularly expanded and comprehensive; and its powers
   were under thorough discipline, and yielded an exact and persevering
   obedience. His habits of study were completely formed, and were of the
   most severe and unbending character.

   Theology had been, for years, his favourite study. For it he had
   deliberately relinquished, not only the varied pursuits of natural
   science, but in a measure, also, those investigations into the nature
   and operations of mind, by which, at an earlier period, his whole
   attention had been engrossed. He had already discovered, that much of
   what he found in systems and commentaries, was a mere mass of rubbish;
   and that many of the great principles, which constitute the foundation
   of the science, were yet to be established. He had studied theology,
   not chiefly in systems or commentaries, but in the Bible, and in the
   character and mutual relations of God and his creatures, from which all
   its principles are derived; and had already entered on a series of
   investigations, which, if ultimately found correct, would effectuate
   most important changes in the opinions of the christian world.

   The ministry had long been the profession of his choice, and was
   doubtless the only profession which he had ever thought of pursuing.
   Few persons, probably, enter the sacred office with more just views of
   its elevation and importance. His work he appears to have regarded
   simply as the work of salvation;--the same work, on which HE, whose
   commission he bore, came down to this lower world;--and to the
   accomplishment of it, the surrendry of himself appears to have been
   deliberate and entire. His reception as a preacher had certainly been
   flattering. Repeated and urgent proposals had been made to him for
   settlement; and, as far as he was known, he was obviously regarded as a
   young man of uncommon promise.

   Northampton, the place of his settlement, is in its natural situation
   uncommonly pleasant, was then the shire town of a county, embracing
   nearly one half of the area of the colony, and embodied within its
   limits, more than the ordinary share of refinement and polish. The
   church was large, and, with the congregation, was united. Both were
   united in him, and earnestly desirous that he should become their
   minister. From his childhood he had familiarly known both the place and
   the people. His parents were the familiar friends of many of the
   inhabitants; and they, with his connexions in the place, regarded his
   settlement there as a most pleasing event.

   He was also the individual, whom probably, of all others, his
   grandfather desired, for his colleague and successor. That venerable
   man, then in his 84th year, had been the minister of Northampton 55
   years; and by his piety, his great energy of character, and his
   knowledge of mankind, had early acquired, and maintained through a long
   life, a singular degree of weight among the ministers and churches of
   New England. Though a close student, and an able and faithful preacher,
   he was in character a man of business, and of action; and, in all the
   important ecclesiastical bodies of Massachusetts, he had for many years
   an influence, which usually was not contested, and almost always was
   paramount. In Northampton he had been a faithful and successful
   minister. Under his preaching, the place had repeatedly witnessed
   revivals of religion; particularly in 1679, 1683, 1690, 1712, and 1718.
   Those in 1683, 1690, and 1712, were distinguished for their extent, and
   for the accessions made to the number of communicants. While the
   existing members of the church, with scarcely an exception, regarded
   him as their spiritual father, all the acting inhabitants of the town
   had grown up under his ministry, and had been accustomed, from infancy,
   to pay a respect to his person and character, and a deference to his
   opinions, such as children pay to those of a loved and venerated
   parent.

   One circumstance, relating to the actual condition of the church at
   Northampton, deserves to be mentioned here, as it had an ultimate
   bearing on some of the most important events recorded in these pages.
   That church, like the other early churches of New England, according to
   its original platform, admitted none to the sacrament of the Lord's
   supper, except those who, after due examination, were regarded in the
   judgment of christian charity as regenerate persons. Such was the
   uniform practice of the church, from the time of its formation, during
   the life of Mr. Mather, and for upwards of thirty years after the
   settlement of Mr. Stoddard. How early Mr. Stoddard changed his own
   views on this subject, cannot probably be ascertained; but he
   attempted, in 1704, and, though not without opposition, yet with
   ultimate success, to introduce a corresponding change in the practice
   of the church. Though no vote was then taken to alter the rules of
   admission, yet the point of practice was yielded. The sacrament, from
   that time, was viewed as a converting ordinance, and those who were not
   regarded, either by themselves or others, as possessed of piety, were
   encouraged to unite themselves to the church.

   The attention to religion in 1718, was neither extensive, nor of long
   continuance, and appears not to have terminated happily. During the
   nine years which intervened between that event and the settlement of
   Mr. Edwards, Mr. Stoddard witnessed "a far more degenerate time among
   his people, particularly among the young, than ever before," in which
   the means of salvation were attended with little or no visible
   efficacy. The young became addicted to habits of dissipation and
   licentiousness; family government too generally failed; the sabbath was
   extensively profaned; and the decorum of the sanctuary was not
   unfrequently disturbed. There had also long prevailed in the town a
   spirit of contention between two parties, into which they had for many
   years been divided, which kept alive a mutual jealousy, and prepared
   them to oppose one another in all public affairs.

   Such were the circumstances in which Mr. Edwards entered on his
   ministry at Northampton.

   At this time, Mr. Stoddard, though so much advanced in years, had a
   good degree of strength, both of body and mind; and, for a considerable
   period after the settlement of his grandson, he was able to officiate
   in the desk the half of every sabbath. Almost immediately after that
   event, he was permitted to witness a work of divine grace among some of
   his people; in the course of which about twenty were believed to be
   savingly converted. This was to him a most pleasing circumstance, as
   well as most useful to his colleague; who observes, "I have reason to
   bless God for the great advantage I had by it." No doubt it was
   intended to prepare him for more important and interesting scenes. The
   attention to religion, though at no time very extensive, continued for
   about two years, and was followed by several years of general
   inattention and indifference.

   Immediately after his settlement, Mr. Edwards commenced the practice of
   preparing two discourses weekly; one of which was preached as a
   lecture, on an evening in the week. This he continued for several
   years. Though he regarded preaching the gospel as the great duty of a
   minister, and would on no account offer to God, or deliver to his
   people, that which was not the fruit of toil and labour; yet he
   resolved, from the commencement of his ministry, not to devote the time
   of each week exclusively to the preparation of his sermons, but to
   spend a large portion of it in the study of the Bible, and in the
   investigation of the more difficult and important subjects of theology.
   His mode of study with the pen has been described, and was now
   vigorously pursued, in the continuation of his "Miscellanies," and his
   "Notes on the Scriptures," as well as of a work, entitled, "The Types
   of the Messiah in the Old Testament, " which he appears to have
   commenced while a candidate for the ministry. With an infirm
   constitution, and health ordinarily feeble, it was obviously
   impossible, however, to carry this resolution into practice, without
   the most strict attention to diet, exercise, and method; but in all
   these points, his habits had long been formed, and persevered in, with
   a direct reference to the best improvement of time, and the greatest
   efficiency of his intellectual powers. In eating and drinking, he was
   unusually abstemious, and constantly watchful. He carefully observed
   the effects of the different sorts of food, and selected those which
   best suited his constitution, and rendered him most fit for mental
   labour. Having also ascertained the quantity of food, which, while it
   sustained his bodily strength, left his mind most sprightly and active,
   he most scrupulously and exactly confined himself to the prescribed
   limits; regarding it as a shame and a sin, to waste his time, and his
   mental strength, by animal indulgence. In this respect, he lived by
   rule, and constantly practised great self-denial; as he did. also, with
   regard to the time passed in sleep. He accustomed himself to rise at
   four, or between four and five, in the morning, and, in winter, spent
   several of those hours in study which are commonly wasted in slumber.
   In the evening, he usually allowed himself a season of relaxation, in
   the midst of his family.

   His most usual diversion in summer, was riding on horseback, and
   walking; and in his solitary rides and walks, he appears to have
   decided, before leaving home, on what subjects to meditate. He would
   commonly, unless diverted by company, ride two or three miles after
   dinner, to some lonely grove, where he would dismount and walk awhile.
   At such times, he generally carried his pen and ink with him, to note
   any thought that might be suggested, and which promised some light on
   any important subject. In winter, he was accustomed, almost daily, to
   take his axe, and cut wood moderately, for the space of half an hour or
   more. In solitary rides of considerable length, he adopted a kind of
   artificial memory. Having pursued a given subject of thought to its
   proper results, he would pin a small piece of paper on a given spot in
   his coat, and charge his mind to associate the subject and the piece of
   paper. He would then repeat the same process with a second subject of
   thought, fastening the token in a different place, and then a third,
   and a fourth, as the time might permit. From a ride of several days, he
   would usually bring home a considerable number of these remembrancers;
   and, on going to his study, would take them off, one by one, in regular
   order, and write down the train of thought of which each was intended
   to remind him.

   "He did not," observes Dr. Hopkins, "make it his custom to visit his
   people in their own houses, unless he was sent for by the sick, or he
   heard that they were under some special affliction. Instead of visiting
   from house to house, he used to preach frequently at private meetings,
   in particular neighbourhoods; and often call the young people and
   children to his own house, when he used to pray with them, and treat
   with them in a manner suited to their years and circumstance; and he
   catechized the children in public, every sabbath in the forenoon. And
   he used, sometimes, to propose questions to particular young persons,
   in writing, for them to answer, after a proper time given to them to
   prepare. In putting out these questions, he endeavoured to suit them to
   the age, genius, and ability of those, to whom they were given. His
   questions were generally such, as required but a short answer; and yet,
   could not be answered without a particular knowledge of some historical
   part of the Scriptures; and therefore led, and even obliged, persons to
   study the Bible.

   "He did not neglect visiting his people from house to house, because he
   did not look upon it, in ordinary cases, to be one important part of
   the work of a gospel minister; but, because he supposed that ministers
   should, with respect to this, consult their own talents and
   circumstances, and visit more or less, according to the degree in which
   they could hope thereby to promote the great ends of the ministry. He
   observed, that some had a talent for entertaining and profiting by
   occasional visits among their people. They have words at command, and a
   facility at introducing profitable religious discourse, in a manner
   free, natural, and familiar, and apparently without design or
   contrivance. He supposed, that such had a call to spend a great deal of
   their time in visiting their people; but he looked on his own talents
   to be quite otherwise. He was not able to enter into a free
   conversation with every person he met, and, in an easy manner, turn it
   to whatever topic he pleased, without the help of others, and it may
   be, against their inclinations. He therefore found, that his visits of
   this kind must be, in a great degree, unprofitable. And as he was
   settled in a large parish, it would have taken up a great part of his
   time to visit from house to house, which he thought he could spend, in
   his study, to much more valuable purposes, and so better promote the
   great ends of his ministry. For it appeared to him, that he could do
   the greatest good to the souls of men, and most promote the cause of
   Christ, by preaching and writing, and conversing with persons under
   religious impressions, in his study; whither he encouraged all such to
   repair; where they might be sure, in ordinary cases, to find him, and
   to be allowed easy access to him; and where they were treated with all
   desirable tenderness, kindness, and familiarity."

   Owing to his constant watchfulness and self-denial in food and sleep,
   and his regular attention to bodily exercise, notwithstanding the
   feebleness of his constitution, few students are capable of more close
   or more long-continued application than he was. He commonly spent
   thirteen hours every day in his study; and these hours were passed, not
   in perusing or treasuring up the thoughts of others, but in employments
   far more exhausting--in the investigation of difficult subjects, in the
   origination and arrangement of thoughts, in the invention of arguments,
   and in the discovery of truths and principles. Nor was his exact
   method, in the distribution of his time, of less essential service. In
   consequence of his uniform regularity and self-denial, and the force of
   habit, the powers of his mind were always at his command, and would do
   their prescribed task in the time appointed. This enabled him to assign
   the preparation of his sermons, each week, to given days, and specific
   subjects of investigation to other given days; and except in cases of
   sickness, or journeying, or some other extraordinary interruption, it
   was rare, indeed, that he failed of accomplishing every part of his
   weekly task, or that he was pressed for time in the accomplishment. So
   exact was the distribution of his time, and so perfect the command of
   his mental powers, that in addition to his preparation of two
   discourses in each week, his stated and occasional lectures, and his
   customary pastoral duties, he continued regularly his "Notes on the
   Scriptures," his "Miscellanies," his "Types of the Messiah," and a work
   which he soon commenced, entitled, "Prophecies of the Messiah in the
   Old Testament, and their Fulfilment."

   On the 28th of July, 1727, Mr. Edwards was married, at New-haven, to
   Miss Sarah Pierrepont. Her paternal grandfather, John Pierrepont, Esq.
   who came from England and resided in Roxbury, Massachusetts, was a
   younger branch of a most distinguished family in his own country. Her
   father, the Rev. James Pierrepont, was "an eminent, pious, and useful
   minister, at New-Haven." He married Mary, the daughter of the Rev.
   Samuel Hooker, of Farmington, who was the son of the Rev. Thomas
   Hooker, of Hartford, familiarly denominated "the father of the
   Connecticut churches," and "well known, in the churches of England, for
   his distinguished talents and most ardent piety." Mr. Pierrepont was
   one of the principal founders, and one of the trustees, of Yale
   college; and, to help forward the seminary, read lectures to the
   students, for some considerable time, as professor of Moral Philosophy.
   The Platform of the Connecticut Churches, established at Saybrook, in
   1708, is ascribed to his pen. Miss Pierrepont was born on the 9th of
   January, 1710, and at the time of her marriage was in the 18th year of
   her age. She was a young lady of uncommon beauty. Not only is this the
   language of tradition; but Dr. Hopkins, who first saw her when the
   mother of seven children, says she was more than ordinarily beautiful;
   and her portrait, taken by a respectable English painter [12] , while
   it presents a form and features not often rivalled, exhibits also that
   peculiar loveliness of expression, which is the combined result of
   intelligence, cheerfulness, and benevolence. The native powers of her
   mind were of a superior order; and her parents being in easy
   circumstances, and of liberal views, provided for their children all
   the advantages of an enlightened and polished education. In her manners
   she was gentle and courteous, amiable in her behaviour, and the law of
   kindness appeared to govern all her conversation and conduct. She was
   also a rare example of early piety; having exhibited the life and power
   of religion, and that in a remarkable manner, when only five years of
   age; [13] and having also confirmed the hopes which her friends then
   cherished, by the uniform and increasing excellence of her character,
   in childhood and youth. So warm and animated were her religious
   feelings, in every period of life, that they might perhaps have been
   regarded as enthusiastic, had they not been under the control of true
   delicacy and sound discretion. Mr. Edwards had known her several years
   before their marriage, and from the following passage, written on a
   blank leaf, in 1723, it is obvious, that even then her uncommon piety,
   at least, had arrested his attention. "They say there is a young lady
   in [New-Haven] who is loved of that Great Being, who made and rules the
   world, and that there are certain seasons in which this Great Being, in
   some way or other invisible, comes to her and fills her mind with
   exceeding sweet delight; and that she hardly cares for any thing,
   except to meditate on him--that she expects after a while to be
   received up where he is, to be raised up out of the world and caught up
   into heaven; being assured that he loves her too well to let her remain
   at a distance from him always. There she is to dwell with him, and to
   be ravished with his love and delight for ever. Therefore, if you
   present all the world before her, with the richest of its treasures,
   she disregards it and cares not for it, and is unmindful of any pain or
   affliction. She has a strange sweetness in her mind, and singular
   purity in her affections; is most just and conscientious in all her
   conduct; and you could not persuade her to do any thing wrong or
   sinful, if you would give her all the world, lest she should offend
   this Great Being. She is of a wonderful sweetness, calmness, and
   universal benevolence of mind; especially after this Great God has
   manifested himself to her mind. She will sometimes go about from place
   to place, singing sweetly; and seems to be always full of joy and
   pleasure; and no one knows for what. She loves to be alone, walking in
   the fields and groves, and seems to have some one invisible always
   conversing with her." After due allowance is made for animation of
   feeling, the reader will be convinced, that such a testimony,
   concerning a young lady of thirteen, could not have been given, by so
   competent a judge, had there not been something unusual in the purity
   and elevation of her mind and the excellence of her life. Few persons,
   we are convinced, no older than she was at the time of her marriage,
   have made equal progress in holiness; and rare, very rare, is the
   instance, in which such a connexion results in a purer or more
   uninterrupted happiness. It was a union founded on high personal
   esteem, and on a mutual affection, which continually grew, and ripened,
   and mellowed for the time of harvest. The station, which she was called
   to fill at this early age, is one of great delicacy, as well as
   responsibility, and is attended with many difficulties. She entered on
   the performance of the various duties to her family and the people, to
   which it summoned her, with a firm reliance on the guidance and support
   of God; and perhaps no stronger evidence can be given of her
   substantial worth, than that from the first she discharged them in such
   a manner, as to secure the high and increasing approbation of all who
   knew her.

   The attention to religion, which has been mentioned as commencing about
   the period of Mr. Edwards's ordination, though at no time extensive,
   continued about two years, and was followed by several years of
   inattention and indifference. His public labours were continued with
   faithfulness, but with no peculiar success; and he had reason to lament
   the too perceptible declension of his people, both in religion and
   morals.

   On the 11th of February, 1729, his venerable colleague was removed from
   the scene of his earthly labours. The event was sincerely and tenderly
   lamented by the people of Northampton, as well as extensively
   throughout the province. His funeral sermon was preached by his
   son-in-law, the Rev. William Williams, of Hatfield; and numerous
   ministers, in their own pulpits, paid a similar tribute of respect to
   his memory.

   In the spring of the same year, the health of Mr. Edwards, in
   consequence of too close application, so far failed him, that he was
   obliged to be absent from his people several months. Early in May he
   was at New-Haven, in company with Mrs. Edwards and their infant child,
   a daughter born Aug. 25th, 1728. In September, his father, in a letter
   to one of his daughters, expresses the hope that the health of his son
   is so far restored, as to enable him to resume his labours, and to
   preach twice on the sabbath. The summer was probably passed, partly at
   Northampton, and partly in travelling.

   His visit to Windsor, in September, gave him his last opportunity of
   seeing his sister Jerusha, whom he tenderly loved; and who a little
   while before had passed a considerable time with her friends in
   Northampton. She was attacked with a malignant fever in December, and
   on the 22d of that month died at her father's house. The uncommon
   strength and excellence of her character, rendered her peculiarly dear
   to all her relatives and friends; and from the testimonials of her
   father, of four of her sisters, and of a friend of the family at a
   distance, written soon after her death, [14] I have ascertained the
   following particulars. She was born in June, 1710, and, on the
   testimony of that friend, was a young lady of great sweetness of
   temper, of a fine understanding, and of a beautiful countenance. She
   was devoted to reading from childhood, and though fond of books of
   taste and amusement, she customarily preferred those which require
   close thought, and are fitted to strengthen and inform the mind. Like
   her sisters, she had received a thorough education, both English and
   classical, and by her proficiency, had justified the views of her
   father, and sustained the honour and claims of her sex. In
   conversation, she was solid and instructive beyond her years, yet, at
   the same time, was sprightly and active, and had an uncommon share of
   native wit and humour. Her wit was always delicate and kind, and used
   merely for recreation. According to the rule she prescribed to another,
   it constituted "the sauce, and not the food, in the entertainment."
   Being fond of retirement and meditation from early life, she passed
   much of her leisure time in solitary walks in the groves behind her
   father's house; and the richness of her mind, in moral reflection and
   philosophical remark, proved that these hours were not wasted in
   reverie, but occupied by solid thought and profitable contemplation.
   Habitually serene and cheerful, she was contented and happy; not
   envious of others, not desirous of admiration, not ambitious nor
   aspiring: and while she valued highly the esteem of her friends and of
   the wise and good, she was firmly convinced that her happiness
   depended, chiefly and ultimately, on the state of her own mind. She
   appeared to have gained the entire government of her temper and her
   passions, discovered uncommon equanimity and firmness under trials, and
   while, in difficult cases, she sought the best advice, yet ultimately
   acted for herself. Her religious life began in childhood; and from that
   time, meditation, prayer, and reading the sacred Scriptures, were not a
   prescribed task, but a coveted enjoyment. Her sisters, who knew how
   much of her time she daily passed alone, had the best reason to believe
   that no place was so pleasant to her as her own retirement, and no
   society so delightful as solitude with God. She read theology, as a
   science, with the deepest interest, and pursued the systematic study of
   the Scriptures, by the help of the best commentaries. Her observance of
   the sabbath was exemplary, in solemnly preparing for it, in allotting
   to it the prescribed hours, and in devoting it only to sacred
   employments; and in the solemn and entire devotion of her mind to the
   duties of the sanctuary, she appeared, habitually, to feel with David,
   "Holiness becometh thine house for ever." Few persons attend more
   closely to preaching, or judge more correctly concerning it, or have
   higher pleasure in that which is solid, pungent, and practical. She saw
   and conversed with God, in his works of creation and providence. Her
   religious joy was, at times, intense and elevated. After telling one of
   her sisters, on a particular occasion, that she could not describe it,
   she observed to her, that it seemed like a streak of light shining in a
   dark place; and reminded her of a line Watts's Lyrics,

   "And sudden, from the cleaving skies, a gleam of glory broke."

   Her conscience was truly enlightened, and her conduct appeared to be
   governed by principle. She approved of the best things; discovered
   great reverence for religion, and strong attachment to the truly pious
   and conscientious; was severe in her estimate of herself, and
   charitable in judging of others; was not easily provoked, and usually
   tried to excuse the provocation; was unapt to cherish prejudices, and
   lamented, and strove to conceal, the faults of Christians.

   On the testimony of those who knew her best, "She was a remarkably
   loving, dutiful, obedient daughter, and a very kind and loving sister,"
   "very helpful and serviceable in the family, and willingly labouring
   with her own hands," very "kind and friendly to her neighbours,"
   attentive to the sick, charitable to the poor, prone to sympathize with
   the afflicted, and merciful to the brutes; and at the same time,
   respectful to superiors, obliging to equals, condescending and affable
   to inferiors, and manifesting sincere good will to all mankind.
   Courteous and easy in her manners, she was also modest, unostentatious,
   and retiring; and, while she uniformly respected herself, she commanded
   the respect of all who saw her. She was fond of all that was comely in
   dress, but averse to every thing gay and gaudy. She loved peace, and
   strove to reconcile those who were at variance; was delicately
   attentive to those of her sex, who were slighted by others; received
   reproofs with meekness, and told others of their faults with so much
   sweetness and faithfulness, as to increase their esteem and affection
   for herself. She detested all guile, and management, and deception, all
   flattery and falsehood, and wholly refused to associate with those who
   exhibited this character. She was most careful and select in her
   friendships, and most true and faithful to her friends--highly valuing
   their affection, and discovering the deepest interest in their welfare.
   Her conversation and conduct indicated uncommon innocence and purity of
   mind; and she avoided many things, which are thought correct by
   multitudes who are strictly virtuous. During her sickness she was not
   forsaken. A day or two before its termination, she manifested a
   remarkable admiration of the grace and mercy of God, through Jesus
   Christ, to sinners, and particularly to herself: saying, "It is
   wonderful, it surprises me." A part of the time she was in some degree
   delirious; but, when her mind wandered, it seemed to wander heavenward.
   Just before her death, she attempted to sing a hymn, entitled, "The
   Absence of Christ," and died, in the full possession of her rational
   powers, expressing her hope of eternal salvation through his blood.
   This first example of the ravages of death, in this numerous family,
   was a most trying event to all its members; and the tenderness with
   which they cherished the memory of her who was gone, probably
   terminated only with life.

   The second daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, was born on the 16th of
   the following April, and named Jerusha, after their deceased sister.

   In July, 1731, Mr. Edwards being in Boston, delivered a sermon at the
   public lecture, entitled, "God glorified in Man's Dependence," from 1
   Cor. i. 29, 30. "That no flesh should glory in his presence. But of him
   are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
   righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. That according as it
   is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." It was
   published, at the request of several ministers, and others who heard
   it, and preceded by a preface by the Rev. Messrs. Prince and Cooper, of
   Boston. This was his first publication, and is scarcely known to the
   American reader of his works. The subject was at that time novel, as
   exhibited by the preacher, and made a deep impression on the audience,
   and on the reverend gentlemen who were particularly active in procuring
   its publication. "It was with no small difficulty," say they, "that the
   author's youth and modesty were prevailed on, to let him appear a
   preacher in our public lecture, and afterwards to give us a copy of his
   discourse, at the desire of divers ministers, and others who heard it.
   But, as we quickly found him to be a workman that need not be ashamed
   before his brethren, our satisfaction was the greater, to see him
   pitching upon so noble a subject, and treating it with so much strength
   and clearness, as the judicious will perceive in the following
   composure: a subject, which secures to God his great design, in the
   work of fallen man's redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, which is
   evidently so laid out, as that the glory of the whole should return to
   him the blessed ordainer, purchaser, and applier; a subject, which
   enters deep into practical religion; without the belief of which, that
   must soon die in the hearts and lives of men."

   The following is the testimony, borne by these excellent men, to the
   talents and piety of the author:

   "We cannot, therefore, but express our joy and thankfulness, that the
   great Head of the church is pleased still to raise up, from among the
   children of his people, for the supply of his churches, those who
   assert and maintain these evangelical principles; and that our
   churches, notwithstanding all their degeneracies, have still a high
   value for just principles, and for those who publicly own and teach
   them. And, as we cannot but wish and pray, that the college in the
   neighbouring colony, as well as our own, may be a fruitful mother of
   many such sons as the author; so we heartily rejoice, in the special
   favour of Providence, in bestowing such a rich gift on the happy church
   of Northampton, which has, for so many lustres of years, flourished
   under the influence of such pious doctrines, taught them in the
   excellent ministry of their late venerable pastor, whose gift and
   spirit we hope will long live and shine in his grandson, to the end
   that they may abound in all the lovely fruits of evangelical humility
   and thankfulness, to the glory of God."

   The discourse itself deserves this high commendation. It was the
   commencement of a series of efforts, on the part of the author, to
   illustrate the glory of God, as appearing in the greatest of all his
   works, the work of man's redemption. Rare indeed is the instance, in
   which a first publication is equally rich in condensed thought, or in
   new and elevated conceptions.

   The third child of Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, also a daughter, was born
   February 13th, 1732, and received the name of Esther, after his mother
   and Mrs. Stoddard.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [11] I use spiritual here in its original and most appropriate sense,
   as opposed to material.

   [12] The Rev. Dr. Erskine, the warm friend and the correspondent of Mr.
   Edwards, being desirous of procuring a correct portrait , both of him
   and his wife, and hearing that a respectable English painter was in
   Boston , forwarded to his agent in that town, the sum requisite, not
   only for the portraits, but for the expenses of the journey. They were
   taken in 1740; and after the death of Dr. Erskine, were very kindly
   transmitted by his executor to Dr. Edwards.

   [13] Hopkin's Life of Edwards. Dr. H. resided in the family a
   considerable time.

   [14] This last was published.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER VII.

   REMARKABLE REVIVAL OF RELIGION, IN 1734, AND 1735--ITS EXTENT AND
   POWER--MANNER OF TREATING AWAKENED SINNERS--CAUSES OF ITS
   DECLINE--RELIGIOUS CONTROVERSY IN HAMPSHIRE--DEATH OF HIS SISTER
   LUCY--CHARACTERISTICS OF MRS. EDWARDS--REMAINDER OF PERSONAL NARRATIVE.

   Early in 1732, the state of religion in Northampton, which had been for
   several years on the decline, began gradually, and perceptibly, to grow
   better; and an obvious check was given to the open prevalence of
   disorder and licentiousness. Immoral practices, which had long been
   customary, were regarded as disgraceful, and extensively renounced. The
   young, who had been the chief abettors of these disorders, and on whom
   the means of grace had exerted no salutary influence, discovered more
   of a disposition to hearken to the counsels of their parents, and the
   admonitions of the gospel, relinquished by degrees their more gross and
   public sins, and attended on the worship of the sabbath more generally,
   and with greater decorum and seriousness of mind; and, among the people
   as a body, there was a larger number than before, who manifested a
   personal interest in their own salvation. This desirable change in the
   congregation became more and more perceptible, throughout that and the
   following year. At the latter end of 1733, there appeared a very
   unusual flexibleness, and a disposition to yield to advice, in the
   young of both sexes; on an occasion, too, and under circumstances,
   where it was wholly unexpected. It had long, and perhaps always, been
   the custom in Northampton, to devote the sabbath evening, and the
   evening after the state public lecture, to visiting and diversion. On a
   sabbath preceding one of the public lectures, Mr. Edwards preached a
   sermon on the subject, explaining the mischievous consequences of this
   unhappy practice, exhorting the young to a reformation; and calling on
   parents and masters, universally, to come to an explicit agreement with
   one another, to govern their families in this respect, and on these
   evenings to keep their children and servants at home. The following
   evening, it so happened that, among a considerable number visiting at
   his house, there were individuals from every part of the town; and he
   took that occasion, to propose to those who were present, that they
   should, in his name, request the heads of families in their respective
   neighbourhoods, to assemble the next day, and converse upon the
   subject, and agree, every one, to restrain his own family. They did so.
   Such a meeting was accordingly held in each neighbourhood, and the
   proposal was universally complied with. But, when they made known this
   agreement to their families, they found little or no restraint
   necessary; for the young people, almost without exception, declared
   that they were convinced, by what they had heard from the pulpit, of
   the impropriety of the practice, and were ready cheerfully to
   relinquish it. From that time forward, it was given up, and there was
   an immediate and thorough reformation of those disorders and
   immoralities, which it had occasioned. This unexpected occurrence
   tenderly affected the minds of the people, and happily prepared them
   for events of still deeper interest.

   Just after this, there began to be an unusual concern on the subject of
   religion, at a little hamlet called Pascommuck, consisting of a few
   farm houses, about three miles from the principal settlement; and a
   number of persons, at that place, appeared to be savingly converted. In
   the ensuing spring, the sudden and awful death of a young man, who
   became immediately delirious, and continued so until he died; followed
   by that of a young married woman, who, after great mental suffering,
   appeared to find peace with God, and died full of comfort, in a most
   earnest and affecting manner warning and counselling others;
   contributed extensively, and powerfully, to impress the minds of the
   young, and to excite a deeper interest on the subject of religion,
   throughout the congregation.

   The fourth child and daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edwards was born April
   7th, 1734, and baptized by the name of Mary.

   In the autumn, Mr. Edwards recommended to the young people, on the day
   of each stated public lecture, to assemble in various parts of the
   town, and spend the evening in prayer, and the other duties of social
   religion. This they readily did, and their example was followed by
   those who were older.

   The solemnity of mind, which now began to pervade the church and
   congregation, and which was constantly increasing, had a visible
   re-action on all the labours of Mr. Edwards, public as well as private;
   and it will not be easy to find discourses in any language, more
   solemn, spiritual, or powerful, than many of those which he now
   delivered. One of these, from Matt. xvi. 17. entitled, "A Divine and
   Supernatural Light immediately imparted to the Soul by the Spirit of
   God, shown to be both a Scriptural and Rational Doctrine," excited
   uncommon interest in the hearers, and, at their request, was now
   published. As an exhibition of religion, as existing within the soul,
   in one of its peculiar forms or aspects, it will be found, in the
   perusal, remarkably adapted to enlighten, to refresh, and to sanctify;
   while the evidence of the reality of such a light, as derived both from
   the Scriptures and from reason, will convince every unprejudiced mind.

   At this time, a violent controversy, respecting Arminianism, prevailed
   extensively over that part of New England, and the friends of vital
   piety in Northampton regarded it as likely to have a most unhappy
   bearing on the interests of religion in that place; but, contrary to
   their fears, it was powerfully overruled for its promotion. Mr.
   Edwards, well knowing that the points at issue had an immediate bearing
   on the great subject of salvation, and that mankind never can be so
   powerfully affected by any subject, as when their attention to it has
   been strongly excited; determined, in opposition to the fears and the
   counsels of many of his friends, to explain his own views to his
   people, from the pulpit. Accordingly, he preached a series of sermons,
   on the various points relating to the controversy, and among others,
   his well-known Discourses on the great doctrine of Justification by
   Faith alone. For this he was sincerely censured by numbers on the spot,
   as well as ridiculed by many elsewhere [15] . The event, however,
   proved that he had judged wisely. In his discourses, he explained the
   scriptural conditions of salvation, and exposed the errors then
   prevalent with regard to them, with so much force of argument, and in a
   manner so solemn and practical, that it was attended with a signal
   blessing from heaven, on the people of his charge. Many, who had
   cherished these errors, were convinced that they could be justified
   only by the righteousness of Christ; while others, who had not, were
   brought to feel that they must be renewed by the Holy Spirit; and the
   minds of both were led the more earnestly to seek that they might be
   accepted of God. In the latter part of December, five or six
   individuals appeared to be very suddenly and savingly converted, one
   after another; and some of them in a manner so remarkable, as to awaken
   very great numbers, of all ages and conditions. The year 1735 opened on
   Northampton in a most auspicious manner. A deep and solemn interest in
   the great truths of religion, had become universal in all parts of the
   town, and among all classes of people. This was the only subject of
   conversation in every company; and almost the only business of the
   people appeared to be, to secure their salvation. So extensive was the
   influence of the Spirit of God, that there was scarcely an individual
   in the town, either old or young, who was left unconcerned about the
   great things of the eternal world. This was true of the gayest, of the
   most licentious, and of the most hostile to religion. And in the midst
   of this universal attention, the work of conversion was carried on in
   the most astonishing manner. Every day witnessed its triumphs; and so
   great was the alteration in the appearance of the town, that in the
   spring and summer following, it appeared to be full of the presence of
   God. There was scarcely a house which did not furnish the tokens of his
   presence, and scarcely a family which did not present the trophies of
   his grace. "The town," says Mr. Edwards, "was never so full of love,
   nor so full of joy, nor yet so full of distress, as it was then."
   Whenever he met the people in the sanctuary, he not only saw the house
   crowded, but every hearer earnest to receive the truth of God, and
   often the whole assembly dissolved in tears: some weeping for sorrow,
   others for joy, and others from compassion. In the months of March and
   April, when the work of God was carried on with the greatest power, he
   supposes the number, apparently of genuine conversions, to have been at
   least four a day, or nearly thirty a week, take one week with another,
   for five or six weeks together.

   During the winter and spring, many persons from the neighbouring towns
   came to Northampton, to attend the stated lectures of Mr. Edwards; many
   others, on business, or on visits; and many others, from a distance,
   having heard contradictory reports of the state of things, came to see
   and examine for themselves. Of these, great numbers had their
   consciences awakened, were savingly wrought upon, and went home
   rejoicing in the forgiving love of God. This appeared to be the means
   of spreading the same influence in the adjacent towns, and in places
   more remote, so that no less than ten towns in the same county, and
   seventeen in the adjoining colony of Connecticut, within a short time,
   were favoured with revivals of religion.

   This was undoubtedly one of the most remarkable events of the kind,
   that has occurred since the canon of the New Testament was finished. It
   was so on account of its universality: no class, nor age, nor
   description, was exempt. Upwards of fifty persons above forty years of
   age, and ten above ninety, near thirty between ten and fourteen, and of
   four [16] , became, in the view of Mr. Edwards, the subjects of the
   renewing grace of God. It was so on account of the unusual numbers, who
   appeared to become Christians; amounting to more than three hundred
   persons, in half a year, and about as many of them males as females.
   Previous to one sacrament, about one hundred were received to the
   communion, and near sixty previous to another; and the whole number of
   communicants, at one time, was about six hundred and twenty, including
   almost all the adult population of the town. It was so in its rapid
   progress, in its amazing power, in the depth of the convictions felt,
   and in the degree of light, of love, and of joy communicated; as well
   as in its great extent, and in its swift propagation from place to
   place.

   Early in the progress of this work of grace, Mr. Edwards seems to have
   decided for himself, the manner in which he was bound to treat awakened
   sinners:--to urge repentance on every such sinner, as his immediate
   duty; to insist that God is under no manner of obligation to any
   unrenewed man; and that a man can challenge nothing, either in absolute
   justice, or by free promise, on account of any thing he does before he
   repents and believes. He was fully convinced that if he had taught
   those, who came to consult him in their spiritual troubles, any other
   doctrines, he should have taken the most direct course to have utterly
   undone them. The discourses, which, beyond measure more than any others
   which he preached, "had an immediate saving effect," were several from
   Rom. iii. 19. "That every mouth may be stopped,"--in which he
   endeavoured to show that it would be just with God, for ever to reject,
   and cast off, mere natural men.

   Though it had not been the custom, as we have already seen, for a long
   period at Northampton, to require of candidates for admission to the
   church, a credible relation of the evidences of their own conversion,
   because, if unconverted, they were supposed to have a right to the
   sacrament of the Lord's supper, as a converting ordinance: yet Mr.
   Edwards supposed he had very "sufficient evidence" of the conversion of
   those who were now admitted. There can be but little doubt, however,
   that, if the rules of the church had required, in every case, a
   thorough examination of the candidate's piety, the period of probation
   would have been longer, the danger of a false profession more solemnly
   realized, and the examination of each individual, by the pastor of the
   church, as well as by himself, far more strict; or that many, at first,
   regarded, both by themselves and others, as unquestionably Christians,
   would not, at that time, have made a profession of religion. But
   unfortunately he had never fully examined the scriptural ground for
   admission to the Lord's supper, and, like many others, had taken it for
   granted, that Mr. Stoddard's views of the subject were just. Had he
   investigated it as thoroughly, at that important crisis, as he did
   afterwards, there can be but little doubt that, in the high state of
   religious feeling then prevalent, the church would readily have changed
   its practice, or that all the candidates for admission would have
   consented to a thorough examination. Had such indeed been the issue,
   Mr. Edwards himself would have been saved from many trials, and the
   church and people of Northampton from great and incalculable evils:
   still it may well be doubted, whether the actual result has not
   occasioned a far greater amount of good to the church at large.

   In the latter part of May, 1735, this great work of the Spirit of God
   began obviously to decline, and the instances of conversion to be less
   numerous, both at Northampton and in the neighbouring villages. One
   principal cause of this declension, is undoubtedly to be found in the
   fact, that in all these places, both among ministers and private
   christians, the physical excitement had been greater than the human
   constitution can, for a long period, endure. Nothing, it should be
   remembered, exhausts the strength and the animal spirits, like feeling.
   One hour of intense joy, or of intense sorrow, will more entirely
   prostrate the frame, than weeks of close study. In revivals of
   religion, as they have hitherto appeared, the nerves of the whole
   man--of body, mind, and heart,--are kept continually on the stretch,
   from month to month; until at length they are relaxed, and become
   non-elastic; and then all feeling and energy, of every kind, is gone.
   Another reason is undoubtedly to be found in the fact, that those, who
   had so long witnessed this remarkable work of God, without renouncing
   their sins, had at length become hardened and hopeless in their
   impenitence. Mr. Edwards also attributes it, in part, to two striking
   events of Providence, at Northampton, and to two remarkable instances
   of enthusiastic delusion, in two of the neighbouring villages.

   He mentions also a third cause, and one far more powerful, and more
   extensive in its influence, than either of the two last. This was an
   ecclesiastical controversy, growing out of the settlement of a minister
   at Springfield, in which he himself was ultimately compelled, though
   with great reluctance, to take a part; which agitated, not only the
   county of Hampshire, but the more remote churches of the province. Of
   this, a bare mention would alone be necessary, did we not find his
   connexion with it referred to, at a subsequent and most interesting
   period of his life.

   In 1735, the first church in Springfield, having elected a pastor,
   invited the churches in the southern part of Hampshire, by their
   pastors and delegates in council, to proceed to his ordination. The
   council, when convened, after examining the qualifications of the
   candidate, refused to ordain him, and assigned two reasons for this
   refusal--youthful immorality, and anti-scriptural tenets. Mr. Edwards,
   though invited to this council, for some reason or other, was not
   present. The church, in August, called a second council, consisting
   chiefly of ministers and delegates from the churches in Boston, which,
   without delay, proceeded to the ordination. The first council, finding
   their own measures thus openly impeached, published a pamphlet
   entitled, "A Narrative and Defence of the Proceedings of the Ministers
   of Hampshire," &c. justifying their own conduct, and censuring that of
   their brethren. The second council defended themselves in a pamphlet
   entitled, "An Answer to the Hampshire Narrative." Mr. Edwards, at the
   request of the first council, and particularly of his uncle, the Rev.
   Mr. Williams, of Hatfield, who was its moderator, wrote a reply to
   this, entitled, "A Letter to the Author of the Pamphlet called, An
   Answer to the Hampshire Narrative."--This reply, viewed either as an
   argument upon the law and the facts, or as an answer to his opponents,
   is an exhibition of logic, not often met with in similar discussions,
   and appears to have concluded the controversy. This series of events
   occurred during the revival of religion in the churches of that county,
   and was thought, by too powerfully engrossing the attention, both of
   ministers and people, in various places, to have hastened its
   conclusion. And there can be no doubt that this opinion was correct. A
   revival of religion is nothing but the immediate result of an uncommon
   attention, on the part of a church and congregation, to the truth of
   God;--particularly to the great truths, which disclose the worth of the
   soul, and the only way in which it can be saved. Whenever, and
   wherever, the members of a church pay the due attention to these
   truths, by giving them their proper influence on their hearts, religion
   revives immediately in their affections and their conduct; and when the
   impenitent pay such attention, the kingdom of heaven immediately
   "suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force." The only
   effectual way to put a stop to such a work of grace, is, therefore, to
   divert the attention of Christians and sinners from those truths which
   bear immediately on the work of salvation.

   In the latter part of the summer, Mr. and Mrs. Edwards were called to
   mourn the death of another of his sisters, named Lucy, the youngest but
   one of his father's children; who was born in 1715, and died August 21,
   1736 [17] , at the age of 21. After her they named their fifth child,
   who was born August 31, of the same year.

   It was a peculiarly favourable dispensation of Providence, that, amid
   the multiplied cares and labours of this period, the health of Mr.
   Edwards was graciously preserved. A revival of religion to a minister,
   like the period of harvest to the husbandman, is the most busy and the
   most exhausting of all seasons; and during the progress of that, which
   he had just witnessed, not only was the whole time of Mr. Edwards fully
   occupied, but all the powers of his mind were laboriously employed, and
   all the feelings of his heart kept, from month to month, in high and
   powerful excitement. In addition to his ordinary duties as a teacher
   and pastor, his public lectures were now multiplied, private lectures
   were weekly appointed in different parts of the town, and his study was
   almost daily thronged by multitudes, looking to him as their spiritual
   guide. From the adjacent villages, also, great numbers resorted to him,
   for the same purpose, having the highest confidence in his wisdom and
   experience; and numerous ministers from various parts of the country,
   came to his house, to witness the triumphs of divine grace, and to
   gain, from his counsels and his measures, more just conceptions of the
   best manner of discharging the highest and most sacred duties of their
   office.

   In the midst of these complicated labours, as well as at all times, he
   found at home one, who was in every sense a help meet for him; one who
   made their common dwelling the abode of order and neatness, of peace
   and comfort, of harmony and love, to all its inmates, and of kindness
   and hospitality to the friend, the visitant, and the stranger. "While
   she uniformly paid a becoming deference to her husband, and treated him
   with entire respect, she spared no pains in conforming to his
   inclinations, and rendering every thing in the family agreeable and
   pleasant: accounting it her greatest glory, and that wherein she could
   best serve God and her generation, to be the means, in this way, of
   promoting his usefulness and happiness. As he was of a weakly, infirm
   constitution, and was necessarily peculiarly exact in his diet, she was
   tender nurse to him, cheerfully attending upon him at all times, and in
   all things ministering to his comfort. And no person of discernment
   could be conversant in the family, without observing, and admiring, the
   perfect harmony, and mutual love and esteem, that subsisted between
   them. At the same time, when she herself laboured under bodily
   disorders and pains, which was not unfrequently the case, instead of
   troubling those around her with her complaints, and wearing a sour or
   dejected countenance, as if out of humour with every body, and every
   thing around her, because she was disregarded and neglected; she was
   accustomed to bear up under them, not only with patience, but with
   cheerfulness and good humour."

   Devoted as Mr. Edwards was to study, and to the duties of his
   profession, it was necessary for him at all times, but especially in a
   season like this, of multiplied toils and anxieties, to be relieved
   from attention to all secular concerns; and it was a most happy
   circumstance, that he could trust every thing of this nature to the
   care of Mrs. Edwards, with entire safety, and with undoubting
   confidence. "She was a most judicious and faithful mistress of a
   family, habitually industrious, a sound economist, managing her
   household affairs with diligence and discretion. She was
   conscientiously careful that nothing should be wasted and lost; and
   often when she herself took care to save any thing of trifling value,
   or directed her children or others to do so, or when she saw them waste
   any thing, she would repeat the words of our Saviour--that nothing be
   lost;' which words she said she often thought of, as containing a maxim
   worth remembering, especially when considered as the reason alleged by
   Christ, why his disciples should gather up the fragments of that bread
   which he had just before created with a word. She took almost the whole
   direction of the temporal affairs of the family without doors and
   within, managing them with great wisdom and prudence as well as
   cheerfulness; and in this was particularly suited to the disposition as
   well as the habits and necessities of her husband, who chose to have no
   care, if possible, of any worldly business."

   But there are other duties, of a still more tender and difficult
   nature, which none but a parent can adequately perform; and it was an
   unspeakable privilege to Mr. Edwards, now surrounded by a young and
   growing family, that when his duties to his people, especially in
   seasons like this, necessarily occupied his whole attention, he could
   safely commit his children to the wisdom and piety, the love and
   faithfulness, of their mother. Her views of the responsibility of
   parents were large and comprehensive. "She thought that, as a parent,
   she had great and important duties to do towards her children, before
   they were capable of government and instruction. For them, she
   constantly and earnestly prayed, and bore them on her heart before God,
   in all her secret and most solemn addresses to him; and that, even
   before they were born. The prospect of her becoming the mother of a
   rational immortal creature, which came into existence in an undone and
   infinitely dreadful state, was sufficient to lead her to bow before God
   daily, for his blessing on it--even redemption and eternal life by
   Jesus Christ. So that, through all the pain, labour, and sorrow, which
   attended her being the mother of children, she was in travail for them,
   that they might be born of God."

   She regularly prayed with her children, from a very early period, and,
   as there is the best reason to believe, with great earnestness and
   importunity. Being thoroughly sensible that, in many respects, the
   chief care of forming children by government and instruction naturally
   lies on mothers, as they are most with their children at an age when
   they commonly receive impressions that are permanent, and have great
   influence in forming the character for life, she was very careful to do
   her part in this important business. When she foresaw or met with any
   special difficulty in this matter, she was wont to apply to her husband
   for advice and assistance; and on such occasions, they would both
   attend to it as a matter of the utmost importance. She had an excellent
   way of governing her children: she knew how to make them regard and
   obey her cheerfully, without loud angry words, much less, heavy blows.
   She seldom punished them; and in speaking to them used gentle and
   pleasant words. If any correction was necessary, she did not administer
   it in a passion; and when she had occasion to reprove and rebuke, she
   would do it in few words, without warmth and noise, and with all
   calmness and gentleness of mind. In her directions and reproofs in
   matters of importance, she would address herself to the reason of her
   children, that they might not only know her inclination and will, but
   at the same time be convinced of the reasonableness of it. She had need
   to speak but once; she was cheerfully obeyed; murmuring and answering
   again were not known among them. In their manners, they were uncommonly
   respectful to their parents. When their parents came into the room,
   they all rose instinctively from their seats, and never resumed them
   until their parents were seated; and when either parent was speaking,
   no matter with whom they had been conversing, they were all immediately
   silent and attentive. The kind and gentle treatment they received from
   their mother, while she strictly and punctiliously maintained her
   parental authority, seem naturally to beget and promote a filial
   respect and affection, and to lead them to a mild, tender treatment of
   each other. Quarrelling and contention, which too frequently take place
   among children, were in her family wholly unknown. She carefully
   observed the first appearance of resentment and ill will in her young
   children, towards any person whatever, and did not connive at it, as
   many who have the care of children do, but was careful to show her
   displeasure, and suppress it to the utmost; yet not by angry, wrathful
   words, which often provoke children to wrath, and stir up their
   irascible passions, rather than abate them. Her system of discipline
   was begun at a very early age, and it was her rule to resist the first,
   as well as every subsequent, exhibition of temper or disobedience in
   the child, however young, until its will was brought into submission to
   the will of its parents; wisely reflecting, that until a child will
   obey his parents, he can never be brought to obey God.

   Fond as Mr. Edwards was of welcoming the friend and the stranger, and
   much as his house was a favourite place of resort, to ministers and
   others; it was absolutely necessary at all times, and peculiarly so in
   seasons of religious attention like this, that some one, well knowing
   how to perform the rites of hospitality, and to pay all the civilities
   and charities of life, should relieve him from these attentions, during
   those hours which were consecrated to his professional duties; and
   here, also, he could most advantageously avail himself of the
   assistance of Mrs. Edwards. Educated in the midst of polished life,
   familiar from childhood with the rules of decorum and good breeding,
   affable and easy in her manners, and governed by the feelings of
   liberality and benevolence, she was remarkable for her kindness to her
   friends, and to the visitants who resorted to Mr. Edwards; sparing no
   pains to make them welcome, and to provide for their convenience and
   comfort. She was also peculiarly kind to strangers who came to her
   house. By her sweet and winning manners and ready conversation, she
   soon became acquainted with them, and brought them to feel acquainted
   with herself; and showed such concern for their comfort, and so kindly
   offered what she thought they needed, that while her friendly
   attentions discovered at once that she knew the feelings of a stranger,
   they also made their way directly to his heart, and gaining his
   confidence, led him immediately to feel as if he were at home, in the
   midst of near and affectionate friends.

   "She made it her rule to speak well of all, so far as she could with
   truth and justice to herself and others. She was not wont to dwell with
   delight on the imperfections and failings of any; and when she heard
   persons speaking ill of others, she would say what she thought she
   could with truth and justice in their excuse, or divert the obloquy, by
   mentioning those things that were commendable in them. Thus she was
   tender of every one's character, even of those who injured and spoke
   evil of her; and carefully guarded against the too common vice of evil
   speaking and backbiting. She could bear injuries and reproach with
   great calmness, without any disposition to render evil for evil; but,
   on the contrary, was ready to pity and forgive those who appeared to be
   her enemies." This course of conduct, steadily pursued, secured, in an
   unusual degree, the affection and confidence of those who knew her.

   She proved, also, an invaluable auxiliary to Mr. Edwards, in the duties
   of his profession, not only by her excellent example, but by her active
   efforts in doing good. "She was," says Dr. Hopkins, "eminent for her
   piety, and for experimental religion. Religious conversation was her
   delight; and, as far as propriety permitted, she promoted it in all
   companies. her religious conversation showed at once her clear
   comprehension of spiritual and divine things, and the deep impression
   which they had made upon her mind." It was not merely conversation
   about religion--about its truths, or duties, or its actual state--its
   doctrines or triumphs--or the character and conduct of its friends and
   ministers: it was religion itself;--that supreme love to God, to his
   kingdom and his glory, which, abounding in the heart, flows forth
   spontaneously, in the daily conversation and the daily life.

   The friends of vital Christianity, those who delighted in its great and
   essential truths, who showed its practical influence on their lives,
   and who were most engaged in promoting its prosperity, were her chosen
   friends and intimates. With such persons she would converse freely and
   confidentially, telling them of the exercises of her own heart, and the
   happiness she had experienced in a life of religion, for their
   encouragement in the christian course. Her mind appeared to attend to
   spiritual and divine things constantly, on all occasions, and in every
   condition and business of life. Secret prayer was her uniform practice,
   and appeared to be the source of daily enjoyment. She was a constant
   attendant on public worship, and always exhibited the deepest solemnity
   and reverence in the house of God. She always prized highly the
   privilege of social worship, not only in the family, but in the private
   meetings of christians. Such meetings, on the part of females only, for
   prayer and religious conversation, have at times been objected to, as,
   both in their nature and results, inconsistent with the true delicacy
   of the sex. Her own judgment, formed deliberately, and in coincidence
   with that of her husband, was in favour of these meetings; and
   accordingly, she regularly encouraged and promoted them, during the
   revival of religion of which we have been speaking, as well as at other
   times; attending on them herself, and not declining to take her proper
   share in the performance of their various duties. In this way, she
   exerted an important influence among her own sex, and over the young;
   an influence always salutary in promoting union, ardour, and
   spiritual-mindedness, but especially powerful in seasons of uncommon
   attention to religion.

   One circumstance, which served essentially to extend and increase this
   influence, was the fact, that her religion had nothing gloomy or
   forbidding in its character. Unusual as it was in degree, it was
   eminently the religion of joy. On the testimony of Mr. Edwards, it
   possessed this character, even when she was a little child of about
   five or six years of age, as well as customarily in after-life. At the
   commencement of this remarkable work of grace, she appears to have
   dedicated herself anew to God, with more entire devotion of heart to
   his service and glory, than she had ever been conscious of before; and
   during its progress, as well as afterwards, she experienced a degree of
   religious enjoyment, not previously known to herself, and not often
   vouchsafed to others. But on this subject, we may have occasion to
   speak more fully hereafter.

   What, during this interesting work of grace, was the state of Mr.
   Edwards's own feelings on the subject of religion, must be gathered
   chiefly from his sermons written at the time, from the "Narrative of
   Surprising Conversions," and from that high character for moral
   excellence, which he enjoyed not only among his own people, but among
   the ministers. Yet the remainder of his Personal Narrative, extending
   from his settlement, until a date somewhat later than this, and of
   course including this period, presents a general view of the subject,
   in a high degree interesting, and most proper to be inserted here.

      REMAINDER OF PERSONAL NARRATIVE.

   "Since I came to Northampton, I have often had sweet complacency in
   God, in views of his glorious perfections, and of the excellency of
   Jesus Christ. God has appeared to me a glorious and lovely Being,
   chiefly on account of his holiness. The holiness of God has always
   appeared to me the most lovely of all his attributes. The doctrines of
   God's absolute sovereignty, and free grace, in showing mercy to whom he
   would show mercy; and man's absolute dependence on the operations of
   God's Holy Spirit, have very often appeared to me as sweet and glorious
   doctrines. These doctrines have been much my delight. God's sovereignty
   has ever appeared to me a great part of his glory. It has often been my
   delight to approach God, and adore him as a sovereign God, and ask
   sovereign mercy of him.

   "I have loved the doctrines of the gospel; they have been to my soul
   like green pastures. The gospel has seemed to me the richest treasure;
   the treasure that I have most desired, and longed that it might dwell
   richly in me. The way of salvation by Christ has appeared, in a general
   way, glorious and excellent, most pleasant and most beautiful. It has
   often seemed to me, that it would, in a great measure, spoil heaven, to
   receive it in any other way. That text has often been affecting and
   delightful to me, Isa. xxxii. 2. A man shall be an hiding place from
   the wind, and a covert from the tempest,' &c.

   "It has often appeared to me delightful, to be united to Christ; to
   have him for my Head, and to be a member of his body; also to have
   Christ for my Teacher and Prophet. I very often think with sweetness,
   and longings, and pantings of soul, of being a little child, taking
   hold of Christ, to be led by him through the wilderness of this world.
   That text, Matt. xviii. 3. has often been sweet to me, Except ye be
   converted, and become as little children,' &c. I love to think of
   coming to Christ, to receive salvation of him, poor in spirit, and
   quite empty of self, humbly exalting him alone; cut off entirely from
   my own root, in order to grow into and out of Christ: to have God in
   Christ to be all in all; and to live, by faith on the Son of God, a
   life of humble, unfeigned confidence in him. That scripture has often
   been sweet to me, Ps. cxv. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
   unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.' And
   those words of Christ, Luke x. 21.. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in
   spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
   that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
   revealed them unto babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
   sight.' That sovereignty of God, which Christ rejoiced in, seemed to me
   worth of such joy; and that rejoicing seemed to show the excellency of
   Christ, and of what spirit he was.

   "Sometimes, only mentioning a single word caused my heart to burn
   within me; or only seeing the name of Christ, or the name of some
   attribute of God. And God has appeared glorious to me, on account of
   the Trinity. It has made me have exalting thoughts of God, that he
   subsists in three persons; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The sweetest
   joys and delights I have experienced, have not been those that have
   arisen from a hope of my own good estate; but in a direct view of the
   glorious things of the gospel. When I enjoy this sweetness, it seems to
   carry me above the thoughts of my own estate; it seems, at such times,
   a loss that I cannot bear, to take off my eye from the glorious,
   pleasant object I behold without me, to turn my eye in upon myself, and
   my own good estate.

   "My heart has been much on the advancement of Christ's kingdom in the
   world. The histories of the past advancement of Christ's kingdom have
   been sweet to me. When I have read histories of past ages, the
   pleasantest thing, in all my reading, has been, to read of the kingdom
   of Christ being promoted. And when I have expected, in my reading, to
   come to any such thing, I have rejoiced in the prospect, all the way as
   I read. And my mind has been much entertained and delighted with the
   scripture promises and prophecies, which relate to the future glorious
   advancement of Christ's kingdom upon earth.

   "I have sometimes had a sense of the excellent fulness of Christ, and
   his meetness and suitableness as a Saviour; whereby he has appeared to
   me, far above all, the chief of ten thousands. His blood and atonement
   have appeared sweet, and his righteousness sweet; which was always
   accompanied with ardency of spirit; and inward strugglings and
   breathings, and groanings that cannot be uttered, to be emptied of
   myself, and swallowed up in Christ.

   "Once, as I rode out into the woods for my health, in 1737, having
   alighted from my horse in a retired place, as my manner commonly has
   been, to walk for divine contemplation and prayer, I had a view, that
   for me was extraordinary, of the glory of the Son of God, as Mediator
   between God and man, and his wonderful, great, full, pure and sweet
   grace and love, and meek and gentle condescension. This grace that
   appeared so calm and sweet, appeared also great above the heavens. The
   person of Christ appeared ineffably excellent, with an excellency great
   enough to swallow up all thought and conception--which continued, as
   near as I can judge, about an hour; which kept me the greater part of
   the time in a flood of tears, and weeping aloud. I felt an ardency of
   soul to be, what I know not otherwise how to express, emptied and
   annihilated; to lie in the dust, and to be full of Christ alone; to
   love him with a holy and pure love; to trust in him; to live upon him;
   to serve and follow him; and to be perfectly sanctified and made pure,
   with a divine and heavenly purity. I have several other times had views
   very much of the same nature, and which have had the same effects.

   "I have, many times, had a sense of the glory of the Third Person in
   the Trinity, and his office as Sanctifier; in his holy operations,
   communicating divine light and life to the soul. God in the
   communications of his Holy Spirit, has appeared as an infinite fountain
   of divine glory and sweetness; being full, and sufficient to fill and
   satisfy the soul; pouring forth itself in sweet communications; like
   the sun in its glory, sweetly and pleasantly diffusing light and life.
   And I have sometimes an affecting sense of the excellency of the word
   of God as a word of life; as the light of life; a sweet, excellent,
   life-giving word; accompanied with a thirsting after that word, that it
   might dwell richly in my heart.

   "Often, since I lived in this town, I have had very affecting views of
   my own sinfulness and vileness; very frequently to such a degree, as to
   hold me in a kind of loud weeping, sometimes for a considerable time
   together; so that I have often been forced to shut myself up. I have
   had a vastly greater sense of my own wickedness, and the badness of my
   heart, than ever I had before my conversion [18] . It has often
   appeared to me, that if God should mark iniquity against me, I should
   appear the very worst of all mankind; of all that have been since the
   beginning of the world to this time: and that I should have by far the
   lowest place in hell. When others, that have come to talk with me about
   their soul-concerns, have expressed the sense they have had of their
   own wickedness, by saying, that it seemed to them, that they were as
   bad as the devil himself; I thought their expressions seemed exceeding
   faint and feeble, to represent my wickedness.

   "My wickedness, as I am in myself, has long appeared to me perfectly
   ineffable, and swallowing up all thought and imagination; like an
   infinite deluge, or mountains over my head. I know not how to express
   better what my sins appear to me to be, than by heaping infinite upon
   infinite, and multiplying infinite by infinite. Very often, for these
   many years, these expressions are in my mind, and in my mouth, Infinite
   upon infinite--Infinite upon infinite!' When I look into my heart, and
   take a view of my wickedness, it looks like an abyss, infinitely deeper
   than hell. And it appears to me, that were it not for free grace,
   exalted and raised up to the infinite height of all the fulness and
   glory of the great Jehovah, and the arm of his power and grace
   stretched forth in all the majesty of his power, and in all the glory
   of his sovereignty, I should appear sunk down in my sins below hell
   itself; far beyond the sight of every thing, but the eye of sovereign
   grace, that can pierce even down to such a depth. And yet, it seems to
   me that my conviction of sin is exceedingly small and faint; it is
   enough to amaze me, that I have no more sense of my sin. I know
   certainly, that I have very little sense of my sinfulness. When I have
   had turns of weeping and crying for my sins, I though I knew at the
   time, that my repentance was nothing to my sin.

   "I have greatly longed of late for a broken heart, and to lie low
   before God; and, when I ask for humility, I cannot bear the thoughts of
   being no more humble than other Christians. It seems to me, that though
   their degrees of humility may be suitable for them, yet it would be a
   vile self-exaltation in me, not to be the lowest in humility of all
   mankind. Others speak of their longing to be humbled to the dust;' that
   may be a proper expression for them, but I always think of myself, that
   I ought, and it is an expression that has long been natural for me to
   use in prayer, to lie infinitely low before God.' And it is affecting
   to think, how ignorant I was, when a young Christian, of the
   bottomless, infinite depths of wickedness, pride, hypocrisy, and
   deceit, left in my heart.

   "I have a much greater sense of my universal, exceeding dependence on
   God's grace and strength, and mere good pleasure, of late, than I used
   formerly to have; and have experienced more of an abhorrence of my own
   righteousness. The very thought of any joy arising in me, on any
   consideration of my own amiableness, performances, or experiences, or
   any goodness of heart or life, is nauseous and detestable to me. And
   yet, I am greatly afflicted with a proud and self-righteous spirit,
   much more sensibly than I used to be formerly. I see that serpent
   rising and putting forth its head continually, every where, all around
   me.

   "Though it seems to me, that in some respects I was a far better
   Christian, for two or three years after my first conversion, than I am
   now; and lived in a more constant delight and pleasure; yet of late
   years, I have had a more full and constant sense of the absolute
   sovereignty of God, and a delight in that sovereignty; and have had
   more of a sense of the glory of Christ, as a Mediator revealed in the
   gospel. On one Saturday night, in particular, I had such a discovery of
   the excellency of the gospel above all other doctrines, that I could
   not but say to myself, This is my chosen light, my chosen doctrine;'
   and of Christ, This is my chosen Prophet.' It appeared sweet, beyond
   all expression, to follow Christ, and to be taught, and enlightened,
   and instructed by him; to learn of him, and live to him. Another
   Saturday night, (Jan. 1739,) I had such a sense, how sweet and blessed
   a thing it was to walk in the way of duty; to do that which was right
   and meet to be done, and agreeable to the holy mind of God; that it
   caused me to break forth into a kind of loud weeping, which held me
   some time, so that I was forced to shut myself up, and fasten the
   doors. I could not but, as it were, cry out, How happy are they, who do
   that which is right in the sight of God! They are blessed indeed, they
   are the happy ones!' I had, at the same time, a very affecting sense,
   how meet and suitable it was that God should govern the world, and
   order all things according to his own pleasure; and I rejoiced in it,
   that God reigned, and that his will was done."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [15] Among those who opposed Mr. Edwards on this occasion, were several
   members of a family, in a neighbouring town, nearly connected with his
   own, and possessing, from its numbers, wealth, and respectability, a
   considerable share of influence. Their religious sentiments differed
   widely from his, and their opposition to him, in the course which he
   now pursued, became direct and violent. As his defence of his own
   opinions was regarded as triumphant, they appear to have felt, in some
   degree, the shame and mortification of a defeat; and their opposition
   to Mr. Edwards, though he resorted to every honourable method of
   conciliation, became, on their part, a settled personal hostility. It
   is probable, that their advice to Mr. Edwards, to refrain from the
   controversy, and particularly, not to publish his sentiments with
   regard to it, was given somewhat categorically, and with a full
   expectation that he, young as he was, would comply with it. His refusal
   so to do, was an offence not to be forgiven. We shall have occasion to
   recur to this subject again.

   [16] Of the conversion of this child, whose name was Phebe Bartlett, a
   most minute and interesting account is given in the "Narrative of
   Surprising Conversions." Dr. Edwards, under date of March 30, 1789, in
   a letter to Dr. Ryland, says, "In answer to your inquiry, in a former
   letter, concerning Phebe Bartlett, I have to inform you, that she is
   yet living, and has uniformly maintained the character of a true
   convert.

   [17] I have discovered no papers or letters of the family, of a date
   near this, and no mention of this young lady, except on her tombstone.

   [18] Our author does not say, that he had more wickedness, and badness
   of heart, since his conversion, the he had before; but that he had a
   greater sense thereof. Thus a blind man may have his garden full of
   noxious weeds, and yet not see or be sensible of them. But should the
   garden be is great part cleared of these, and furnished with many
   beautiful and salutary plants; and supposing the owner now to have the
   power of discriminating objects of sight; in this case, he would have
   less, but he see and have a sense of more. And thus it was that St.
   Paul, though greatly freed from sin, yet saw and felt himself as "the
   chief of sinners." To which may be added, that the better the organ,
   and clearer the light may be, the stronger will be the sense excited by
   sin or holiness.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER VIII.

   "NARRATIVE OF SURPRISING CONVERSIONS"--HIS VIEWS OF REVIVALS OF
   RELIGION--REMARKABLE PROVIDENCE AT NORTHAMPTON--"FIVE DISCOURSES"--MR.
   BELLAMY A RESIDENT OF HIS FAMILY--HISTORY OF
   REDEMPTION--EXTRA-PAROCHIAL LABOURS OF MR. EDWARDS--SERMON AT
   ENFIELD--FUNERAL SERMON ON THE REV. W. WILLIAMS.

   On the 30th of May, 1735, Mr. Edwards, in answer to a letter from the
   Rev. Dr. Colman, of Boston, wrote a succinct account of the work of
   Divine grace at Northampton; which, being published by him, and
   forwarded to the Rev. Dr. Watts and the Rev. Dr. Guyse, in London,
   those gentlemen discovered so much interest in the facts recited,
   detailing them on several occasions before large assemblies, that the
   author, at the request of his correspondent, was induced to prepare a
   much fuller statement, in a letter to the same gentleman, bearing date,
   Nov. 6, 1736. This was published in London, under the title of
   "Narrative of Surprising Conversions," with an Introduction by Dr.
   Watts and Dr. Guyse; and was read very extensively, and with very
   lively emotions, by Christians in England. There, this mark of Divine
   grace was regarded, not only with very deep interest, but with surprise
   and wonder: nothing like it, for its extent and power, having been
   witnessed in that country, for many previous years. Those excellent men
   observe, "We are abundantly satisfied of the truth of this narrative,
   not only from the character of the writer, but from the concurrent
   testimony of many other persons in New England; for this thing was not
   done in a corner. There is a spot of ground, as we are informed,
   wherein there are twelve or fourteen towns and villages, chiefly
   situate in the county of Hampshire, near the banks of the river
   Connecticut, within the compass of thirty miles, wherein it pleased
   God, two years ago, to display his sovereign mercy, in the conversion
   of a great multitude of souls, in a short space of time; turning them
   from a formal, cold, and careless profession of Christianity, to the
   lively exercise of every christian grace, and the powerful practice of
   our holy religion. The great God has seemed to act over again the
   miracle of Gideon's fleece, which was plentifully watered with the dew
   of heaven, while the rest of the earth round about it was dry, and had
   no such remarkable blessing.

   "There has been a great and just complaint, for many years, among the
   ministers and churches of Old England, and in New, (except about the
   time of the late earthquake there,) that the work of conversion goes on
   very slowly, that the Spirit of God, in his saving influences, is much
   withdrawn from the ministrations of his word; and there are few that
   receive the ministrations of the gospel, with any eminent success upon
   their hearts. But as the gospel is the same divine instrument of grace
   still, as ever it was in the days of the apostles, so our ascended
   Saviour, now and then, takes a special occasion to manifest the
   divinity of this gospel, by a plentiful effusion of his Spirit where it
   is preached: then sinners are turned into saints in numbers, and there
   is a new face of things spread over a town or country. The wilderness
   and the solitary places are glad, the desert rejoices and blossoms as
   the rose; and surely, concerning this instance, we may add, that they
   have seen the glory of the Lord there, and the excellency of our God;
   they have seen the outgoings of God our King in his sanctuary."

   This work was the first of a series of publications from Mr. Edwards,
   intended to explain the nature and effects of saving conversion, and
   the nature of a genuine work of the Holy Spirit in a community. As a
   religious narrative, it is one of the most interesting I have hitherto
   met with; having all that exactness of description and vividness of
   colouring, which attend the account of an eyewitness, when drawn up,
   not from recollection, but in the very passing of the scenes which he
   describes. It proved a most useful and seasonable publication. For a
   long period, revivals of religion had been chiefly unknown, both in
   Great Britain and on the continent of Europe. The church at large had
   generally ceased to expect events of this nature, regarding them as
   confined to apostolic times, and to the ultimate triumphs of
   Christianity; and appear to have entertained very imperfect views of
   their causes, their nature, and the manner in which they ought to be
   regarded. In no previous publication had these important subjects been
   adequately explained. The particular event, which Mr. Edwards had the
   privilege of recording, viewed as a remarkable work of Divine grace,
   has, to this day, scarcely a parallel in the modern annals of the
   church. His own views of these subjects were alike removed from the
   apathy of unbelief, and the wildness of enthusiasm; they were derived,
   not merely from his familiarity with the facts, but from just
   conceptions of the intellectual and moral faculties of man, and from a
   thorough knowledge of the word of God. And while the "Narrative of
   Surprising Conversions" served to inspire the church at large with a
   new and higher kind of faith, and hope, and zeal, it also proved a safe
   directory of their views and their conduct. In a short time it was
   extensively circulated, both in England and Scotland; and in the latter
   country, as we shall soon have occasion to remark, its diffusion was
   speedily followed by salutary and important consequences.

   It may not be improper to insert in this place the following letter of
   Mr. Edwards, giving an account of a surprising and alarming providence,
   which attended the people of Northampton, in the early part of 1737.

   "Northampton, March 19, 1737.

   "We in this town were, the last Lord's day, (March 13th,) the
   spectators, and many of us the subjects, of one of the most amazing
   instances of Divine preservation, that perhaps was ever known in the
   world. Our meeting-house is old and decayed, so that we have been for
   some time building a new one, which is yet unfinished. It has been
   observed of late, that the house we have hitherto met in, has gradually
   spread at the bottom; the sills and walls giving way, especially in the
   foreside, by reason of the weight of timber at top pressing on the
   braces, that are inserted into the posts and beams of the house. It has
   done so more than ordinarily this spring: which seems to have been
   occasioned by the heaving of the ground, through the extreme frosts of
   the winter past, and its now settling again on that side which is next
   the sun, by the spring thaws. By this means, the underpinning has been
   considerably disordered, which people were not sensible of, till the
   ends of the joists, which bore up the front gallery, were drawn off
   from the girts on which they rested, by the walls giving way. So that
   in the midst of the public exercise in the forenoon, soon after the
   beginning of the sermon, the whole gallery--full of people, with all
   the seats and timbers, suddenly, and without any warning--sunk, and
   fell down, with the most amazing noise, upon the heads of those that
   sat under, to the astonishment of the congregation. The house was
   filled with dolorous shrieking and crying; and nothing else was
   expected than to find many people dead, or dashed to pieces.

   "The gallery, in falling, seemed to break and sink first in the middle;
   so that those who were upon it were thrown together in heaps before the
   front door. But the whole was so sudden, that many of those who fell,
   knew nothing what it was, at the time, that had befallen them. Others
   in the congregation thought it had been an amazing clap of thunder. The
   falling gallery seemed to be broken all to pieces before it got down;
   so that some who fell with it, as well as those who were under, were
   buried in the ruins; and were found pressed under heavy loads of
   timber, and could do nothing to help themselves.

   "But so mysteriously and wonderfully did it come to pass, that every
   life was preserved; and though many were greatly bruised, and their
   flesh torn, yet there is not, as I can understand, one bone broken, or
   so much as put out of joint, among them all. Some, who were thought to
   be almost dead at first, are greatly recovered; and but one young woman
   seems yet to remain in dangerous circumstances, by an inward hurt in
   her breast; but of late there appears more hope of her recovery.

   "None can give an account, or conceive, by what means people's lives
   and limbs should be thus preserved, when so great a multitude were thus
   imminently exposed. It looked as though it was impossible, but that
   great numbers must instantly be crushed to death, or dashed in pieces.
   It seems unreasonable to ascribe it to any thing else but the care of
   Providence, in disposing the motions of every piece of timber, and the
   precise place of safety where every one should sit and fall, when none
   were in any capacity to care for their own preservation. The
   preservation seems to be most wonderful, with respect to the women and
   children in the middle alley, under the gallery, where it came down
   first, and with greatest force, and where there was nothing to break
   the force of the falling weight.

   "Such an event may be a sufficient argument of a Divine providence over
   the lives of men. We thought ourselves called on to set apart a day to
   be spent in the solemn worship of God, to humble ourselves under such a
   rebuke of God upon us, in time of public service in his house, by so
   dangerous and surprising an accident; and to praise his name for so
   wonderful, and as it were miraculous, a preservation. The last
   Wednesday was kept by us to that end; and a mercy, in which the hand of
   God is so remarkably evident, may be well worthy to affect the hearts
   of all who hear it."

   In 1738, the "Narrative of Surprising Conversions" was republished in
   Boston, with a preface by four of the senior ministers of that town.

   To it were prefixed five discourses, on the following subjects:

   I. Justification by Faith alone. Rom. iv. 5.

   II. Pressing into the Kingdom of God. Luke xvi. 16.

   III. Ruth's Resolution. Ruth i.16.

   IV. The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners. Rom. iii. 19.

   V. The Excellency of Jesus Christ. Rev. v. 5, 6.

   The first four of these discourses were delivered during the revival of
   religion, and were published at the earnest desire of those to whom
   they were preached. In fixing on the particular discourses, necessary
   to make up the volume, he was guided by the choice of the people. "What
   has determined them in this choice," he observes, "is the experience of
   special benefit to their souls from these discourses. Their desire to
   have them in their hands, from the press, has long manifested, and
   often expressed to me; their earnestness in it is evident from this,
   that though it be a year to them of the greatest charge that ever has
   been, by reason of the expense of building a new meeting-house, yet
   they chose rather to be at this additional expense now, though it be
   very considerable, than to have it delayed another year." In publishing
   the discourse on "Justification," he was also influenced by the urgent
   request of several ministers, who were present when a part of it was
   delivered, and whose opinion and advice he thought deserving of great
   respect. This discourse, though when first written of a much less size
   than as it is printed, was preached at two successive public lectures,
   in the latter part of 1734. It was a time, when the minds of the
   people, in all that section of country, were very much agitated by a
   controversy on that very subject; when some were brought to doubt of
   that way of acceptance with God, which they had been taught from their
   infancy was the only way; and when many were engaged in looking more
   thoroughly into the grounds of those doctrines in which they had been
   educated; that this discourse seemed to be remarkably blessed, not only
   in establishing the judgments of men in this truth, but in engaging
   their hearts in a more earnest pursuit of justification, by faith in
   the righteousness of Christ. "At that time," says the author, "while I
   was greatly reproached for defending this doctrine in the pulpit, and
   just upon my suffering a very open abuse for it, God's work wonderfully
   broke forth among us, and souls began to flock to Christ, as the
   Saviour in whose righteousness alone they hoped to be justified. So
   that this was the doctrine, on which this work, in its beginning, was
   founded, as it evidently was in the whole progress of it." He regarded
   these facts as a remarkable testimony of God's approbation of the
   doctrine of justification by faith alone.

   This discourse, which is really a treatise of more than one hundred
   closely printed pages, exhibited the subject in a light so new, clear,
   and convincing, and so effectually removed the difficulties with which,
   till then, it was supposed to be attended, that on its first
   publication it met a very welcome reception, and from that time to the
   present has been regarded as the common text-book of students in
   theology. It would not be easy to find another treatise on the same
   subject, equally able and conclusive.

   There are individuals, who, having received their theological views
   from the straitest sect of a given class of theologians, regard the
   sermon on "Pressing into the kingdom of God," as inconsistent with
   those principles of moral agency, which are established in the treatise
   on the "Freedom of the Will;" and charitably impute the error to the
   imperfect views of the author at this period. While a member of
   college, however, Mr. Edwards, in investigating the subject of Power,
   as he was reading the Essay of Locke, came to the settled conclusion,
   that men have in the physical sense, the power of repenting and turning
   to God. A further examination might perhaps evince, that the points in
   question are less consistent with some peculiar views of theology, of a
   more modern date, than with any, logically deducible from the treatise
   on the "Will." The sermon itself, like the rest, has uncommon ardour,
   unction, and solemnity, and was one of the most useful which he
   delivered.

   The sermon on the "Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners," in the
   language of the text, literally stops the mouth of every reader, and
   compels him, as he stands before his Judge, to admit, if he does not
   feel, the justice of his sentence. I know not where to find, in any
   language, a discourse so well adapted to strip the impenitent sinner of
   every excuse, to convince him of his guilt, and to bring him low before
   the justice and holiness of God. According to the estimate of Mr.
   Edwards, it was far the most powerful and effectual of his discourses;
   and we scarcely know of any other sermon which has been favoured with
   equal success.

   The sermon on the "Excellency of Christ," was selected by Mr. Edwards
   himself, partly because he had been importuned to publish it by
   individuals in another town, in whose hearing it was occasionally
   preached; and partly because he thought that a discourse on such an
   evangelical subject, would properly follow others that were chiefly
   awakening; and that something of the excellency of the Saviour was
   proper to succeed those things, that were to show the necessity of
   salvation. No one who reads it will hesitate to believe, that it was
   most happily selected. I have met with no sermon hitherto, so admirably
   adapted to the circumstances of a sinner, when, on the commencement of
   his repentance, he renounces every other object of trust, but the
   righteousness of Christ. Taking the whole volume, as thus printed, the
   Narrative and the Five Discourses, we suppose it to have been one of
   the most effectual, in promoting the work of salvation, which has
   hitherto issued from the press.

   The sixth child, and eldest son, of Mr. and Mrs. Edwards was born July
   25, 1738, and after his father was baptized by the name of Timothy.

   About this period, Mr. Joseph Bellamy, afterwards the Rev. Dr. Bellamy
   of Bethlem, Connecticut, went to Northampton to pursue his theological
   studies under Mr. Edwards, and resided for a considerable period in his
   family. The very high respect which he cherished for the eminent
   talents and piety of Mr. Edwards, and which drew him to Northampton,
   was reciprocated by the latter; and a friendship commenced between
   them, which terminated only with life [19] .

   In the beginning of March, 1739, Mr. Edwards commenced a series of
   sermons from Isaiah li. 8. "For the moth shall eat them up like a
   garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness
   shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation." The
   eight first were delivered during that month, the eight next in the two
   following months, and the whole series, thirty in all, was completed
   before the close of August. After explaining the text, he derives from
   it the following doctrine: "The work of redemption is a work, which
   carries on from the fall of man to the end of the world." The subject
   was one in which Mr. Edwards felt the deepest interest; but he appears
   never to have repeated the series of discourses to his people. What his
   ultimate intentions were, we may learn, however, from the following
   extract of a letter, written by him many years afterwards: "I have had
   on my mind and heart (which I long ago began, not with any view to
   publication) a great work, which I call a History of the Work of
   Redemption, a body of divinity in an entire new method, being thrown
   into the form of a history, considering the affair of christian
   theology, as the whole of it, in each part, stands in reference to the
   great work of redemption by Jesus Christ, which I suppose is to be the
   grand design of all God's designs, and the summum and ultimum of all
   God's operations and decrees, particularly considering all parts of the
   grand scheme in their historical order;--The order of their existence,
   or their being brought forth to view, in the course of divine
   dispensations, or the wonderful series of successive acts and events;
   beginning from eternity and descending from thence to the great work
   and successive dispensations of the infinitely wise God in time,
   considering the chief events coming to pass in the church of God, and
   revolutions in the world of mankind, affecting the state of the church
   and the affair of redemption, which we have an account of in history or
   prophecy, till at last we come to the general resurrection, last
   judgment, and consummation of all things, when it shall be said, It is
   done, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End; concluding my
   work, with the consideration of that perfect state of things, which
   shall be finally settled to last for eternity.--This history will be
   carried on with regard to all three worlds,--heaven, earth, and hell;
   considering the connected successive events and alterations in each, so
   far as the Scriptures give any light; introducing all parts of divinity
   in that order which is most scriptural and most natural; which is a
   method which appears to me the most beautiful and entertaining, wherein
   every doctrine will appear to the greatest advantage, in the brightest
   light, in the most striking manner, showing the admirable contexture
   and harmony of the whole."

   From this it is obvious, that he long cherished the intention of
   re-writing and enlarging the work, and of turning it into a regular
   treatise; but this design he never accomplished. We shall have occasion
   to allude to this work hereafter.

   The sixth daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edwards was born June 24, 1740, and
   named Susannah.

   The circumstances which caused the remarkable attention to religion,
   which began in 1734, to decline, were chiefly local in their nature,
   and limited in their influence, either to Northampton, or to the county
   of Hampshire. The consequence was, that it continued to exist, in
   various sections of the country, to the east, the south, and the west,
   during the five following years. By the astonishing work of grace at
   Northampton, an impulse had been given to the churches of this whole
   western world, which could not soon be lost. The history of that event,
   having been extensively circulated, had produced a general conviction
   in the minds of Christians, that the preaching of the gospel might be
   attended by effects, not less surprising, than those which followed it
   in apostolic times. This conviction produced an important change in the
   views, and conduct, both of ministers and churches. The style of
   preaching was altered: it became, extensively, more direct and pungent,
   and more adapted to awaken the feelings and convince the conscience.
   The prayers of good men, both in public and private, indicated more
   intense desires for the prevalence of religion, and a stronger
   expectation that the word of God would be attended with an immediate
   blessing. As the natural result of such a change, revivals of religion
   were witnessed in numerous villages in New Jersey, Connecticut, and the
   eastern parts of New England; and even where this was not the case,
   religion was so extensively and unusually the object of attention,
   during the period specified, that the church at large seemed preparing
   for events of a more interesting nature, than any that had yet been
   witnessed.

   In consequence of the high reputation, which Mr. Edwards had acquired
   as a powerful and successful preacher, and as a safe and wise
   counsellor to the anxious and inquiring, he received frequent
   invitations from churches, near and more remote, to come and labour
   among them for a little period; and with the consent of his people,
   (his own pulpit always being supplied,) he often went forth on these
   missionary tours, and found an ample reward in the abundant success
   which crowned his labours. In this, his example was soon followed by
   several distinguished ministers in Connecticut and New Jersey. In one
   of these excursions, he spent some little time at Enfield in
   Connecticut, where he preached, on the 8th of July, 1741, the
   well-known sermon, entitled, "Sinners in the hands of an angry God,"
   from Deut. xxxii. 35.; which was the cause of an immediate and general
   revival of religion throughout the place. It was soon afterwards
   published.

   On the 2d of September following, he preached the sermon, entitled,
   "The Sorrows of the Bereaved spread before Jesus," at the funeral of
   his uncle, the Rev. William Williams of Hatfield, a gentleman highly
   respected for his sound understanding, piety, and faithfulness as a
   minister. This sermon was immediately afterwards published.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [19] Mr. Bellamy was settled at Bethlem in the spring of 1740, in the
   midst of a general attention to religion, on the part of the people of
   that place.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER IX.

   COMMENCEMENT OF A SECOND GREAT REVIVAL OF RELIGION, IN THE SPRING AND
   SUMMER OF 1740--VISIT OF MR. WHITEFIELD AT
   NORTHAMPTON--IMPULSES--JUDGING OF THE RELIGIOUS CHARACTER OF
   OTHERS--LETTER TO MR. WHEELOCK--GREAT EFFECTS OF A PRIVATE LECTURE OF
   MR. E.--LETTER TO HIS DAUGHTER--LETTER TO A YOUNG LADY IN
   CONNECTICUT--LAY PREACHING--LETTER OF REV. G. TENNENT--SERMON AT
   NEW-HAVEN--"DISTINGUISHING MARKS OF A WORK OF THE SPIRIT OF
   GOD"--PREFACES BY MR. COOPER AND MR. WILLISON--MR. SAMUEL HOPKINS.

   While Mr. Edwards was thus occasionally serving his Divine Master
   abroad, he found, also, that his labours at home began to be attended
   with similar success. A great reformation in morals, as well as
   religion, had been the consequence of the preceding revival of
   religion. Associations for prayer and social religion had been
   regularly kept up, and a few instances of awakening and conversion had
   all along been known, even at the season of the greatest stupidity. In
   the spring of 1740, there was a perceptible alteration for the better;
   and the influence of the Spirit of God was most obvious on the minds of
   the people, particularly on those of the young, in causing greater
   seriousness and solemnity, and in prompting them to make religion far
   more generally the subject of conversation. Improprieties of conduct,
   too often allowed, were more generally avoided; greater numbers
   resorted to Mr. Edwards to converse with him respecting their
   salvation; and, in particular individuals, there appeared satisfactory
   evidence of an entire change of character. This state of things
   continued through the summer and autumn.

   On the evening of Thursday, the 16th of October, 1740, Mr. Whitefield
   came to Northampton to see Mr. Edwards, and to converse with him
   respecting the work of God in 1735, and remained there until the
   morning of the 20th. In this interval he preached five sermons, adapted
   to the circumstances of the town, reproving the backslidings of some,
   the obstinate impenitence of others, and summoning all, by the mercies
   with which the town had been distinguished, to return to God. His visit
   was followed by an awakening among professors of religion, and soon
   afterwards by a deep concern among the young, and there were some
   instances of hopeful conversion. This increased during the winter; and
   in the spring of 1741 religion became the object of general attention.

   On Monday, Mr. Edwards, with the Rev. Mr. Hopkins of West Springfield,
   his brother-in-law, and several other gentlemen, accompanied Mr.
   Whitefield on the east side of the river as far as East Windsor, to the
   house of his father, the Rev. Timothy Edwards. While they were thus
   together, he took an opportunity to converse with Mr. Whitefield alone,
   at some length, on the subject of impulses, and assigned the reasons
   which he had to think, that he gave too much heed to such things. Mr.
   Whitefield received it kindly, but did not seem inclined to have much
   conversation on the subject, and in the time of it, did not appear
   convinced by any thing which he heard. He also took occasion in the
   presence of others, to converse with Mr. Whitefield at some length,
   about his too customary practice of judging other persons to be
   unconverted; examined the scriptural warrant for such judgments, and
   expressed his own decided disapprobation of the practice. Mr.
   Whitefield, at the same time, mentioned to Mr. Edwards his design of
   bringing over a number of young men from England, into New Jersey and
   Pennsylvania, to be ordained by the two Mr. Tennents. Their whole
   interview was an exceedingly kind and affectionate one; yet Mr. Edwards
   supposed that Mr. Whitefield regarded him somewhat less as an intimate
   and confidential friend, than he would have done, had he not opposed
   him in two favourite points of his own practice, for which no one can
   be at a loss to perceive that he could find no scriptural
   justification. Each however regarded the other with great affection and
   esteem, as a highly favoured servant of God; and Mr. Edwards, as we
   shall soon see, speaks of Mr. Whitefield's visit to Northampton in
   terms of the warmest approbation.

   In the month of May, a private lecture of Mr. Edwards's was attended
   with very powerful effects on the audience, and ultimately upon the
   young of both sexes, and on children throughout the town; and during
   the summer, and the early part of the autumn, there was a glorious
   progress in the work of God on the hearts of sinners in conviction and
   conversion, and great numbers appeared to become the real disciples of
   Christ.

   Among the ministers, who at this period occasionally left their own
   congregations, and went forth as labourers into the common field to
   gather in the harvest, one of those who were most distinguished for
   their activity and success, was the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, of Lebanon,
   afterwards the president of Dartmouth college. In the following letter
   from Mr. Edwards to this gentleman, he urges him to visit Scantic, a
   feeble settlement in the northern part of his father's parish: the
   inhabitants of which were too remote to attend public worship regularly
   at East Windsor, and yet too few and feeble to maintain it themselves.

   "Northampton, June 9, 1741.

   "rev. and dear sir,

   "The special occasion of my now writing to you, is a desire I have of
   two things; one is, that you and your brother Pomeroy would go to
   Scantic, in my father's parish, and preach there as often as the people
   will be willing to hear you, and continue so doing as long as the
   concerns of your own parishes will allow of your being absent. You know
   the wretched circumstances of that society; and if ever they are
   healed, I believe it must be by a reviving and prevailing of true
   religion among them. By all that I can understand, they are wholly
   dead, in this extraordinary day of God's gracious visitation. You have
   lately been so remarkable blessed elsewhere, that I cannot but hope you
   would have success there also. I have written to my father, to inform
   him that I have desired this of you.

   "Another thing that I desire of you is, that you would come up hither
   and help us, both you and Mr. Pomeroy. There has been a reviving of
   religion among us of late; but your labours have been much more
   remarkably blessed than mine. Other ministers, I have heard, have shut
   up their pulpits against you; but here I engage you shall find one
   open. May God send you hither, with the like blessing as he has sent
   you to some other places; and may your coming be a means to humble me,
   for my barrenness and unprofitableness, and a means of my instruction
   and enlivening. I want an opportunity to concert measures with you, for
   the advancement of the kingdom and glory of our Redeemer. Please to
   communicate what I write to Mr. Pomeroy, and give my service to him. I
   desire the prayers of you both, that God will give me more of that holy
   spirit, and happy success, with which you are replenished.

   I am, Dear Sir, your unworthy brother

   and fellow-labourer,

   jonathan edwards."

   As very few of Mr. Edwards's letters to his own family are preserved,
   it is proper to give those few to the reader, even when they are not
   otherwise interesting, in order to exhibit his true character, as an
   affectionate and faithful christian father. The following was addressed
   to his eldest daughter, in her thirteenth year, while residing with her
   aunt, Mrs. Huntington, at Lebanon.

   To Miss Sarah Edwards, Lebanon.

   Northampton, June 25th, 1741.

   my dear child,

   Your mother has received two letters from you, since you went away. We
   rejoice to hear of your welfare, and of the flourishing state of
   religion in Lebanon. I hope you will well improve the great advantage
   God is thereby putting into your hands, for the good of your own soul.
   You have very weak and infirm health, and I am afraid are always like
   to have; and it may be, are not to be long-lived; and while you do
   live, are not like to enjoy so much of the comforts of this life as
   others do, by reason of your want of health; and therefore, if you have
   no better portion, will be miserable indeed. But, if your soul
   prospers, you will be a happy, blessed person, whatever becomes of your
   body. I wish you much of the presence of Christ, and of communion with
   him, and that you might live so as to give him honour, in the place
   where you are, by an amiable behaviour towards all.

   Your mother would have you go on with your work, if you can, and she
   would be glad if your aunt would set you to work something of hers,
   though you do but little in a day. She would have you send word by Mr.
   Wheelock, who I suppose will come up the next week, or the week after,
   whether you are well enough to make lace: if you are, she will send you
   a lace and bobbins.

   The flourishing of religion in this town, and in these parts of the
   country, has rather increased since you went away. Your mother joins
   with me in giving her love to you, and to your uncle and aunt. Your
   sisters give their love to you, and their duty to them. The whole
   family is glad, when we hear from you. Recommending you to the
   continual care and mercy of heaven, I remain your loving father,

   Jonathan Edwards."

   Some time in the course of the year, a young lady, residing at S ----,
   in Connecticut, who had lately made a public profession of religion,
   requested Mr. Edwards to give her some advice, as to the best manner of
   maintaining a religious life. In reply, he addressed to her the
   following letter; which will be found eminently useful to all persons
   just entering on the christian course.

   Letter addressed to a Young Lady at S --, Conn.

   in the year 1741.

   "my dear young friend,

   As you desired me to send you, in writing, some directions how to
   conduct yourself in your christian course, I would now answer your
   request. The sweet remembrance of the great things I have lately seen
   at S ----, inclines me to do any thing in my power, to contribute to
   the spiritual joy and prosperity of God's people there.

   1. I would advise you to keep up as great a strife and earnestness in
   religion, as if you knew yourself to be in a state of nature, and were
   seeking conversion. We advise persons under conviction, to be earnest
   and violent for the kingdom of heaven; but when they have attained to
   conversion, they ought not to be the less watchful, laborious, and
   earnest, in the whole work of religion, but the more so; for they are
   under infinitely greater obligations. For want of this, many persons,
   in a few months after their conversion, have begun to lose their sweet
   and lively sense of spiritual things, and to grow cold and dark, and
   have pierced themselves through with many sorrows;' whereas, if they
   had done as the apostle did, (Phil. iii. 12-14.) their path would have
   been as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect
   day.'

   2. Do not leave off seeking, striving, and praying for the very same
   things that we exhort unconverted persons to strive for, and a degree
   of which you have had already in conversion. Pray that your eyes may be
   opened, that you may receive sight, that you may know yourself, and be
   brought to God's footstool; and that you may see the glory of God and
   Christ, and may be raised from the dead, and have the love of Christ
   shed abroad in your heart. Those who have most of these things, have
   need still to pray for them; for there is so much blindness and
   hardness, pride and death remaining, that they still need to have that
   work of God wrought upon them, further to enlighten and enliven them,
   that shall be bringing them out of darkness into God's marvellous
   light, and be a kind of new conversion and resurrection from the dead.
   There are very few requests that are proper for an impenitent man, that
   are not also, in some sense, proper for the godly.

   3. When you hear a sermon, hear for yourself. Though what is spoken may
   be more especially directed to the unconverted, or to those that, in
   other respects, are in different circumstances from yourself; yet, let
   the chief intent of your mind be to consider, In what respect is this
   applicable to me? and what improvement ought I to make of this, for my
   own soul's good?'

   4. Though God has forgiven and forgotten your past sins, yet do not
   forget them yourself: often remember, what a wretched bond-slave you
   were in the land of Egypt. Often bring to mind your particular acts of
   sin before conversion; as the blessed apostle Paul is often mentioning
   his old blaspheming, persecuting spirit, and his injuriousness to the
   renewed; humbling his heart, and acknowledging that he was the least of
   the apostles,' and not worthy to be called an apostle,' and the least
   of all saints,' and the chief of sinners;' and be often confessing your
   old sins to God, and let that text be often in your mind, (Ezek. xvi.
   63.) that thou mayest remember and be confounded, and never open thy
   mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee
   for all that thou has done, saith the Lord God.'

   5. Remember, that you have more cause, on some accounts, a thousand
   times, to lament and humble yourself for sins that have been committed
   since conversion, than before, because of the infinitely greater
   obligations that are upon you to live to God, and to look upon the
   faithfulness of Christ, in unchangeably continuing his loving-kindness,
   notwithstanding all your great unworthiness since your conversion.

   6. Be always greatly abased for your remaining sin, and never think
   that you lie low enough for it; but yet be not discouraged or
   disheartened by it; for, though we are exceeding sinful, yet we have an
   Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; the preciousness
   of whose blood, the merit of whose righteousness, and the greatness of
   whose love and faithfulness, infinitely overtop the highest mountains
   of our sins.

   7. When you engage in the duty of prayer, or come to the Lord's supper,
   or attend any other duty of divine worship, come to Christ as Mary
   Magdalen [20] did; (Luke vii. 37, 38.) come, and cast yourself at his
   feet, and kiss them, and pour forth upon him the sweet perfumed
   ointment of divine love, out of a pure and broken heart, as she poured
   the precious ointment out of her pure broken alabaster box.

   8. Remember, that pride is the worst viper that is in the heart, the
   greatest disturber of the soul's peace, and of sweet communion with
   Christ: it was the first sin committed, and lies lowest in the
   foundation of Satan's whole building, and is with the greatest
   difficulty rooted out, and is the most hidden, secret, and deceitful of
   all lusts, and often creeps insensibly into the midst of religion,
   even, sometimes, under the disguise of humility itself.

   9. That you may pass a correct judgment concerning yourself, always
   look upon those as the best discoveries, and the best comforts, that
   have most of these two effects: those that make you least and lowest,
   and most like a child; and those that most engage and fix your heart,
   in a full and firm disposition to deny yourself for God, and to spend
   and be spent for him.

   10. If at any time you fall into doubts about the state of your soul,
   in dark and dull frames of mind, it is proper to review your past
   experience; but do not consume too much time and strength in this way:
   rather apply yourself, with all your might, to an earnest pursuit after
   renewed experience, new light, and new lively acts of faith and love.
   One new discovery of the glory of Christ's face, will do more toward
   scattering clouds of darkness in one minute, than examining old
   experience, by the best marks that can be given, through a whole year.

   11. When the exercise of grace is low, and corruption prevails, and by
   that means fear prevails; do not desire to have fear cast out any other
   way, than by the reviving and prevailing of love in the heart: by this,
   fear will be effectually expelled, as darkness in a room vanishes away,
   when the pleasant beams of the sun are let into it.

   12. When you counsel and warn others, do it earnestly, and
   affectionately, and thoroughly; and when you are speaking to your
   equals, let your warnings be intermixed with expressions of your sense
   of your own unworthiness, and of the sovereign grace that makes you
   differ.

   13. If you would set up religious meetings of young women by
   yourselves, to be attended once in a while, besides the other meetings
   that you attend, I should think it would be very proper and profitable.

   14. Under special difficulties, or when in great need of, or great
   longings after, any particular mercy, for yourself or others, set apart
   a day for secret prayer and fasting by yourself alone; and let the day
   be spent, not only in petitions for the mercies you desire, but in
   searching your heart, and in looking over your past life, and
   confessing your sins before God, not as is wont to be done in public
   prayer, but by a very particular rehearsal before God of the sins of
   your past life, from your childhood hitherto, before and after
   conversion, with the circumstances and aggravations attending them, and
   spreading all the abominations of your heart very particularly, and
   fully as possible, before him.

   15. Do not let the adversaries of the cross have occasion to reproach
   religion on your account. How holily should the children of God, the
   redeemed and the beloved of the Son of God, behave themselves.
   Therefore, walk as children of the light, and of the day,' and adorn
   the doctrine of God your Saviour;' and especially, abound in what are
   called the christian virtues, and make you like the Lamb of God: be
   meek and lowly of heart, and full of pure, heavenly, and humble love to
   all; abound in deeds of love to others, and self-denial for others; and
   let there be in you a disposition to account others better than
   yourself.

   16. In all your course, walk with God, and follow Christ, as a little,
   poor, helpless child, taking hold of Christ's hand, keeping your eye on
   the marks of the wounds in his hands and side, whence came the blood
   that cleanses you from sin, and hiding your nakedness under the skirt
   of the white shining robes of his righteousness.

   17. Pray much for the ministers and the church of God; especially, that
   he would carry on his glorious work which he has now begun, till the
   world shall be full of his glory."

   About this period, a considerable number of lay members of the church
   began, in various parts of New England, to hold religious meetings, and
   to preach and exhort in the manner of ministers. They were usually men
   of worth, and desirous of doing good; but having much zeal, and little
   knowledge, and often but little discretion, the church, at that period,
   had certainly very little reason to rejoice in their labours. The
   following letter of the Rev. Gilbert Tennent, written probably in the
   autumn of 1741, explains his own views on this subject. [21]

   "rev. And dear sir,

   I rejoice to hear that my poor labours have been of any service to any
   in New England. All glory be to the great and glorious God, when out of
   the mouths of babes and sucklings, he is pleased sometimes to ordain
   praise. I rejoice to hear the progress of God's work among you, this
   last summer and that there are any appearances of its continuance:
   Blessed be God, dear brother! As to the subject you mention of laymen
   being sent out to exhort and to teach, supposing them to be real
   converts, I cannot but think, if it be encouraged and continued, it
   will be of dreadful consequence to the church's peace and soundness in
   the faith. I will not gainsay but that private persons may be of
   service to the church of God by private, humble, fraternal reproof, and
   exhortations; and no doubt it is their duty to be faithful in these
   things. But in the mean time if christian prudence and humility do not
   attend their essays, they are like to be prejudicial to the church's
   real well-being. But for ignorant young converts to take upon them
   authoritatively to instruct and exhort publicly, tends to introduce the
   greatest errors and the grossest anarchy and confusion. The ministers
   of Christ should be apt to teach and able to convince gainsayers, and
   it is dangerous to the pure church of God, when those are novices,
   whose lips should preserve knowledge. It is base presumption, whatever
   zeal be pretended to, notwithstanding, for any persons to take this
   honour to themselves, unless they be called of God, as Aaron. I know
   most young zealots are apt, through ignorance, inconsideration, and
   pride of heart, to undertake what they have no proper qualifications
   for: and, through their imprudences and enthusiasm, the church of God
   suffers. I think all that fear God, should rise up and crush the
   enthusiastic creature in the egg. Dear brother, the times we live in
   are dangerous. The churches in America and elsewhere are in great
   hazard of enthusiasm: we have need to think of the maxim, principiis
   obsta. May Zion's King protect his church! I add no more, but love, and
   beg a remembrance in your prayers.

   Gilbert Tennent."

   In the September following, Mr. Edwards attended the public
   commencement at New-Haven, and on the 10th of that month preached his
   celebrated sermon entitled, "Distinguishing Marks of a Work of the
   Spirit of God," which, in consequence of a general request from the
   clergy, and other gentlemen attending the commencement, was published
   soon after at Boston, accompanied with a Preface from the Rev. Mr.
   Cooper; and in Scotland the ensuing year, with a preface from the Rev.
   Mr. Willison. This sermon, by exhibiting the distinguishing marks
   between an imaginary and a real work of the Spirit of God, and by
   applying those marks to the work of grace then begun, and rapidly
   spreading throughout the northern and middle colonies, became an
   unanswerable defence, not only of that, but of all genuine revivals of
   religion. It was indeed the object of immediate and reiterated attacks
   from the press; but being built on the foundation of the apostles and
   the prophets, it stands sure, while those attacks and their authors are
   forgotten. It exhibits the scriptural evidences of a genuine revival of
   religion, in much the same manner, as his subsequent treatise on
   "Religious Affections," does those of a genuine conversion. Mr. Cooper
   thus introduces it to the Christians of New England:

   "If any are disposed to receive conviction, have mind open to light,
   and are really willing to know of the present work, whether it be of
   God; it is with great satisfaction and pleasure I can recommend to them
   the following sheets, in which they will find the "distinguishing
   marks" of such a work, as they are to be found in the Holy Scriptures,
   applied to the uncommon operation that has been on the minds of many in
   this land. Here the matter is tried by the infallible touchstone of the
   Holy Scriptures, and is weighed in the balance of the sanctuary with
   great judgment and impartiality.

   "A performance of this kind is seasonable and necessary; and I desire
   heartily to bless God, who inclined this, his servant, to undertake it,
   and has greatly assisted him in it. The reverend author is known to be
   a scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven;' the place where he has
   been called to exercise his ministry has been famous for experimental
   religion; and he has had opportunities to observe this work in many
   places where it has powerfully appeared, and to converse with numbers
   that have been the subjects of it. These things qualify him for this
   undertaking, above most. His arguments in favour of the work, are
   strongly drawn from Scripture, reason, and experience: and I shall
   believe every candid, judicious reader will say, he writes very free
   from an enthusiastic or a party spirit. The use of human learning is
   asserted; a methodical way of preaching, the fruit of study as well as
   prayer, is recommended; and the exercise of charity, in judging others,
   pressed and urged: and those things, which are esteemed the blemished,
   are like to be the hinderances, of the work, are with great
   faithfulness cautioned and warned against.--Many, I believe, will be
   thankful for this publication. Those who have already entertained
   favourable thoughts of this work, will be confirmed by it; and the
   doubting may be convinced and satisfied. But if there be any, after
   all, who cannot see the signatures of a Divine hand on the work, it is
   to be hoped they will be prevailed on to spare their censures, and stop
   their oppositions, lest haply they should be found to fight against
   God.'--I will only add my prayer, That the worthy author of this
   discourse may long be continued a burning and a shining light, in the
   golden candlestick where Christ has placed him, and from thence diffuse
   his light throughout these provinces! That the Divine Spirit, whose
   cause is here espoused, would accompany this, and the other valuable
   publications of his servant, with his powerful influences; that they
   may promote the Redeemer's interests, serve the ends of vital religion,
   and so add to the author's present joy and future crown!"

   The following is the testimony of the Rev. Mr. Willison, to the
   churches of Scotland. "The ensuing treatise, by the Rev. Mr. Edwards,
   of Northampton, in New England, concerning the work and operation of
   the Holy Spirit on men's consciences, is, in my humble opinion, a most
   excellent, solid, judicious, and scriptural performance; which I hope,
   through the Divine blessing, will prove most useful to the church, for
   discerning a true and real work of the Spirit of God, and for guarding
   against delusions and mistakes. It is certainly a great mercy to the
   church, that this subject hath been undertaken and handled by such an
   experienced, well furnished scribe, that hath been long acquainted with
   the Spirit of God's dealings with the souls of men, in his own
   congregation, and the country where he lives. And seeing the
   extraordinary work there at present, though several thousand miles
   distant from Scotland, is of the same kind with that at Cambuslang and
   other places about, and meets with the same opposition; the author
   doth, with great judgment, answer the common objections which are made
   against the work, both here and there, so that scarce any thing further
   needs be added. He warns people very warmly against opposing or
   reproaching the work of the Holy Spirit. He being the Third Person of
   the glorious Trinity, and God equal with the Father and the Son, and
   the great applier of the redemption purchased for us; it becomes all
   men highly to honour him and his work, and to look upon it as highly
   dangerous to speak a word against him, according to Matt. xii. 32.--I
   shall add no more, but my fervent prayers to God, to bless both the
   author and his discourse, and that he would pour out his Spirit yet
   more abundantly, both on America and all the British dominions; and
   that he would hasten the glory of the latter days, when the Jews shall
   be brought in with the fulness of the Gentiles, and that all the
   kingdoms of the world may become the kingdoms of the Lord and of his
   Christ, that he may reign for ever and ever! Amen and Amen."

   It was during this visit to New-Haven, that Mr. Hopkins [22] , then
   about to receive the degree of A.B. at Yale college, first saw Mr.
   Edwards. He soon after became his pupil, and continued his intimate
   friend through life, and was ultimately his biographer. The impression
   made on his mind, may be gathered from the following account of the
   subject, in the Memoirs of his own life. "When I heard Mr. Tennent,"
   (the Rev. Gilbert Tennent, who had preached often at New-Haven in the
   preceding March.) "I thought he was the greatest and best man, and the
   best preacher, that I had ever seen or heard. His words were to me like
   apples of gold in pictures of silver.' And I thought that, when I
   should leave the college, as I was then in my last year, I would go and
   live with him, wherever I should find him. But just before the
   commencement in September, when I was to take my degree, on the
   seventeenth day of which month I was twenty years old, Mr. Edwards, of
   Northampton, came to New-Haven, and preached. He then preached the
   sermon on The Trial of the Spirits, which was afterwards printed. I had
   before read his sermons on Justification, &c., and his Narrative of
   Remarkable Conversions at Northampton, which took place about seven
   years before this. Though I then did not obtain any personal
   acquaintance with him, any further than by hearing him preach; yet I
   conceived such an esteem of him, and was so pleased with his preaching,
   that I altered my former determination with respect to Mr. Tennent, and
   concluded to go and live with Mr. Edwards, as soon as I should have
   opportunity, though he lived about eighty miles from my father's
   house."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [20] This is a very common mistake. The woman here mentioned was not
   Mary Magdalen.

   [21] The superscription and date are gone from the MS. but having Mr.
   Edwards's hand-writing on the back, I suppose the letter to have been
   written to him.

   [22] Afterwards the Rev. Samuel Hopkins, D. D. of Newport, author of
   the System of Divinity
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER X.

   TEMPORARY ABATEMENT OF RELIGIOUS ATTENTION--LETTER TO MR.
   BELLAMY--MISSIONARY TOUR--SUCCESS AT LEICESTER--MR. HOPKINS BECOMES A
   MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY--MR. BUELL'S SUCCESSFUL LABOURS AT
   NORTHAMPTON--MR. EDWARDS'S NARRATIVE OF THE REVIVAL AT NORTHAMPTON, IN
   1740-1742--COVENANT ENTERED INTO BY THE CHURCH.

   for about three months, or from November to January, there was an
   obvious abatement in the attention to religion at Northampton; and
   although there were instances of conversion from time to time through
   the winter, yet they were less frequent than before. Mr. Edwards
   alludes to this fact, in the following letter to Mr. Bellamy, of
   Bethlehem.

   "Northampton, Jan. 21, 1742.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I received yours of Jan. 11, for which I thank you. Religion, in this
   and the neighbouring towns, has now of late been on the decaying hand.
   I desire your prayers, that God would quicken and revive us again; and
   particularly, that he would greatly humble, and pardon, and quicken me,
   and fill me with his own fulness; and, if it may consist with his will,
   improve me as an instrument to revive his work. There has been, the
   year past, the most wonderful work among children here, by far, that
   ever was. God has seemed almost wholly to take a new generation, that
   are come on since the late great work, seven years ago.--Neither earth
   nor hell can hinder his work, that is going on in the country. Christ
   gloriously triumphs at this day. You have probably before now heard of
   the great and wonderful things that have lately been wrought at
   Portsmouth, the chief town in new Hampshire. There are also appearing
   great things at Ipswich and Newbury, the two largest towns in this
   province except Boston, and several other towns beyond Boston, and some
   towns nearer. By what I can understand, the work of God is greater at
   this day in the land, than it has been at any time. O what cause have
   we, with exulting hearts, to agree to give glory to him, who thus rides
   forth in the chariot of his salvation, conquering and to conquer; and
   earnestly to pray, that now the Sun of righteousness would come forth
   like a bridegroom, rejoicing as a giant, to run his race from one end
   of the heavens to the other, that nothing may be hid from the light and
   heat thereof.

   It is not probable that I shall be able to attend your meeting at
   Guilford. I have lately been so much gone from my people, and don't
   know but I must be obliged to leave em again next week about a
   fortnight, being called to Leicester, a town about half way to Boston,
   where a great work of grace has lately commenced; and probably soon
   after that to another place; and having at this time some extraordinary
   affairs to attend to at home. I pray that Christ, our good Shepherd,
   will be with you, and direct you and greatly strengthen and bless you.

   Dear Sir, I have none of those books you speak of, to sell. I have only
   a few, that I intend to send to some of my friends. I have already sent
   you one of my New-Haven sermons, by Mr. ----. Nevertheless, I have
   herewith sent another, which I desire you to give to Mr. Mills, if he
   has none; but if he has, dispose of it where you think it will do most
   good. I have also sent one of those sermons I preached at Enfield; as
   to the other, I have but one of them in the world.

   I am, dear Sir, your affectionate and unworthy brother, and
   fellow-labourer,

   jonathan edwards."

   The absence from his people, alluded to in the preceding letter,
   occurred in consequence of a missionary tour of some length, in the two
   preceding months; during which he visited various places, to which he
   had been invited, in consequence of an unusual attention to religion
   there, among the people. His own congregation, readily admitting that,
   at such a time, there was a louder call for his services in those
   places, than in Northampton, consented, in the true spirit of christian
   benevolence, that he should listen to these calls of Providence, and go
   forth into other fields of labour. In so doing, they soon found a
   fulfilment of the promise, that he who watereth shall be watered
   himself. On Monday the 25th of January, Mr. Edwards set out for
   Leicester, and remained there several weeks, preaching with remarkable
   success. The revival of religion almost immediately pervaded the whole
   congregation, and great numbers were believed to be the subjects of
   hopeful conversion. On Wednesday, January 27th, Mr. Buell, a class-mate
   of Mr. Hopkins, who, though he left college in the September preceding,
   had already been preaching some time, and had gained the reputation of
   an uncommonly engaged and animated preacher, came to Northampton, to
   preach during the absence of Mr. Edwards. Immediately the work of
   grace, which had for a season declined, was again carried on with even
   greater power than before. A high degree of religious feeling was
   excited in the church; a solemn, anxious attention to the salvation of
   the soul, was witnessed extensively among the congregation; and, soon
   after the return of Mr. Edwards, the work of conviction and conversion
   again went forward with renewed success.

   Mr. Hopkins alludes to these events, in his own narrative. "In the
   month of December," he observes, "being furnished with a horse, I set
   out for Northampton, with a view to live with Mr. Edwards, where I was
   an utter stranger. When I arrived there, Mr. Edwards was not at home;
   but I was received with great kindness by Mrs. Edwards and the family,
   and had encouragement that I might live there during the winter. Mr.
   Edwards was absent on a preaching tour, as people in general were
   greatly attentive to religion and preaching, which was attended with
   remarkable effects, in the conviction and supposed conversion of
   multitudes. I was very gloomy, and was most of the time retired in my
   chamber. After some days, Mrs. Edwards came into my chamber, and said,
   "As I was now become a member of the family for a season, she felt
   herself interested in my welfare; and, as she observed that I appeared
   gloomy and dejected, she hoped I would not think she intruded, by her
   desiring to know, and asking me what was the occasion of it, or to that
   purpose. I told her the freedom she used was agreeable to me; that the
   occasion of the appearance which she mentioned, was the state in which
   I considered myself. I was in a Christless, graceless state, and had
   been under a degree of conviction and concern for myself, for a number
   of months; had got no relief, and my case, instead of growing better,
   appeared to grow worse. Upon which we entered into a free conversation;
   and on the whole she told me, that she had peculiar exercises in prayer
   respecting me, since I had been in the family; that she trusted I
   should receive light and comfort, and doubted not that God intended yet
   to do great things by me.

   "Religion was now at a lower ebb at Northampton than it had been of
   late, and than it appeared to be in the neighbouring towns, and in New
   England in general. In the month of January, Mr. Buell, my class-mate,
   came to Northampton, having commenced a zealous preacher of the gospel;
   and was the means of greatly reviving the people to zeal in religion.
   He preached every day, and sometimes twice a day, publicly, Mr. Edwards
   being out of town, preaching in distant towns. Professing Christians
   appeared greatly revived and comforted; and a number were under
   conviction; and I think there were some hopeful new converts. After Mr.
   Buell had been in Northampton a week or two, he set out on a tour
   towards Boston [23] ."

   Having thus alluded to the religious state of Northampton at this
   period, so far as was necessary to exhibit the order and connexion of
   events; we now proceed to give Mr. Edwards's own account of the revival
   of religion in that town, in 1740-1742, as communicated in a letter to
   a minister of Boston.

   "Northampton, Dec.12, 1743.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Ever since the great work of God, that was wrought here about nine
   years ago, there has been a great and abiding alteration in this town,
   in many respects. There has been vastly more religion kept up in the
   town, among all sorts of persons, in religious exercises, and in common
   conversation; there has been a great alteration among the youth of the
   town, with respect to revelry, frolicking, profane and licentious
   conversation, and lewd songs; and there has also been a great
   alteration, amongst both old and young, with regard to tavern-haunting.
   I suppose the town has been in no measure so free of vice in these
   respects, for any long time together, for sixty years, as it has been
   these nine years past. There has also been an evident alteration, with
   respect to a charitable spirit to the poor; though I think with regard
   to this, we in this town, as well as the land in general, come far
   short of gospel rules. And though after that great work nine years ago,
   there has been a very lamentable decay of religious affections, and the
   engagedness of people's spirit in religion; yet many societies for
   prayer and social worship were all along kept up, and there were some
   few instances of awakening, and deep concern about the things of
   another world, even in the most dead time.

   In the year 1740, in the spring before Mr. Whitefield came to this
   town, there was a visible alteration: there was more seriousness and
   religious conversation, especially among young people; those things
   that were of ill tendency among them, were forborne; and it was a very
   frequent thing for persons to consult their minister upon the salvation
   of their souls; and in some particular persons there appeared a great
   attention, about that time. And thus it continued, until Mr. Whitefield
   came to town, which was about the middle of October following: he
   preached here four sermons in the meeting-house, (besides a private
   lecture at my house,) one on Friday, another on Saturday, and two upon
   the sabbath. The congregation was extraordinarily melted by every
   sermon; almost the whole assembly being in tears for a great part of
   sermon time. Mr. Whitefield's sermons were suitable to the
   circumstances of the town; containing a just reproof of our
   backslidings, and in a most moving and affecting manner, making use of
   our great professions, and great mercies, as arguments with us to
   return to God, from whom we had departed. Immediately after this, the
   minds of the people in general appeared more engaged in religion,
   showing a greater forwardness to make religion the subject of their
   conversation, and to meet frequently for religious purposes, and to
   embrace all opportunities to hear the word preached. The revival at
   first appeared chiefly among professors, and those that had entertained
   hope that they were in a state of salvation, to whom Mr. Whitefield
   chiefly addressed himself; but in a very short time, there appeared an
   awakening and deep concern among some young persons, that looked upon
   themselves in a Christless state; and there were some hopeful
   appearances of conversion, and some professors were greatly revived. In
   about a month or six weeks, there was a great attention in the town,
   both as to the revival of professors and the awakening of others. By
   the middle of December, a considerable work of God appeared among those
   that were very young; and the revival of religion continued to
   increase, so that in the spring an engagedness of spirit, about the
   things of religion, was become very general amongst young people and
   children, and religious subjects almost wholly took up their
   conversation when they were together.

   In the month of May, 1741, a sermon was preached to a company, at a
   private house. Near the conclusion of the discourse, one or two
   persons, that were professors, were so greatly affected with a sense of
   the greatness and glory of divine things, and the infinite importance
   of the things of eternity, that they were not able to conceal it--the
   affection of their minds overcoming their strength, and having a very
   visible effect upon their bodies. When the exercises were over, the
   young people that were present removed into the other room for
   religious conference; and particularly that they might have opportunity
   to inquire of those, that were thus affected, what apprehensions they
   had, and what things they were that thus deeply impressed their minds;
   and there soon appeared a very great effect of their conversation; the
   affection was quickly propagated throughout the room; many of the young
   people and children, that were professors, appeared to be overcome with
   a sense of the greatness and glory of divine things, and with
   admiration, love, joy, and praise, and compassion to others, that
   looked upon themselves as in a state of nature; and many others at the
   same time were overcome with distress, about their sinful and miserable
   estate and condition; so that the whole room was full of nothing but
   outcries, faintings, and the like. Others soon heard of it in several
   parts of the town, and came to them; and what they saw and heard there,
   was greatly affecting to them, so that many of them were overpowered in
   like manner, and it continued thus for some hours; the time being spent
   in prayer, singing, counselling, and conferring. There seemed to be a
   consequent happy effect of that meeting, to several particular persons,
   and on the state of religion in the town in general. After this, were
   meetings from time to time, attended with like appearances. But a
   little after it, at the conclusion of the public exercises on the
   sabbath, I appointed the children that were under seventeen years of
   age, to go from the meeting-house to a neighbouring house, that I might
   there further enforce what they had heard in public, and might give in
   some counsels proper for their age. The children were there very
   generally and greatly affected with the warnings and counsels that were
   given them, and many exceedingly overcome; and the room was filled with
   cries; and when they were dismissed, they almost all of them went home
   crying aloud through the streets, to all parts of the town. The like
   appearances attended several such meetings of children, that were
   appointed. But their affections appeared by what followed, to be of a
   very different nature: in many, they appeared indeed but childish
   affections, and in a day or two would leave them as they were before;
   others were deeply impressed; their convictions took fast hold of them,
   and abode by them: and there were some that, from one meeting to
   another, seemed extraordinarily affected for some time, to but little
   purpose, their affections presently vanishing from time to time; but
   yet afterwards, were seized with abiding convictions, and their
   affections became durable.

   About the middle of the summer, I called together the young people that
   were communicants, from sixteen to twenty-six years of age, to my
   house; which proved to be a most happy meeting: many seemed to be very
   greatly and most agreeably affected with those views, which excited
   humility, self-condemnation, self-abhorrence, love, and joy: many
   fainted under these affections. We had several meetings that summer, of
   young people, attended with like appearances. It was about that time,
   that there first began to be cryings out in the meeting-house; which
   several times occasioned many of the congregation to stay in the house
   after the public exercises were over, to confer with those who seemed
   to be overcome with religious convictions and affections, which was
   found to tend much to the propagation of their impressions, with
   lasting effect upon many; conference being, at these times, commonly
   joined with prayer and singing. In the summer and autumn, the children
   in various parts of the town had religious meetings by themselves, for
   prayer, sometimes joined with fasting; wherein many of them seemed to
   be greatly and properly affected, and I hope some them savingly wrought
   upon.

   The months of August and September were the most remarkable of any this
   year, for appearances of the conviction and conversion of sinners, and
   great revivings, quickenings, and comforts of professors, and for
   extraordinary external effects of these things. It was a very frequent
   thing, to see a house full of outcries, faintings, convulsions, and
   such like, both with distress, and also with admiration and joy. It was
   not the manner here, to hold meetings all night, as in some places, nor
   was it common to continue them till very late in the night; but it was
   pretty often so, that there were some that were so affected, and their
   bodies so overcome, that they could not go home, but were obliged to
   stay all night where they were. There was no difference, that I know of
   here, with regard to these extraordinary effects, in meetings in the
   night and in the day time: the meetings in which these effects appeared
   in the evening, being commonly begun, and their extraordinary effects,
   in the day, and continued in the evening; and some meetings have been
   very remarkable for such extraordinary effects, that were both begun
   and finished in the day time. There was an appearance of a glorious
   progress of the work of God upon the hearts of sinners, in conviction,
   and conversion, this summer and autumn, and great numbers, I think we
   have reason to hope, were brought savingly home to Christ. But this was
   remarkable: the work of Good in his influences of this nature, seemed
   to be almost wholly upon a new generation--those that were not come to
   years of discretion in that wonderful season, nine years ago; children,
   or those that were then children: others, who had enjoyed that former
   glorious opportunity, without any appearance of saving benefit, seemed
   now to be almost wholly passed over and let alone. But now we had the
   most wonderful work among children, that ever was in Northampton. The
   former outpouring of the Spirit was remarkable for influences upon the
   minds of children, beyond all that had ever been before; but this far
   exceeded that. Indeed, as to influences on the minds of professors,
   this work was by no means confined to a new generation. Many, of all
   ages, partook of it; but yet, in this respect, it was more general on
   those that were of the young sort. Many, who had been formerly wrought
   upon, and in the time of our declension had fallen into decays, and had
   in a great measure left God, and gone after the world, now passed under
   a very remarkable new work of the Spirit of God, as if they had been
   the subjects of a second conversion. They were first led into the
   wilderness, and had a work of conviction; having much deeper
   convictions of the sins of both nature and practice, than ever before;
   though with some new circumstances, and something new in the kind of
   conviction in some, with great distress, beyond what they had felt
   before their first conversion. Under these convictions, they were
   excited to strive for salvation, and the kingdom of heaven suffered
   violence from some of them, in a far more remarkable manner than
   before; and after great convictions and humblings, and agonizing with
   God, they had Christ discovered to them anew, as an all-sufficient
   Saviour, and in the glories of his grace, and in a far more clear
   manner than before; and with greater humility, self-emptiness, and
   brokenness of heart, and a purer, a higher joy, and greater desires
   after holiness of life; but with greater self-diffidence and distrust
   of their treacherous hearts. One circumstance, wherein this work
   differed from that, which had been in the towns five or six years
   before, was, that conversions were frequently wrought more sensibly and
   visibly; the impressions stronger, and more manifest by their external
   effects; the progress of the Spirit of God in conviction, from step to
   step, more apparent; and the transition from one state to another, more
   sensible and plain; so that it might, in many instances, be as it were
   seen by bystanders. The preceding season had been very remarkable on
   this account, beyond what had been before; but this more remarkable
   than that. And in this season, these apparent or visible conversions,
   (if I may so call them,) were more frequently in the presence of
   others, at religious meetings, where the appearances of what was
   wrought on the heart fell under public observation.

   After September, 1741, there seemed to be some abatement of these
   extraordinary appearances, yet they did not wholly cease, but there was
   something of them, from time to time, all winter. About the beginning
   of February, 1742, Mr. Buell came to this town. I was then absent from
   home, and continued so till about a fortnight after. Mr. Buell preached
   from day to day, almost every day, in the meeting-house.--I had left
   him the free use of my pulpit, having heard of his designed visit,
   before I went from home. He spent almost the whole time religious
   exercises with the people, either in public or private, the people
   continually thronging him. When he first came, there came with him a
   number of the zealous people from Suffield, who continued here for some
   time. There were very extraordinary effects of Mr. Buell's labours; the
   people were exceedingly moved, crying out in great numbers in the
   meeting-house, and a great part of the congregation commonly staying in
   the house of God, for hours after the public service. Many also were
   exceedingly moved in private meetings, where Mr. Buell was: almost the
   whole town seemed to be in a great and continual commotion, day and
   night, and there was indeed a very great revival of religion. But it
   was principally among professors; the appearances of a work of
   conversion were in no measure as great, as they had been the summer
   before. When I came home, I found the town in very extraordinary
   circumstances, such as, in some respects, I never saw it in before. Mr.
   Buell continued here a fortnight or three weeks after I returned: there
   being still great appearances attending his labours; many in their
   religious affections being raised far beyond what they had ever been
   before: and there were some instances of persons lying in a sort of
   trance, remaining perhaps for a whole twenty-four hours motionless, and
   with their senses locked up; but in the mean time under strong
   imaginations, as though they went to heaven, and had there a vision of
   glorious and delightful objects. But when the people were raised to
   this height, Satan took the advantage, and his interposition, in many
   instances, soon became very apparent: and a great deal of caution and
   pains were found necessary, to keep the people, many of them, from
   running wild.

   In the month of March, I led the people into a solemn public renewal of
   their covenant with God. To that end, having made a draft of a
   covenant, I first proposed it to some of the principal men in the
   church; then to the people, in their several religious associations in
   various parts of the town; then to the whole congregation in public;
   and then I deposited a copy of it in the hands of each of the four
   deacons, that all who desired it might resort to them, and have
   opportunity to view and consider it. Then the people in general, that
   were above fourteen years of age, first subscribed the covenant with
   their hands; and then, on a day of fasting and prayer, all together
   presented themselves before the Lord in his house, and stood up, and
   solemnly manifested their consent to it, as their vow to God. The
   covenant was as follows:

      COPY OF A COVENANT,

   Entered into and subscribed, by the people of God at Northampton, and
   owned before God in his house as their vow to the Lord, and made a
   solemn act of public worship, by the congregation in general that were
   above fourteen years of age, on a day of fasting and prayer for the
   continuance and increase of the gracious presence of God in that place.

   March 16th, 1742. Acknowledging God's great goodness to us, a sinful,
   unworthy, people, in the blessed manifestations and fruits of his
   gracious presence in this town, both formerly and lately, and
   particularly in the very late spiritual revival; and adoring the
   glorious majesty, power, and grace of God, manifested in the present
   wonderful outpouring of his Spirit, in many parts of this land, in this
   place; and lamenting our past backslidings and ungrateful departings
   from God, and humbly begging of God that he would not mark our
   iniquities, but, for Christ's sake, come over the mountains of our
   sins, and visit us with his salvation, and continue the tokens of his
   presence with us, and yet more gloriously pour out his blessed Spirit
   upon us, and make us all partakers of the divine blessings he is, at
   this day, bestowing here, and in many parts of this land; we do this
   day present ourselves before the Lord, to renounce our evil ways, we
   put away our abominations from before God's eyes, and with one accord,
   to renew our engagements to seek and serve God: and particularly do now
   solemnly promise and vow to the Lord as follows:--

   In all our conversation, concerns, and dealings with our neighbour, we
   will have a strict regard to rules of honesty, justice, and
   uprightness, that we don't overreach or defraud our neighbour in any
   matter, and either wilfully, or through want of care, injure him in any
   of his honest possessions or rights; and in all our communication will
   have a tender respect, not only to our own interest, but also to the
   interest of our neighbour; and will carefully endeavour, in every
   thing, to do to others as we should expect, or think reasonable, that
   they should do to us, if we were in their case, and they in ours.

   And particularly we will endeavour to render every one his due, and
   will take heed to ourselves, that we don't injure our neighbour, and
   give him just cause of offence, by wilfully or negligently forbearing
   to pay our honest debts.

   And wherein any of us, upon strict examination of our past behaviour,
   may be conscious to ourselves, that we have by any means wronged any of
   our neighbours in their outward estate, we will not rest, till we have
   made that restitution, or given that satisfaction, which the rules of
   moral equity require; or if we are, on a strict and impartial search,
   conscious to ourselves, that we have in any other respect considerably
   injured our neighbour, we will truly endeavour to do that, which we in
   our consciences suppose christian rules require, in order to a
   reparation of the injury, and removing the offence given thereby.

   And furthermore we promise, that we will not allow ourselves in
   backbiting; and that we will take great heed to ourselves to avoid all
   violations of those christian rules, Tit. iii. 2. Speak evil of no
   man;' Jam. iv. 11. Speak not evil one of another, brethren;' and 2 Cor.
   xii. 20. Let there be no strifes, backbitings, whisperings;' and that
   we will not only not slander our neighbour, but also will not feed a
   spirit of bitterness, ill will, or secret grudge against our neighbour,
   insist on his real faults needlessly, and when not called to it, or
   from such a spirit, speak of his failings and blemishes with ridicule,
   or an air of contempt.

   And we promise, that we will be very careful to avoid doing any thing
   to our neighbour from a spirit of revenge. And that we will take great
   care that we do not, for private interest or our own honour, or to
   maintain ourselves against those of a contrary party, or to get our
   wills, or to promote any design in opposition to others, do those
   things which we, on the most impartial consideration are capable of,
   can think in our consciences will tend to wound religion, and the
   interests of Christ's kingdom.

   And particularly, that so far as any of us, by Divine Providence, have
   any special influence upon others, to lead them in the management of
   public affairs, we will not make our own worldly gain, or honour, or
   interest in the affections of others, or getting the better of any of a
   contrary party, that are in any respect our competitors, or the
   bringing or keeping them down, our governing aim, to the prejudice of
   the interest of religion, and the honour of Christ.

   And in the management of any public affair, wherever there is a
   difference of opinions, concerning any outward possessions, privileges,
   rights, or properties, we will not willingly violate justice for
   private interest: and with the greatest strictness and watchfulness,
   will avoid all unchristian bitterness, vehemence, and heat of spirit;
   yea, though we should think ourselves injured by a contrary party; and
   in the time of the management of such affairs, will especially watch
   over ourselves, our spirits, and our tongues, to avoid all unchristian
   inveighings, reproachings, bitter reflecting, judging and ridiculing
   others, either in public meetings or in private conversation, either to
   men's faces, or behind their backs; but will greatly endeavour, so far
   as we are concerned, that all should be managed with christian
   humility, gentleness, quietness, and love.

   And furthermore we promise, that we will not tolerate the exercise of
   enmity and ill will, or revenge in our hearts, against any of our
   neighbours; and we will often be strictly searching and examining our
   own hearts with respect to that matter.

   And if any of us find that we have an old secret grudge against any of
   our neighbours, we will not gratify it, but cross it, and endeavour to
   our utmost to root it out, crying to God for his help; and that we will
   make it our true and faithful endeavour, in our places, that a party
   spirit may not be kept up amongst us, but that it may utterly cease;
   that for the future, we may all be one, united in undisturbed peace and
   unfeigned love.

   And those of us that are in youth, do promise, never to allow ourselves
   in any diversions or pastimes, in meetings, or companies of young
   people, that we, in our consciences, upon sober consideration, judge
   not well to consist with, or would sinfully tend to hinder, the
   devoutest and most engaged spirit in religion, or indispose the mind
   for that devout and profitable attendance on the duties of the closet,
   which is most agreeable to God's will, or that we, in our most
   impartial judgment, can think tends to rob God of that honour which he
   expects, by our orderly serious attendance on family worship.

   And furthermore we promise, that we will strictly avoid all freedoms
   and familiarities in company, so tending either to stir up or gratify a
   lust of lasciviousness, that we cannot in our consciences think will be
   approved by the infinitely pure and holy eye of God, or that we can
   think, on serious and impartial consideration, we should be afraid to
   practise, if we expected in a few hours to appear before that holy God,
   to give an account of ourselves to him, as fearing they would be
   condemned by him as unlawful and impure.

   We also promise, with great watchfulness, to perform relative duties,
   required by christian rules, in the families we belong to, as we stand
   related respectively, towards parents and children, husbands and wives,
   brothers and sisters, masters or mistresses, and servants.

   And we now appear before God, depending on Divine grace and assistance,
   solemnly to devote our whole lives, to be laboriously spent in the
   business of religion; ever making it our greatest business, without
   backsliding from such a way of living, not hearkening to the
   solicitations of our sloth, and other corrupt inclinations, or the
   temptations of the world, that tend to draw us off from it; and
   particularly, that we will not abuse a hope or opinion that any of us
   may have, of our being interested in Christ, to indulge ourselves in
   sloth, or the more easily to yield to the solicitations of any sinful
   inclinations; but will run with perseverance the race that is set
   before us, and work out our own salvation with fear and trembling.

   And because we are sensible that the keeping these solemn vows may
   hereafter, in many cases, be very contrary to our corrupt inclinations
   and carnal interests, we do now therefore appear before God to make a
   surrender of all to him, and to make a sacrifice of every carnal
   inclination and interest, to the great business of religion and the
   interest of our souls.

   And being sensible of our weakness, and the deceitfulness of our own
   hearts, and our proneness to forget our most solemn vows, and lose our
   resolutions, we promise to be often strictly examining ourselves by
   these promises, especially before the sacrament of the Lord's supper;
   and beg of God that he would, for Christ's sake, keep us from wickedly
   dissembling in these our solemn vows; and that he who searches our
   hearts, and ponders the path of our feet, would, from time to time,
   help us in trying ourselves by this covenant, and help us to keep
   covenant with him, and not leave us to our own foolish, wicked, and
   treacherous hearts.

   In the beginning of the summer of 1742, there seemed to be an abatement
   of the liveliness of people's affections in religion; but yet many were
   often in a great height of them. And in the fall and winter following,
   there were at times extraordinary appearances. But in the general,
   people's engagedness in religion, and the liveliness of their
   affections, have been on the decline; and some of the young people
   especially, have shamefully lost their liveliness and vigour in
   religion, and much of the seriousness and solemnity of their spirits.
   But there are many that walk as becometh saints; and to this day there
   are a considerable number in town that seem to be near to God, and
   maintain much of the life of religion, and enjoy many of the sensible
   tokens and fruits of his gracious presence.

   With respect to the late season of revival of religion amongst us for
   three or four years past, it has been observable, that in the former
   part of it, in the years 1740 and 1741, the work seemed to be much more
   pure, having less of a corrupt mixture than in the former great
   outpouring of the Spirit, in 1735 and 1736. Persons seemed to be
   sensible of their former errors, and had learned more of their own
   hearts, and experience had taught them more of the tendency and
   consequences of things. They were now better guarded, and their
   affections were not only stronger, but attended with greater solemnity,
   and greater humility and self-distrust, and greater engagedness after
   holy living and perseverance: and there were fewer errors in conduct.
   But in the latter part of it, in the year 1742, it was otherwise: the
   work continued more pure till we were infected from abroad: our people
   hearing of, and some of them seeing, the work in other places, where
   there was greater visible commotion than here, and the outward
   appearances were more extraordinary, were ready to think that the work
   in those places far excelled what was amongst us, and their eyes were
   dazzled with the high profession and great show that some made, who
   came hither from other places.

   That those people went so far beyond them in raptures and violent
   emotions of the affections, and a vehement zeal, and what they call
   boldness for Christ, our people were ready to think was owing to far
   greater attainments in grace, and intimacy with heaven: they looked
   little in their own eyes in comparison with them, and were ready to
   submit themselves to them, and yield themselves up to their conduct,
   taking it for granted, that every thing was right that they said and
   did. These things had a strange influence on the people, and gave many
   of them a deep and unhappy tincture, from which it was a hard and long
   labour to deliver them, and from which some of them are not fully
   delivered to this day.

   The effects and consequences of things among us plainly show the
   following things, viz. That the degree of grace is by no means to be
   judged of by the degree of joy, or the degree of zeal; and that indeed
   we cannot at all determine by these things, who are gracious and who
   are not; and that it is not the degree of religious affections, but the
   nature of them, that is chiefly to be looked at. Some that have had
   very great raptures of joy, and have been extraordinarily filled, (as
   the vulgar phrase is,) and have had their bodies overcome, and that
   very often, have manifested far less of the temper of Christians in
   their conduct since, than some others that have been still, and have
   made no great outward show. But then again, there are many others, that
   have had extraordinary joys and emotions of mind, with frequent great
   effects upon their bodies, that behave themselves stedfastly, as
   humble, amiable, eminent Christians.

   'Tis evident that there may be great religious affections in
   individuals, which may in show and appearance resemble gracious
   affections, and have the same effects upon their bodies, but are far
   from having the same effect on the temper of their minds and the course
   of their lives. And likewise there is nothing more manifest, by what
   appears amongst us, than that the good estate of individuals is not
   chiefly to be judged of by any exactness of steps, and method of
   experiences, in what is supposed to be the first conversion; but that
   we must judge by the spirit that breathes, the effect wrought upon the
   temper of the soul in the time of the work and remaining afterwards.
   Though there have been very few instances among professors, amongst us,
   of what is ordinarily called scandalous sins, known to me; yet the
   temper that some of them show, and the behaviour they have been of,
   together with some things in the nature and circumstances of their
   experiences, make me much afraid lest there be a considerable number
   that have woefully deceived themselves. Though, on the other hand,
   there is a great number whose temper and conversation is such, as
   justly confirms the charity others towards them; and not a few, in
   whose disposition and walk there are amiable appearances of eminent
   grace. And notwithstanding all the corrupt mixtures that have been in
   the late work here, there are not only many blessed fruits of it, in
   particular persons that yet remain, but some good effects of it upon
   the town in general. A spirit of party has more extensively subsided. I
   suppose there has been less appearance these three or four years past,
   of that division of the town into two parties, which has long been our
   bane, than has been at any time during the preceding thirty years; and
   the people have apparently had much more caution, and a greater guard
   on their spirit and their tongues, to avoid contention and unchristian
   heats, in town-meetings, and on other occasions. And tis a thing
   greatly to be rejoiced in, that the people very lately came to an
   agreement and final issue, with respect to their grand controversy
   relating to their common lands; which has been, above any other
   particular thing, a source of mutual prejudices, jealousies, and
   debates, for fifteen or sixteen years past. The people also seem to be
   much more sensible of the danger of resting in old experiences, or what
   they were subjects of at their supposed first conversion; and to be
   more fully convinced of the necessity of forgetting the things that are
   behind, and pressing forward and maintaining earnest labour,
   watchfulness, and prayerfulness, as long as they live.

   I am, Rev. Sir,

   Your friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] Mr. Hopkins continued to pursue his studies with Mr. Edwards,
   until the next autumn, and again for a short period in the spring,
   after which he was settled at Housatonnuck, then a part of Stockbridge,
   now called Great Barrington.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XI.

   MRS. EDWARDS. HER SOLEMN SELF-DEDICATIONS HER UNCOMMON DISCOVERIES OF
   THE DIVINE PERFECTIONS AND GLORY; AND OF THE EXCELLENCY OF CHRIST
   REMARKS CONCERNING THEM.

   In speaking of Mrs. Edwards, we have already had occasion to remark,
   that her piety appears to have been in no ordinary degree pure,
   intense, and elevated, and that her views of spiritual and heavenly
   things were uncommonly clear and joyful. Near the close of the year
   1738, according to the testimony of Mr. Edwards, she was led, under an
   uncommon discovery of God's excellency, and in an high exercise of love
   to God, and of rest and joy in him, to make a new and most solemn
   dedication of herself to his service and glory, an entire renunciation
   of the world, and a resignation of all to God. After this, she had
   often such views of the glory of the divine perfections, and of
   Christ's excellencies, and at times, for hours together, without any
   interruption, that she was overwhelmed, and as it were swallowed up, in
   the light and joy of the love of God. In the summer of 1740, after a
   new and more perfect resignation of herself to God, with yet greater
   fervency, her views of the glory of God, and of the excellency of
   Christ, became still more clear and transporting; and in the following
   winter, after a similar but more perfect resignation of herself, and
   acceptance of God as the only portion and happiness of her soul, God
   appeared to vouchsafe to her, for a long period, a degree of spiritual
   light and enjoyment, which seemed to be, in reality, an anticipation of
   the joys of the heavenly world. There was so much that was unusual and
   striking in this state of mind, that her husband requested her to draw
   up an exact statement of it; which, having been preserved, is now
   presented to the reader.

   "On Tuesday night, Jan. 19, 1742," observes Mrs. Edwards, "I felt very
   uneasy and unhappy, at my being so low in grace. I thought I very much
   needed help from God, and found a spirit of earnestness to seek help of
   him, that I might have more holiness. When I had for a time been
   earnestly wrestling with God for it, I felt within myself great
   quietness of spirit, unusual submission to God, and willingness to wait
   upon him, with respect to the time and manner in which he should help
   me, and wished that he should take his own time, and his own way, to do
   it.

   "The next morning I found a degree of uneasiness in my mind, at Mr.
   Edwards's suggesting, that he thought I had failed in some measure in
   point of prudence, in some conversation I had with Mr. Williams, of
   Hadley, the day before. I found, that it seemed to bereave me of the
   quietness and calm of my mind, in any respect not to have the good
   opinion of my husband. This, I much disliked in myself, as arguing a
   want of a sufficient rest in God, and felt a disposition to fight
   against it, and look to God for his help, that I might have a more full
   and entire rest in him, independent of all other things. I continued in
   this frame, from early in the morning until about 10 o'clock, at which
   time the Rev. Mr. Reynolds went to prayer in the family.

   "I had, before this, so entirely given myself up to God, and resigned
   up every thing into his hands, that I had, for a long time, felt myself
   quite alone in the world; so that the peace and calm of my mind, and my
   rest in God, as my only and all-sufficient happiness, seemed sensibly
   above the reach of disturbance from any thing but these two: 1st. My
   own good name and fair reputation among men, and especially the esteem
   and just treatment of the people of this town; 2dly. And more
   especially, the esteem, and love, and kind treatment of my husband. At
   times, indeed, I had seemed to be considerable elevated above the
   influence of even these things; yet I had not found my calm, and peace,
   and rest in God so sensibly, fully, and constantly, above the reach of
   disturbance from them, until now.

   While Mr. Reynolds was at prayer in the family this morning, I felt an
   earnest desire that, in calling on God, he should say, Father, or that
   he should address the Almighty under that appellation: on which the
   thought turned in my mind.--Why can I say, Father?--Can I now at this
   time, with the confidence of a child, and without the least misgiving
   of heart, call God my Father?--This brought to my mind two lines of Mr.
   Erskine's sonnet:

   'I see him lay his vengeance by. And smile in Jesus' face.'

   "I was thus deeply sensible, that my sins did loudly call for
   vengeance; but I then by faith saw God lay his vengeance by, and smile
   in Jesus' face.' It appeared to be real and certain that he did so. I
   had not the least doubt, that he then sweetly smiled upon me, with the
   look of forgiveness and love, having laid aside all his displeasure
   towards me, for Jesus' sake; which made me feel very weak, and somewhat
   faint.

   "In consequence of this, I felt a strong desire to be alone with God,
   to go to him, without having any one to interrupt the silent and soft
   communion, which I earnestly desired between God and my own soul; and
   accordingly withdrew to my chamber. It should have been mentioned that,
   before I retired, while Mr. Reynolds was praying, these words, in Rom.
   viii. 34. came into my mind, Who is he that condemneth; it is Christ
   that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
   hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us;' as well as the
   following words, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ,' &c.;
   which occasioned great sweetness and delight in my soul. But when I was
   alone, the words came to my mind with far greater power and sweetness;
   upon which I took the Bible, and read the words to the end of the
   chapter, when they were impressed on my heart with vastly greater power
   and sweetness still. They appeared to me with undoubted certainty as
   the words of God, and as words which God did pronounce concerning me. I
   had no more doubt of it, than I had of my being. I seemed as it were to
   hear the great God proclaiming thus to the world concerning me; Who
   shall lay any thing to thy charge,' &c.; and had it strongly impressed
   on me, how impossible it was for any thing in heaven or earth, in this
   world or the future, ever to separate me from the love of God which was
   in Christ Jesus. I cannot find language to express, how certain this
   appeared--the everlasting mountains and hills were but shadows to it.
   My safety, and happiness, and eternal enjoyment of God's immutable
   love, seemed as durable and unchangeable as God himself. Melted and
   overcome by the sweetness of this assurance, I fell into a great flow
   of tears, and could not forbear weeping aloud. It appeared certain to
   me that God was my Father, and Christ my Lord and Saviour, that he was
   mine and I his. Under a delightful sense of the immediate presence and
   love of God, these words seemed to come over and over in my mind, My
   God, my all; my God, my all.' The presence of God was so near, and so
   real, that I seemed scarcely conscious of any thing else. God the
   Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, seemed as distinct persons, both
   manifesting their inconceivable loveliness, and mildness, and
   gentleness, and their great and immutable love to me. I seemed to be
   taken under the care and charge of my God and Saviour, in an
   inexpressibly endearing manner; and Christ appeared to me as a mighty
   Saviour, under the character of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, taking
   my heart, with all its corruptions, under his care, and putting it at
   his feet. In all things, which concerned me, I felt myself safe under
   the protection of the Father and the Saviour; who appeared with supreme
   kindness to keep a record of every thing that I did, and of every thing
   that was done to me, purely for my good.

   "The peace and happiness, which I hereupon felt, was altogether
   inexpressible. It seemed to be that which came from heaven; to be
   eternal and unchangeable. I seemed to be lifted above earth and hell,
   out of the reach of every thing here below, so that I could look on all
   the rage and enmity of men or devils, with a kind of holy indifference,
   and an undisturbed tranquillity. At the same time, I felt compassion
   and love for all mankind, and a deep abasement of soul, under a sense
   of my own unworthiness. I thought of the ministers who were in the
   house, and felt willing to undergo any labour and self-denial, if they
   would but come to the help of the Lord. I also felt myself more
   perfectly weaned from all things here below, than ever before. The
   whole world, with all its enjoyments, and all its troubles, seemed to
   be nothing:--My God was my all, my only portion. No possible suffering
   appeared to be worth regarding: all persecutions and torments were a
   mere nothing. I seemed to dwell on high, and the place of defence to be
   the munition of rocks.

   "After some time, the two evils mentioned above, as those which I
   should have been least able to bear, came to my mind--the ill treatment
   of the town, and the ill will of my husband; but now I was carried
   exceedingly above even such things as these, and I could feel that, if
   I were exposed to them both, they would seem comparatively nothing.
   There was then a deep snow on the ground, and I could think of being
   driven from my home into the cold and snow, of being chased from the
   town with the utmost contempt and malice, and of being left to perish
   with the cold, as cast out by all the world, with perfect calmness and
   serenity. It appeared to me, that it would not move me, or in the least
   disturb the inexpressible happiness and peace of my soul. My mind
   seemed as much above all such things, as the sun is above the earth.

   "I continued in a very sweet and lively sense of divine things, day and
   night, sleeping and waking, until Saturday, Jan. 23. On Saturday
   morning, I had a most solemn and deep impression on my mind of the eye
   of God as fixed upon me, to observe what improvement I made of those
   spiritual communications I had received from him; as well as of the
   respect shown Mr. Edwards, who had then been sent for to preach at
   Leicester. I was sensible that I was sinful enough to bestow it on my
   pride, or on my sloth, which seemed exceedingly dreadful to me. At
   night, my soul seemed to be filled with an inexpressibly sweet and pure
   love to God, and to the children of God; with a refreshing consolation
   and solace of soul, which made me willing to lie on the earth, at the
   feet of the servants of God, to declare his gracious dealings with me,
   and breathe forth before them my love, and gratitude, and praise.

   "The next day, which was the sabbath, I enjoyed a sweet, and lively,
   and assured sense of God's infinite grace, and favour, and love to me,
   in taking me out of the depths of hell, and exalting me to the heavenly
   glory, and the dignity of a royal priesthood.

   "On Monday night, Mr. Edwards, being gone that day to Leicester, I
   heard that Mr. Buell was coming to this town, and from what I had heard
   of him, and of his success, I had strong hopes that there would be
   great effects from his labours here. At the same time, I had a deep and
   affecting impression, that the eye of God was ever upon my heart, and
   that it greatly concerned me to watch my heart, and see to it that I
   was perfectly resigned to God, with respect to the instruments he
   should make use of to revive religion in this town, and be entirely
   willing, if it was God's pleasure, that he should make use of Mr.
   Buell; and also that other Christians should appear to excel me in
   christian experience, and in the benefit they should derive from
   ministers. I was conscious, that it would be exceedingly provoking to
   God if I should not be thus resigned, and earnestly endeavoured to
   watch my heart, that no feelings of a contrary nature might arise; and
   was enabled, as I thought, to exercise full resignation, and
   acquiescence in God's pleasure, as to these things. I was sensible what
   great cause I had to bless God, for the use he had made of Mr. Edwards
   hitherto; but thought, if he never blessed his labours any more, and
   should greatly bless the labours of other ministers, I could entirely
   acquiesce in his will. It appeared to me meet and proper, that God
   should employ babes and sucklings to advance his kingdom. When I
   thought of these things, it was my instinctive feeling to say, Amen,
   Lord Jesus! Amen, Lord Jesus!' This seemed to be the sweet and
   instinctive language of my soul.

   "On Tuesday, I remained in a sweet and lively exercise of this
   resignation, and love to and rest in God, seeming to be in my heart
   from day to day, far above the reach of every thing here below. On
   Tuesday night, especially the latter part of it, I felt a great
   earnestness of soul and engagedness in seeking God for the town, that
   religion might now revive, and that God would bless Mr. Buell to that
   end. God seemed to be very near to me while I was thus striving with
   him for these things, and I had a strong hope that what I sought of him
   would be granted. There seemed naturally and unavoidably to arise in my
   mind an assurance that now God would do great things for Northampton.

   "On Wednesday morning, I heard that Mr. Buell arrived the night before
   at Mr. Phelps's, and that there seemed to be great tokens and effects
   of the presence of God there, which greatly encouraged and rejoiced me.
   About an hour and a half after, Mr. Buell came to our house; I sat
   still in entire resignedness to God, and willingness that God should
   bless his labours here as much as he pleased; though it were to the
   enlivening of every saint, and to the conversion of every sinner, in
   the town. These feelings continued afterwards, when I saw his great
   success; as I never felt the least rising of heart to the contrary, but
   my submission was even and uniform, without interruption or
   disturbance. I rejoiced when I saw the honour which God put upon him,
   and the respect paid him by the people, and the greater success
   attending his preaching, than had followed the preaching of Mr. Edwards
   immediately before he went to Leicester. I found rest and rejoicing in
   it, and the sweet language of my soul continually was, Amen, Lord
   Jesus! Amen, Lord Jesus!'

   "At 3 o'clock in the afternoon, a lecture was preached by Mr. Buell. In
   the latter part of the sermon, one or two appeared much moved, and
   after the blessing, when the people were going out, several others. To
   my mind there was the clearest evidence, that God was present in the
   congregation, on the work of redeeming love; and in the clear view of
   this, I was all at once filled with such intense admiration of the
   wonderful condescension and grace of God, in returning again to
   Northampton, as overwhelmed my soul, and immediately took away my
   bodily strength. This was accompanied with an earnest longing, that
   those of us, who were the children of God, might now arise and strive.
   It appeared to me, that the angels in heaven sung praises, for such
   wonderful, free, and sovereign grace, and my heart was lifted up in
   adoration and praise. I continued to have clear views of the future
   world, of eternal happiness and misery, and my heart full of love to
   the souls of men. On seeing some, that I found were in a natural
   condition, I felt a most tender compassion for them; but especially was
   I, while I remained in the meeting-house, from time to time overcome,
   and my strength taken away, by the sight of one and another, whom I
   regarded as the children of God, and who, I had heard, were lively and
   animated in religion. We remained in the meeting-house about three
   hours, after the public exercises were over. During most of the time,
   my bodily strength was overcome; and the joy and thankfulness, which
   were excited in my mind, as I contemplated the great goodness of God,
   led me to converse with those who were near me, in a very earnest
   manner.

   "When I came home, I found Mr. Buell, Mr. Christophers, Mr. Hopkins,
   Mrs. Eleanor Dwight, the wife of Mr. Joseph Allen, and Mr. Job Strong,
   at the house. Seeing and conversing with them on the Divine goodness,
   renewed my former feelings, and filled me with an intense desire that
   we might all arise, and with an active, flowing, and fervent heart give
   glory to God. The intenseness of my feelings again took away my bodily
   strength. The words of one of Dr. Watts's Hosannas powerfully affected
   me; and in the course of the conversation, I uttered them as the real
   language of my heart, with great earnestness and emotion.

   Hosanna to King David's Son, Who reigns on a superior throne,' &c.

   And while I was uttering the words, my mind was so deeply impressed
   with the love of Christ, and a sense of his immediate presence, that I
   could with difficulty refrain from rising from my seat, and leaping for
   joy. I continued to enjoy this intense, and lively, and refreshing
   sense of divine things, accompanied with strong emotions, for nearly an
   hour; after which, I experienced a delightful calm, and peace and rest
   in God, until I retired for the night; and during the night, both
   waking and sleeping, I had joyful views of divine things, and a
   complacential rest of soul in God. I awoke in the morning of Thursday,
   Jan. 28th, in the same happy frame of mind, and engaged in the duties
   of my family with a sweet consciousness, that God was present with me,
   and with earnest longings of soul for the continuance and increase of
   the blessed fruits of the Holy Spirit in the town. About nine o'clock,
   these desires became so exceedingly intense, when I saw numbers of the
   people coming into the house, with an appearance of deep interest in
   religion, that my bodily strength was much weakened, and it was with
   difficulty that I could pursue my ordinary avocations. About 11
   o'clock, as I accidentally went into the room where Mr. Buell was
   conversing with some of the people, I heard him say, O that we, who are
   the children of God, should be cold and lifeless in religion!' and I
   felt such a sense of the deep ingratitude manifested by the children of
   God, in such coldness and deadness, that my strength was immediately
   taken away, and I sunk down on the spot. Those who were near raised me,
   and placed me in a chair; and from the fulness of my heart, I expressed
   to them, in a very earnest manner, the deep sense I had of the
   wonderful grace of Christ towards me, of the assurance I had of his
   having saved me from hell, of my happiness running parallel with
   eternity, of the duty of giving up all to God, and of the peace and joy
   inspired by an entire dependence on his mercy and grace. Mr. Buell then
   read a melting hymn of Dr. Watts's, [24] concerning the loveliness of
   Christ, the enjoyments and employments of heaven, and the Christian's
   earnest desire of heavenly things; and the truth and reality of the
   things mentioned in the hymn, made so strong an impression on my mind,
   and my soul was drawn so powerfully towards Christ and heaven, that I
   leaped unconsciously from my chair. I seemed to be drawn upwards, soul
   and body, from the earth towards heaven; and it appeared to me that I
   must naturally and necessarily ascend thither. These feelings continued
   while the hymn was reading, and during the prayer of Mr. Christophers,
   which followed. After the prayer, Mr. Buell read two other hymns, on
   the glories of heaven, which moved me so exceedingly, and drew me so
   strongly heavenward, that it seemed as it were to draw my body upwards,
   and I felt as if I must necessarily ascend thither. At length my
   strength failed me, and I sunk down; when they took me up and laid me
   on the bed, where I lay for a considerable time, faint with joy, while
   contemplating the glories of the heavenly world. After I had lain a
   while, I felt more perfectly subdued and weaned from the world, and
   more fully resigned to God, than I had ever been conscious of before. I
   felt an entire indifference to the opinions, and representations, and
   conduct of mankind respecting me; and a perfect willingness, that God
   should employ some other instrument than Mr. Edwards, in advancing the
   work of grace in Northampton. I was entirely swallowed up in God, as my
   only portion, and his honour and glory was the object of my supreme
   desire and delight. At the same time, I felt a far greater love to the
   children of God, than ever before. I seemed to love them as my own
   soul; and when I saw them, my heart went out towards them, with an
   inexpressible endearedness and sweetness. I beheld them by faith in
   their risen and glorified state, with spiritual bodies re-fashioned
   after the image of Christ's glorious body, and arrayed in the beauty of
   heaven. The time when they would be so appeared very near, by faith it
   seemed as if it were present. This was accompanied with a ravishing
   sense of the unspeakable joys of the upper world. They appeared to my
   mind in all their reality and certainty, and as it were in actual and
   distinct vision; so plain and evident were they to the eye of my faith,
   I seemed to regard them as begun. These anticipations were renewed over
   and over, while I lay on the bed, from twelve o'clock till four, being
   too much exhausted by emotions of joy, to rise and sit up; and during
   most of the time, my feelings prompted me to converse very earnestly
   with one and another of the pious women, who were present, on those
   spiritual and heavenly objects, of which I had so deep an impression. A
   little while before I arose, Mr. Buell and the people went to meeting.

   "I continued in a sweet and lively sense of divine things, until I
   retired to rest. That night, which was Thursday night, Jan. 28, was the
   sweetest night I ever had in my life. I never before, for so long a
   time together, enjoyed so much of the light, and rest, and sweetness of
   heaven in my soul, but without the least agitation of body during the
   whole time. The great part of the night I lay awake, sometimes asleep,
   and sometimes between sleeping and waking. But all night I continued in
   a constant, clear, and lively sense of the heavenly sweetness of
   Christ's excellent and transcendent love, of his nearness to me, and of
   my dearness to him; with an inexpressibly sweet calmness of soul in an
   entire rest in him. I seemed to myself to perceive a glow of divine
   love come down from the heart of Christ in heaven, into my heart, in a
   constant stream, like a stream or pencil of sweet light. At the same
   time, my heart and soul all flowed out in love to Christ; so that there
   seemed to be a constant flowing and reflowing of heavenly and divine
   love, from Christ's heart to mine; and I appeared to myself to float or
   swim, in these bright, sweet beams of the love of Christ, like the
   motes swimming in the beams of the sun, or the streams of his light
   which come in at the window. My soul remained in a kind of heavenly
   elysium. So far as I am capable of making a comparison, I think that
   what I felt each minute, during the continuance of the whole time, was
   worth more than all the outward comfort and pleasure, which I had
   enjoyed in my whole life put together. It was a pure delight, which fed
   and satisfied the soul. It was pleasure, without the least sting, or
   any interruption. It was a sweetness, which my soul was lost in. It
   seemed to be all that my feeble frame could sustain, of that fulness of
   joy, which is felt by those, who behold the face of Christ, and share
   his love in the heavenly world. There was but little difference,
   whether I was asleep or awake, so deep was the impression made on my
   soul; but if there was any difference, the sweetness was greatest and
   most uninterrupted while I was asleep.

   "As I awoke early the next morning, which was Friday, I was led to
   think of Mr. Williams of Hadley preaching that day in the town, as had
   been appointed; and to examine my heart, whether I was willing that he,
   who was a neighbouring minister, should be extraordinarily blessed, and
   made a greater instrument of good in the town, than Mr. Edwards; and
   was enabled to say, with respect to that matter, Amen, Lord Jesus!' and
   to be entirely willing, if God pleased, that he should be the
   instrument of converting every soul in the town. My soul acquiesced
   fully in the will of God, as to the instrument, if his work of renewing
   grace did but go on.

   "This lively sense of the beauty and excellency of divine things
   continued during the morning, accompanied with peculiar sweetness and
   delight. To my own imagination, my soul seemed to be gone out of me to
   God and Christ in heaven, and to have very little relation to my body.
   God and Christ were so present to me, and so near me, that I seemed
   removed from myself. The spiritual beauty of the Father and the
   Saviour, seemed to engross my whole mind; and it was the instinctive
   feeling of my heart, Thou art; and there is none beside thee.' I never
   felt such an entire emptiness of self-love, or any regard to any
   private, selfish interest of my own. It seemed to me, that I had
   entirely done with myself. I felt that the opinions of the world
   concerning me were nothing, and that I had no more to do with any
   outward interest of my own, than with that of a person whom I never
   saw. The glory of God seemed to be all, and in all, and to swallow up
   every wish and desire of my heart.

   "Mr. Sheldon came into the house about 10 o'clock, and said to me as he
   came in, The Sun of righteousness arose on my soul this morning, before
   day;' upon which I said to him in reply, That Sun has not set upon my
   soul all this night; I have dwelt on high in the heavenly mansions; the
   light of divine love has surrounded me; my soul has been lost in God,
   and has almost left the body.' This conversation only served to give me
   a still livelier sense of the reality and excellence of divine things,
   and that to such a degree, as again to take away my strength, and
   occasion great agitation of body. So strong were my feelings, I could
   not refrain from conversing with those around me, in a very earnest
   manner, for about a quarter of an hour, on the infinite riches of
   divine love in the work of salvation; when, my strength entirely
   failing, my flesh grew very cold, and they carried me and set me by the
   fire. As I sat there, I had a most affecting sense of the mighty power
   of Christ, which had been exerted in what he had done for my soul, and
   in sustaining and keeping down the native corruptions of my heart, and
   of the glorious and wonderful grace of God in causing the ark to return
   to Northampton. So intense were my feelings, when speaking of these
   things, that I could not forbear rising up and leaping with joy and
   exultation. I felt at the same time an exceedingly strong and tender
   affection for the children of God, and realized, in a manner
   exceedingly sweet and ravishing, the meaning of Christ's prayer, in
   John xvii. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and
   I in thee, that they also may be one in us.' This union appeared to me
   an inconceivable, excellent, and sweet oneness; and at the same time I
   felt that oneness in my soul, with the children of God who were
   present. Mr. Christophers then read the hymn out of the Penitential
   cries, beginning with

   My soul doth magnify the Lord, My spirit doth rejoice;'

   The whole hymn was deeply affecting to my feelings: but when these
   words were read,

   My sighs at length are turn'd to songs, The Comforter is come:'--

   So conscious was I of the joyful presence of the Holy Spirit, I could
   scarcely refrain from leaping with transports of joy. This happy frame
   of mind continued until two o'clock, when Mr. Williams came in, and we
   soon went to meeting. He preached on the subject of the assurance of
   faith. The whole sermon was affecting to me, but especially when he
   came to show the way in which assurance was obtained, and to point out
   its happy fruits. When I heard him say, that those who have assurance,
   have a foretaste of heavenly glory, I knew the truth of it from what I
   then felt: I knew that I then tasted the clusters of the heavenly
   Canaan: my soul was filled and overwhelmed with light, and love, and
   joy in the Holy Ghost, and seemed just ready to go away from the body.
   I could scarcely refrain from expressing my joy aloud, in the midst of
   the service. I had, in the mean time, an overwhelming sense of the
   glory of God, as the Great Eternal All, and of the happiness of having
   my own will entirely subdued to his will. I knew that the foretaste of
   glory, which I then had in my soul, came from him, that I certainly
   should go to him, and should, as it were, drop into the Divine Being,
   and be swallowed up in God.

   "After meeting was done, the congregation waited while Mr. Buell went
   home, to prepare to give them a lecture. It was almost dark before he
   came, and, in the mean time, I conversed in a very earnest and joyful
   manner, with those who were with me in the pew. My mind dwelt on the
   thought, that the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, and it appeared to me
   that he was going to set up a reign of love on the earth, and that
   heaven and earth were, as it were, coming together; which so
   exceedingly moved me that I could not forbear expressing aloud, to
   those near me, my exultation of soul. This subsided into a heavenly
   calm, and a rest of soul in God, which was even sweeter than what
   preceded it. Afterwards, Mr. Buell came and preached; and the same
   happy frame of mind continued during the evening, and night, and the
   next day. In the forenoon, I was thinking of the manner in which the
   children of God had been treated in the world--particularly of their
   being shut up in prison--and the folly of such attempts to make them
   miserable, seemed to surprise me. It appeared astonishing, that men
   should think, by this means, to injure those who had such a kingdom
   within them. Towards night being informed that Mrs. P----had expressed
   her fears lest I should die before Mr. Edwards's return, and he should
   think the people had killed his wife; I told those who were present,
   that I chose to die in the way that was most agreeable to God's will,
   and that I should be willing to die in darkness and horror, if it was
   most for the glory of God.

   "In the evening, I read those chapters in John, which contain Christ's
   dying discourse with his disciples, and his prayer with them. After I
   had done reading, and was in my retirement, a little before bed-time,
   thinking on what I had read, my soul was so filled with love to Christ,
   and love to his people, that I fainted under the intenseness of the
   feeling. I felt, while reading, a delightful acquiescence in the
   petition to the Father--I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of
   the world, but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil.' Though it
   seemed to me infinitely better to die to go to Christ, yet I felt an
   entire willingness to continue in this world so long as God pleased, to
   do and suffer what he would have me.

   "After retiring to rest and sleeping a little while, I awoke and had a
   very lively consciousness of God's being near me. I had an idea of a
   shining way, or path of light, between heaven and my soul, somewhat as
   on Thursday night, except that God seemed nearer to me, and as it were
   close by, and the way seemed more open, and the communication more
   immediate and more free. I lay awake most of the night, with a constant
   delightful sense of God's great love and infinite condescension, and
   with a continual view of God as near, and as my God. My soul remained,
   as on Thursday night, in a kind of heavenly elysium. Whether waking or
   sleeping, there was no interruption, throughout the night, to the views
   of my soul, to its heavenly light, and divine, inexpressible sweetness.
   It was without any agitation or motion of the body. I was led to
   reflect on God's mercy to me, in giving me, for many years, a
   willingness to die; and after that, for more than two years past, in
   making me willing to live, that I might do and suffer whatever he
   called me to here; whereas, before that, I often used to feel impatient
   at the thought of living. This then appeared to me, as it had often
   done before, what gave me much the greatest sense of thankfulness to
   God. I also thought how God had graciously given me, for a great while,
   an entire resignation to his will, with respect to the kind and manner
   of death that I should die; having been made willing to die on the
   rack, or at the stake, or any other tormenting death, and, if it were
   God's will, to die in darkness: and how I had that day been made very
   sensible and fully willing, if it was God's pleasure and for his glory,
   to die in horror. But now it occurred to me, that when I had thus been
   made willing to live, and to be kept on this dark abode, I used to
   think of living no longer than to the ordinary age of man. Upon this I
   was led to ask myself, Whether I was not willing to be kept out of
   heaven even longer; and my whole heart seemed immediately to reply,
   Yes, a thousand years, if it be God's will, and for his honour and
   glory:' and then my heart, in the language of resignation, went
   further, and with great alacrity and sweetness, to answer as it were
   over and over again, Yes, and live a thousand years in horror, if it be
   most for the glory of God: yea, I am willing to live a thousand years a
   hell upon earth, if it be most for the honour of God.' But then I
   considered with myself, What this would be, to live a hell upon earth,
   for so long a time; and I thought of the torment of my body being so
   great, awful, and overwhelming, that none could bear to live in the
   country where the spectacle was seen, and of the torment and horror of
   my mind being vastly greater than the torment of my body; and it seemed
   to me that I found a perfect willingness, and sweet quietness and
   alacrity of soul, in consenting that it should be so, if it were most
   for the glory of God; so that there was no hesitation, doubt, or
   darkness in my mind, attending the thoughts of it, but my resignation
   seemed to be clear, like a light that shone through my soul. I
   continued saying, Amen, Lord Jesus! Amen, Lord Jesus! glorify thyself
   in me, in my body and my soul,'--with a calm and sweetness of soul,
   which banished all reluctance. The glory of God seemed to overcome me
   and swallow me up, and every conceivable suffering, and every thing
   that was terrible to my nature, seemed to shrink to nothing before it.
   This resignation continued in its clearness and brightness the rest of
   the night, and all the next day, and the night following, and on Monday
   in the forenoon, without interruption or abatement. All this while,
   whenever I thought of it, the language of my soul was, with the
   greatest fulness and alacrity, Amen, Lord Jesus! Amen, Lord Jesus!' In
   the afternoon of Monday, it was not quite so perceptible and lively,
   but my mind remained so much in a similar frame, for more than a week,
   that I could never think of it without an inexpressible sweetness in my
   soul.

   "After I had felt this resignation on Saturday night, for some time as
   I lay in bed, I felt such a disposition to rejoice in God, that I
   wished to have the world join me in praising him; and was ready to
   wonder how the world of mankind could lie and sleep, when there was
   such a God to praise, and rejoice in, and could scarcely forbear
   calling out to those who were asleep in the house, to arise, and
   rejoice, and praise God. When I arose on the morning of the sabbath, I
   felt a love to all mankind, wholly peculiar in its strength and
   sweetness, far beyond all that I had ever felt before. The power of
   that love seemed to be inexpressible. I thought, if I were surrounded
   by enemies, who were venting their malice and cruelty upon me, in
   tormenting me, it would still be impossible that I should cherish any
   feelings towards them but those of love, and pity, and ardent desires
   for their happiness. At the same time I thought, if I were cast off by
   my nearest and dearest friends, and if the feelings and conduct of my
   husband were to be changed from tenderness and affection, to extreme
   hatred and cruelty, and that every day, I could so rest in God, that it
   would not touch my heart, or diminish my happiness. I could still go on
   with alacrity in the performance of every act of duty, and my happiness
   remain undiminished and entire.

   "I never before felt so far from a disposition to judge and censure
   others, with respect to the state of their hearts, their sincerity, or
   their attainments in holiness, as I did that morning. To do this,
   seemed abhorrent to every feeling of my heart. I realized also, in an
   unusual and very lively manner, how great a part of Christianity lies
   in the performance of our social and relative duties to one another.
   The same lively and joyful sense of spiritual and divine things
   continued throughout the day--a sweet love to God and all mankind, and
   such an entire rest of soul in God, that it seemed as if nothing that
   could be said of me, or done to me, could touch my heart, or disturb my
   enjoyment. The road between heaven and my soul seemed open and wide,
   all the day long; and the consciousness I had of the reality and
   excellence of heavenly things was so clear, and the affections they
   excited so intense, that it overcame my strength, and kept my body weak
   and faint, the great part of the day, so that I could not stand or go
   without help. The night also was comforting and refreshing.

   "This delightful frame of mind was continued on Monday. About noon, one
   of the neighbours who was conversing with me, expressed himself thus,
   One smile from Christ is worth a thousand million pounds,' and the
   words affected me exceedingly, and in a manner which I cannot express.
   I had a strong sense of the infinite worth of Christ's approbation and
   love, and at the same time of the grossness of the comparison; and it
   only astonished me, that any one could compare a smile of Christ to any
   earthly treasure.--Towards night, I had a deep sense of the awful
   greatness of God, and felt with what humility and reverence we ought to
   behave ourselves before him. Just then Mr. W ----came in, and spoke
   with a somewhat light, smiling air, of the flourishing state of
   religion in the town; which I could scarcely bear to see. It seemed to
   me, that we ought greatly to revere the presence of God, and to behave
   ourselves with the utmost solemnity and humility, when so great and
   holy a God was so remarkably present, and to rejoice before him with
   trembling.--In the evening, these words, in the Penitential Cries,--The
   Comforter is come!'--were accompanied to my soul with such conscious
   certainty, and such intense joy, that immediately it took away my
   strength, and I was falling to the floor; when some of those who were
   near me caught me and held me up. And when I repeated the words to the
   by-standers, the strength of my feelings was increased. The name--The
   Comforter'--seemed to denote that the Holy Spirit was the only and
   infinite Fountain of comfort and joy, and this seemed real and certain
   to my mind. These words--the comforter'--seemed as it were immensely
   great, enough to fill heaven and earth.

   "On Tuesday after dinner, Mr. Buell, as he sat at table, began to
   discourse about the glories of the upper world; which greatly affected
   me, so as to take away my strength. The views and feelings of the
   preceding evening, respecting the Great Comforter, were renewed in the
   most lively and joyful manner; so that my limbs grew cold, and I
   continued to a considerable degree overcome for about an hour,
   earnestly expressing to those around me, my deep and joyful sense of
   the presence and divine excellence of the Comforter, and of the glories
   of heaven.

   "It was either on Tuesday or Wednesday, that Mr. W ----came to the
   house, and informed what account Mr. Lyman, who was just then come from
   Leicester, on his way from Boston, gave of Mr. Edwards's success, in
   making peace and promoting religion at Leicester. The intelligence
   inspired me with such an admiring sense of the great goodness of God,
   in using Mr. Edwards as the instrument of doing good, and promoting the
   work of salvation, that it immediately overcame me, and took away my
   strength, so that I could no longer stand on my feet. On Wednesday
   night, Mr. Clark, coming in with Mr. Buell and some of the people,
   asked me how I felt. I told him that I did not feel at all times alike,
   but this I thought I could say, that I had given up all to God; and
   there is nothing like it, nothing like giving all up to him, esteeming
   all to be his, and resigning all at his call. I told him that, many a
   time within a twelvemonth, I had asked myself when I lay down, How I
   should feel, if our house and all our property in it should be burnt
   up, and we should that night be turned out naked; whether I could
   cheerfully resign all to God; and whether I so saw that all was his,
   that I could fully consent to his will, in being deprived of it? and
   that I found, so far as I could judge, an entire resignation to his
   will, and felt that, if he should thus strip me of every thing, I had
   nothing to say, but should, I thought, have an entire calm and rest in
   God, for it was his own, and not mine. After this, Mr. Phelps gave us
   an account of his own feelings, during a journey from which he had just
   returned; and then Mr. Pomeroy broke forth in the language of joy, and
   thankfulness, and praise, and continued speaking to us nearly an hour,
   leading us all the time to rejoice in the visible presence of God, and
   to adore his infinite goodness and condescension. He concluded by
   saying, I would say more if I could; but words were not made to express
   these things.' This reminded me of the words of Mrs. Rowe:

   More I would speak, but all my words are faint: Celestial Love, what
   eloquence can paint? No more, by mortal words, can be expressed; But
   vast Eternity shall tell the rest:'

   And my former impressions of heavenly and divine things were renewed
   with so much power, and life, and joy, that my strength all failed me,
   and I remained for some time faint and exhausted. After the people had
   retired, I had a still more lively and joyful sense of the goodness and
   all-sufficiency of God, of the pleasure of loving him, and of being
   alive and active in his service, so that I could not sit still, but
   walked the room for some time, in a kind of transport. The
   contemplation was so refreshing and delightful, so much like a heavenly
   feast within the soul, that I felt an absolute indifference as to any
   external circumstances; and, according to my best remembrance, this
   enlivening of my spirit continued so, that I slept but little that
   night.

   "The next day, being Thursday, between ten and eleven o'clock, and a
   room full of people being collected, I heard two persons give a minute
   account of the enlivening and joyful influences of the Holy Spirit on
   their own hearts. It was sweet to me to see others before me in their
   divine attainments, and to follow after them to heaven. I thought I
   should rejoice to follow the negro servants in the town to heaven.
   While I was thus listening, the consideration of the blessed
   appearances there were of God's being there with us, affected me so
   powerfully, that the joy and transport of the preceding night were
   again renewed. After this they sang a hymn, which greatly moved me,
   especially the latter part of it, which speaks of the ungratefulness of
   not having the praises of Christ always on our tongues. Those last
   words of the hymn seemed to fasten on my mind, and as I repeated them
   over, I felt such intense love to Christ, and so much delight in
   praising him, that I could hardly forbear leaping from my chair and
   singing aloud for joy and exultation. I continued thus extraordinarily
   moved until about one o'clock, when the people went away."

   I am well aware, that very different views will be formed of the
   preceding narrative, by different individuals. Those who have no
   conception of what is meant by the religion of the heart, will
   doubtless pronounce it the offspring of a diseased body, or a
   distempered brain. Others, who profess the religion of Christ, but
   whose minds usually come in contact with nothing which is not merely
   palpable--with nothing but what they can either see, or hear, or feel,
   or taste--will probably regard it as the effect of mere enthusiasm.
   While others, who are both more intellectual and more spiritual in
   their objects of contemplation, will at once perceive that the state of
   mind therein described, is one to which they themselves are chiefly or
   wholly strangers; and will therefore very naturally and rationally wish
   to learn somewhat more minutely the circumstances of the individual,
   who was the subject of these spiritual discoveries, as well as their
   actual effect upon her character. On these points, the testimony of Mr.
   Edwards is full and explicit; and from his authority we state the
   following facts.

   At this time, Mrs. Edwards had been long, in an uncommon manner,
   growing in grace, and rising by very sensible degrees to higher love to
   God, weanedness from the world, and mastery over sin and temptation,
   through great trials and conflicts, and long-continued struggling and
   fighting with sin, and earnest and constant prayer and labour in
   religion, and engagedness of mind in the use of all means, attended
   with a great exactness of life; and this growth had been attended not
   only with a great increase of religious affections, but with a most
   visible alteration of outward behaviour; particularly in living above
   the world, and in a greater degree of stedfastness and strength in the
   way of duty and self-denial: maintaining the christian conflict against
   temptations, and conquering from time to time under great trials;
   persisting in an unmoved, untouched calm and rest, under the changes
   and accidents of time, such as seasons of extreme pain and apparent
   hazard of immediate death. These transports did not arise from bodily
   weakness, but were greatest in the best state of health. They were
   accompanied with a lively sense of the greatness of God, and her own
   littleness and vileness; and had abiding effects in the increase of the
   sweetness, rest, and humility, which they left upon the soul, and in a
   new engagedness of heart to live to the honour of God, and to watch and
   fight against sin. They were attended with no enthusiastical
   disposition to follow impulses or supposed revelations, nor with any
   appearance of spiritual pride; but on the contrary with a very great
   increase of meekness and humility, and a disposition in honour to
   prefer others, as well as with a great aversion to judging others, and
   a strong sense of the importance of moral, social duties. They were
   accompanied with an extraordinary sense of the awful majesty of God, so
   as frequently to take away the bodily strength; with a sense of the
   holiness of God, as of a flame infinitely pure and bright, so as
   oftentimes to overwhelm soul and body, with an extraordinary view of
   the infinite terribleness of his wrath, of the exceeding sinfulness of
   her own heart, and of a desert of that wrath for ever; with an intense
   sorrow for sin, so as entirely to prostrate the strength of the body;
   with a clear certainty of the truth of the great things revealed in the
   gospel; with an overwhelming sense of the glory of the work of
   redemption, and the way of salvation by Jesus Christ, of the glorious
   harmony of the divine attributes appearing therein, as that wherein
   mercy and truth are met together, and righteousness and peace have
   kissed each other; with a sight of the glorious sufficiency of Christ,
   a constant immovable trust in God, an overwhelming sense of his
   glorious unsearchable wisdom, a sweet rejoicing at his being infinitely
   and unchangeably happy, independent, and all-sufficient, at his
   reigning over all, and doing his own will with uncontrollable power and
   sovereignty; with a delightful sense of the glory of the Holy Spirit as
   the great Comforter; with intense desires for the honour and glory of
   God's name, a clear and constant preference of it, not only to her own
   temporal interests, but to her spiritual comfort; with a willingness to
   live and die in spiritual darkness, if the honour of God required it, a
   great lamenting of ingratitude, intense longings and faintings after
   higher love to Christ, and greater conformity to him--particularly to
   be more perfect in humility and adoration; with great delight in
   singing praises to God and Jesus Christ, a desire that this present
   life might be one continued song of praise, and an overcoming pleasure
   at the thought of spending eternity in that exercise; with a living by
   faith in a very unusual manner; with a uniform distrust of her own
   strength, and a great dependence on God for help; with intense longings
   that all Christians might be fervent in love, and active in the service
   of God; with taking pleasure in watchfulness and toil, self-denial and
   bearing the cross; with a melting compassion for those who were in a
   state of nature, and for Christians under darkness, a universal
   benevolence to all mankind, a willingness to endure any suffering for
   the conversion of the impenitent--her compassion for them being often
   to that degree, that she could find no support nor rest, but in going
   to God and pouring out her soul in prayer for them; with earnest
   desires that the then existing work of Divine grace might be carried on
   with greater purity, and freedom from all bitter zeal, censoriousness,
   spiritual pride, and angry controversy, and that the kingdom of Christ
   might be established through the earth, as a kingdom of holiness,
   peace, and joy; with unspeakable delight in the thoughts of heaven, as
   a world of love, where love shall be the saints' eternal food, where
   they shall dwell in the light of love, and where the very air and
   breath will be nothing but love; with intense love to the people of
   God, as to those who will soon wear his perfect image; with earnest
   desires that others might love God better than herself, and attain to
   higher degrees of holiness; with a delight in conversing on the most
   spiritual and heavenly things in religion, often engaging in such
   conversation, with a degree of feeling too intense to be long endured;
   and with a lively sense of the importance of charity to the poor, as
   well as of the need which ministers have of the influences of the Holy
   Spirit, and earnest longings and wrestlings with God for them in
   prayer. She had also, according to Mr. Edwards, the greatest, fullest,
   longest continued, and most constant assurance of the favour of God,
   and of a title to future glory, that he ever saw any appearance of, in
   any person;--enjoying, especially near the time in which he made this
   statement, to use her own expression, the riches of Full Assurance; as
   well as an uninterrupted, entire resignation to God, with respect to
   health or sickness, ease or pain, life or death, and an entire
   resignation of the lives of her nearest earthly friends. These things
   were attended with a constant, sweet peace and serenity of soul,
   without a cloud to interrupt it, a continual rejoicing in all the works
   of nature and providence, a wonderful access to God by prayer, sensibly
   conversing with him, as much as if Christ were here on earth; frequent,
   plain, sensible, and immediate answers of prayer, all tears wiped away,
   all former troubles and sorrows of life forgotten, excepting sorrow for
   sin, doing every thing for God and his glory, doing it as the service
   of love, with a continual uninterrupted cheerfulness, peace, and joy.
   "O how good," she once observed, "is it to work for God in the day
   time, and at night to lie down under his smiles." Instead of slighting
   the means of grace in consequence of these discoveries, she was never
   more sensible of her need of instruction; instead of regarding herself
   as free from sin, she was led by her clearer sight of the Divine
   holiness, to perceive more fully the sinfulness of her own heart;
   instead of neglecting the business of life, she performed it with
   greater alacrity, as a part of the service of God--declaring that, when
   thus done, it was as delightful as prayer itself. At the same time, she
   discovered an extreme anxiety to avoid every sin, and to discharge
   every moral obligation, was most exemplary in the performance of every
   social and relative duty, exhibited great inoffensiveness of life and
   conversation, great meekness, gentleness, and benevolence of spirit,
   and avoided, with remarkable conscientiousness, all those things which
   she regarded as failings in her own character.

   To those who, after reading this statement of facts, still regard the
   preceding narrative as the offspring of enthusiasm, we shall draw our
   reply from Mr. Edwards himself: "Now if such things are enthusiasm, and
   the offspring of a distempered brain; let my brain be possessed
   evermore of that happy distemper! If this be distraction; I pray God
   that the world of mankind may all be seized with this benign, meek,
   beneficent, beatific, glorious distraction! What notion have they of
   true religion, who reject what has here been described? What shall we
   find to correspond with these expressions of Scripture, The peace of
   God, that passeth all understanding: Rejoicing with joy unspeakable,
   and full of glory: God's shining into our hearts, to give the light of
   the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ: With
   open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of God, and being changed
   into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
   Lord: Being called out of darkness into marvellous light: and having
   the day-star arise in our hearts? What, let me ask, if these things
   that have been mentioned do not correspond with these expressions; what
   else can we find that does correspond with them?"

   Mr. Edwards adds, that he had witnessed many instances, in Northampton
   and elsewhere, of other persons, which were in general of the same kind
   with these, though not so high in degree, in any instance; and, in many
   of them, not so pure and unmixed, or so well regulated. In some
   individuals, who discovered very intense religious affections, there
   was obviously a great mixture of nature with grace, and in some a sad
   degenerating of religious affections; yet, in most instances, they were
   uniform in their character, and obviously the result of fervent piety.

   That such full and clear discoveries of the Divine excellency and
   glory, as those recited in the preceding narrative, are uncommon, is
   unhappily too true: still they are far from being singular; for
   accounts of a similar nature may be found in the private diaries of men
   of distinguished piety, in almost every age of the church. [25] They
   are not however probably more uncommon, than are great attainments in
   piety; and, when enjoyed by those who have made such attainments,
   ought, in no respect, to be regarded as surprising. There is certainly
   in God a goodness and a glory, infinitely surpassing the comprehension
   of the highest created beings. This goodness and glory, which
   constitutes the Divine beauty and loveliness, God is able to reveal to
   the mind of every intelligent creature, as far as his faculties extend.
   If the mind, to which this revelation is made, has a supreme relish for
   holiness; the discovery of this spiritual beauty of the Divine mind
   will communicate to it an enjoyment, which is pure and heavenly in its
   nature; and the degree of this enjoyment, in every case, will be
   proportioned to the measure of the faculties, and to the fulness of the
   discovery. This is obviously true in the heavenly world. God there
   reveals his glory--not in all its infinite brightness: this, he cannot
   do to a created intelligence: he reveals it--in as strong an effulgence
   as the minds of saints and angels can endure. Were a revelation,
   equally clear and full, to be made to one of us here on earth, it would
   obviously overwhelm and destroy the life of the body; for John, even
   when he beheld the glorified body of Christ, fell at his feet as dead.
   In proportion as an individual is possessed of holiness, so much more
   near does he come to God, and so much more clear and distinct is his
   perception of his true character. "If a man love me," says Christ, "he
   will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
   him, and make our abode with him." Such discoveries of the Divine
   beauty and glory are therefore the promised reward, as well as the
   natural consequence, of distinguished holiness; and a well
   authenticated narrative, of the manner in which they were made, in a
   given instance, even if they were unusual in degree, instead of
   exciting our distrust or surprise, should lead us, with a noble
   emulation, to "press forward towards the mark, for the prize of the
   high calling of God in Christ Jesus."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [24] Probably the 91st Hymn of the 2d Book, beginning with "O the
   delights, the heavenly joys, The glories of the place."

   [25] As examples of this nature, the reader is referred to the writings
   of Flavel, L. Baxter, and Brainerd, and of Mr. Edwards himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XII.

   EXTENT OF THE REVIVAL OF 1740-1748--AUSPICIOUS OPENING--OPPOSED BY ITS
   ENEMIES: AND INJURED BY ITS FRIENDS--"THOUGHTS ON THE REVIVAL IN NEW
   ENGLAND"--ATTESTATIONS OF NUMEROUS MINISTERS--CAUSES OF ITS
   DECLINE--INFLUENCE OF MR. WHITEFIELD, MR. TENNENT, AND
   OTHERS--INFLUENCE OF MR. EDWARDS'S PUBLICATIONS IN SCOTLAND--GREAT
   REVIVAL OF RELIGION THERE--HIS CORRESPONDENTS IN THAT COUNTRY--LETTER
   TO MR. M'CULLOCH--ANSWER TO DO--LETTER FROM MR. ROBE.

   The reader can scarcely need to be informed, that the revival of
   religion, of which we have been speaking, was not confined to
   Northampton. It began there, and at Boston, and many other places, in
   1740, and in that, and the three following years, prevailed, to a
   greater or less degree, in more than one hundred and fifty
   congregations in New England, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania;
   as well as in a considerable number more, in Maryland and Virginia, in
   1744. At its commencement, it appears to have been, to an unusual
   degree, a silent, powerful, and glorious work of the Spirit of God--the
   simple effect of truth applied to the conscience, and accompanied by
   his converting grace. So auspicious indeed was the opening of this
   memorable work of God, and so rapid its progress, that the promised
   reign of Christ on the earth was believed, by many, to be actually
   begun. Had it continued of this unmixed character, so extensive was its
   prevalence, and so powerful its operation, it would seem that in no
   great length of time, it would have pervaded the western world. As is
   usual in such cases, it was opposed by the enemies of vital religion,
   and with a violence proportioned to its prevalence and power. But its
   worst enemies were found among its most zealous friends: and Mr.
   Edwards appear to have been early aware, that the measures too
   generally resorted to, by many of them, to extend its influence over
   the whole country, as well as throughout every town and village where
   it was actually begun, were only adapted to introduce confusion and
   disorder, as far as they prevailed. To check these commencing evils, if
   possible, and to bear his own testimony to the work as a genuine work
   of the Holy Spirit, he prepared and published his "Thoughts on the
   Revival of Religion in New England, in 1740." In this treatise, after
   presenting evidence most clear and convincing that the attention to
   religion, of which he speaks, was a glorious work of God, and showing
   the obligations which all were under, to acknowledge and promote it, as
   well as the danger of the contrary conduct; he points out various
   particulars in which its friends had been injuriously blamed, then
   exhibits the errors and mistakes into which they had actually fallen,
   and concludes by showing positively, what ought to be done to promote
   it. This work, which was published in 1742, excited a very deep
   interest in the American churches, and was immediately republished in
   Scotland. The author, from his uncommon acquaintance with the
   Scriptures, the soundness of his theological views, his intuitive
   discernment of the operations of the mind, his knowledge of the human
   heart both before and after its renovation by the Spirit of God, his
   familiarity with revivals of religion, his freedom from enthusiasm, and
   his utter aversion to extravagance and disorder, was admirably
   qualified to execute it in the happiest manner: and, from the time of
   its first publication, it has been, to a very wide extent, the common
   text-book of evangelical divines, on the subject of which it treats. If
   the reader will examine the various accounts of revivals of religion,
   he will find that no one of them, anterior to this, furnishes an
   explanation of the subject, in accordance with the acknowledged
   principles of mental philosophy.

   In 1743, about one hundred and sixty ministers published their
   attestations to this work, as in their own view a genuine work of the
   Spirit of God, and as having been extraordinary and remarkable; on
   account of the numbers who discovered a deep anxiety for their
   salvation; on account of its rapid progress from place to place; and on
   account of the power with which it was carried on. Yet, while they bear
   witness to the great numbers who appeared to have become real
   Christians, to the extensive reformation of morals which it occasioned,
   and to a greater prevalence of religion than they had before witnessed;
   many of them also regret the extravagances and irregularities, which in
   some places had been permitted to accompany it. Among these, they
   particularly point out--a disposition to make secret impulses on the
   mind a rule of duty laymen invading the ministerial office, and under a
   pretence of exhorting, setting up preaching--ministers invading each
   other's provinces--indiscreet young men rushing into particular places,
   and preaching on all occasions--unscriptural separations of churches,
   and of ministers from their churches--a rash judging of the religious
   state of others--and a controversial, uncharitable, and censorious
   spirit.

   There can be no doubt, that both parts of this statement are true.
   Although this most extensive work of grace opened on New England, in
   1740 and 1741, in a manner eminently auspicious; yet in the two
   following years, it assumed, in various places, a somewhat different
   aspect, and was unhappily marked with irregularity and disorder. This
   was doubtless owing, in some degree, to the fact, that many ministers
   of wisdom and sound discretion, not adverting sufficiently to the
   extent and importance of the apostolic exhortation, "Let all things be
   done decently and in order," either encouraged, or did not effectually
   suppress, outcries, falling down and swooning, in the time of public
   and social worship, the speaking and praying of women in the church and
   in mixed assemblies, the meeting of children by themselves for
   religious worship, and singing and praying aloud in the streets; but
   far more to the unrestrained zeal of a considerable number of misguided
   men--some of them preachers of the gospel, and others lay
   exhorters--who, intending to take Mr. Whitefield as their model,
   travelled from place to place, preaching and exhorting wherever they
   could collect an audience; pronounced definitively and unhesitatingly
   with respect to the piety of individuals, both ministers and private
   Christians; and whenever they judged a minister, or a majority of his
   church, destitute of piety--which they usually did, not on account of
   their false principles or their irreligious life, but for their want of
   an ardour and zeal equal to their own--advised, in the one case, the
   whole church to withdraw from the minister; and in the other, a
   minority to separate themselves from the majority, and to form a
   distinct church and congregation. This indiscreet advice had, at times,
   too much influence, and occasioned in some places the sundering of
   churches and congregations, in others the removal of ministers, and in
   others the separation of individuals from the communion of their
   brethren. It thus introduced contentions and quarrels into churches and
   families, alienated ministers from each other, and from their people,
   and produced, in the places where these consequences were most
   discernible, a wide-spread and riveted prejudice against revivals of
   religion. It is deserving perhaps of inquiry, Whether the subsequent
   slumber of the American church, for nearly seventy years, may not be
   ascribed, in an important degree, to the fatal re-action of these
   unhappy measures.

   There can be no doubt that on Mr. Whitefield (although by his
   multiplied and successful labours he was the means of incalculable good
   to the churches of America, as well as to those of England and
   Scotland) these evils are, to a considerable degree, to be charged, as
   having first led the way in this career of irregularity and disorder.
   He did not go as far as some of his followers; but he opened a wide
   door, and went great lengths, in these forbidden paths; and his
   imitators, having less discretion and experience, ventured, under the
   cover of his example, even beyond the limits which he himself was
   afraid to pass. His published journals show, that he was accustomed to
   decide too authoritatively, whether others, particularly ministers,
   were converted; as well as to insist that churches ought to remove
   those, whom they regarded as unconverted ministers; and that individual
   Christians or minorities of churches, where a majority refused to do
   this, were bound to separate themselves. Mr. Edwards, wholly
   disapproving of this conduct, conversed with Mr. Whitefield freely, in
   the presence of others, about his practice of pronouncing ministers,
   and other members of the christian church, unconverted; and declares
   that he supposed him to be of the opinion, that unconverted ministers
   ought not to be continued in the ministry; and that he supposed that he
   endeavoured to propagate this opinion, and a practice agreeable
   thereto. The same may be said, in substance, of Mr. G. Tennent, Mr.
   Finley, and Mr. Davenport, all of whom became early convinced of their
   error, and with christian sincerity openly acknowledged it. At the same
   time, while these things were to be regretted in themselves, and still
   more so in their unhappy consequences, the evidence is clear that, in
   far the greater number of places, these irregularities and disorders,
   if in any degree prevalent, were never predominant; and that the
   attention to religion in these places, while it continued, was most
   obviously a great and powerful work of the Spirit of God. The testimony
   of the ministers of those places, on these points, is explicit. It is
   given with great caution, and with the utmost candour; it acknowledges
   frankly the evils then experienced; and it details the actual moral
   change wrought in individuals and in society at large, in such a
   manner, that no one, who believes in regeneration as the work of the
   Holy Spirit, can doubt that this change was effected by the finger of
   God.

   Though the attention to religion, at this period, was more powerful and
   more universal at Northampton, than in almost any other congregation,
   there was yet scarcely one in which so few of these evils were
   experienced. The reason was, that their spiritual guide had already
   formed, in his own mind, settled principles respecting a genuine
   revival of religion--as to its cause, its nature, and in the most
   important points, as to the manner in which it was to be treated. He
   regarded it as caused--not by appeals to the feelings or the passions,
   but--by the truth of God brought home to the mind, in a subordinate
   sense by the preaching of the gospel, but in a far higher sense by the
   immediate agency of the Holy Spirit. He considered such an event, so
   far as man is concerned, as the simple effect of a practical attention
   to truth, on the conscience and the heart. He felt it to be his great,
   and in a sense his only, duty, therefore, to urge divine truth on the
   feelings and consciences of his hearers, with all possible solemnity
   and power. How he in fact urged it, his published sermons will show.

   Yet even in Northampton many things occurred, which not only were
   deviations from decorum and good sense, but were directly calculated,
   as far as they prevailed, to change that which, in its commencement,
   was, to an uncommon degree, a silent and powerful work of Divine grace,
   into a scene of confusion and disorder. This was owing chiefly to
   contagion from without. "The former part of the revival of religion, in
   1740 and 1741, seemed to be much more pure, having less of a corrupt
   mixture than in that of 1735 and 1736.--But in 1742, it was otherwise:
   the work continued more pure till we were infected from abroad. Our
   people hearing of, and some of them seeing, the work in other places,
   where there was a greater visible commotion than here, and the outward
   appearances were more extraordinary, their eyes were dazzled with the
   high professions and great show that some made, who came in hither from
   other places. That these people went so far before them in raptures and
   violent emotions of the affections, and a vehement zeal, and what they
   called boldness for Christ, our people were ready to think was owing to
   far greater attainments in grace and intimacy with heaven. These things
   had a strange influence on the people, and gave many of them a deep and
   unhappy tincture, from which it was a hard and long labour to deliver
   them, and from which some of them are not fully delivered to this day."

   In many parishes, where the attention to religion commenced in 1742, it
   was extensively, if not chiefly, of this unhappy character. This was
   particularly true in the eastern part of Connecticut, and in the
   eastern and southeastern part, and some of the more central parishes,
   of Massachusetts. Churches and congregations were torn asunder, many
   ministers were dismissed, churches of a separatical character were
   formed, the peace of society was permanently broken up, and a revival
   of religion became extensively, in the view of the community, another
   name for the prevalence of fanaticism, disorder, and misrule. This
   unhappy and surprising change should prove an everlasting beacon to the
   church of God.

   I have already had occasion to remark, that the "Narrative of
   Surprising Conversions" was repeatedly published, and extensively
   circulated, throughout England and Scotland. The same was true of Mr.
   Edwards's Five Sermons preached during the revival of religion in
   1734-5, and of his discourse on "the Distinguishing Marks of a Work of
   the Spirit of God." The effect of these publications, particularly of
   the first, was in the latter country great and salutary. The eyes both
   of ministers and Christians were extensively opened to the fact, that
   an effusion of the Spirit, resembling in some good degree those
   recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, might take place, and might
   rationally be expected to take place, in modern times, in consequence
   of the direct and powerful application of similar means. Scotland was
   at that time favoured with the labours of many clergymen, greatly
   respected for their piety and talents; among whom were the Rev. William
   M'Culloch of Cambuslang, the Rev. John Robe of Kilsyth, the Rev. John
   M'Laurin of Glasgow, the Rev. Thomas Gillespie of Carnock, the Rev.
   John Willison of Dundee, and the Rev. John Erskine of Kirkintillock,
   afterwards Dr. Erskine of Edinburgh. These gentlemen, and many of their
   associates in the ministry, appear, at the time of which we are
   speaking, to have preached, not only with great plainness and fervency,
   but with the strongest confidence of immediate and great success; and,
   as a natural consequence, the church of Scotland soon witnessed a state
   of things, to which she had long been a stranger.

   In February, 1742, a revival of religion began at Cambuslang, the
   parish of Mr. M'Culloch, four miles from Glasgow, resembling in its
   power and rapidity, and the number of conversions, that in Northampton,
   in 1734-5; and in the course of that year, scenes of a similar nature
   were witnessed in Kilsyth, Glasgow, Dundee, Carnock, Kirkintillock,
   Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and upwards of thirty towns and villages, in
   various parts of that kingdom. Thus the darkness which covers the earth
   was dispersed, for a season, from over these two countries, and the
   clear light of heaven shone down upon them, with no intervening cloud.
   In such circumstances, it might naturally be expected, that the
   prominent clergymen in both, feeling a common interest, and being
   engaged in similar labours, would soon open a mutual correspondence.

   The first of Mr. Edwards's correspondents in Scotland, was the Rev. Mr.
   M'Laurin of Glasgow; but, unfortunately, I have been able to procure
   none of the letters which passed between them. That gentleman, in the
   early part of 1743, having informed Mr. Edwards that his friend, Mr.
   M'Culloch of Cambuslang, had intended to write to him with a view of
   offering a correspondence, but had failed of the expected opportunity;
   Mr. Edwards addressed to the latter the following letter.

   "To the Rev. William M'Culloch, Cambuslang.

   Northampton, May 12, 1743.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Mr. M'Laurin of Glasgow, in a letter he has lately sent me, informs me
   of your proposing to write a letter to me, and of your being prevented
   by the failing of the expected opportunity. I thank you Rev. Sir, that
   you had such a thing in your heart. We were informed last year, by the
   printed and well attested narrative, of the glorious work of God in
   your parish; which we have since understood has spread into many other
   towns and parishes in that part of Scotland; especially are we informed
   of this by Mr. Robe's Narrative, and I perceive by some papers of the
   Weekly History, sent me by Mr. M'Laurin of Glasgow, that the work has
   continued to make glorious progress at Cambuslang, even till it has
   prevailed to a wonderful degree indeed. God has highly favoured and
   honoured you, dear Sir, which may justly render your name precious to
   all that love our Lord Jesus Christ. We live in a day wherein God is
   doing marvellous things: in that respect, we are distinguished from
   former generations. God has wrought great things in New England, which,
   though exceedingly glorious, have all along been attended with some
   threatening clouds; which, from the beginning, caused me to apprehend
   some great stop or check to be put to the work, before it should be
   begun and carried on in its genuine purity and beauty, to subdue all
   before it, and to prevail with an irresistible and continual progress
   and triumph; and it is come to pass according to my apprehensions. But
   yet I cannot think otherwise, than that what has now been doing, is the
   forerunner of something vastly greater, more pure, and more extensive.
   I can't think that God has come down from heaven, and done such great
   things before our eyes, and gone so much beside and beyond his usual
   way of working, and wrought so wonderfully, and that he has gone away
   with a design to leave things thus. Who hath heard such a thing? Who
   hath seen such things? And will God, when he has wrought so
   wonderfully, and made the earth to bring forth in one day, bring to the
   birth and not cause to bring forth? And shall he cause to bring forth,
   and shut the womb? Isaiah lxvi. 8, 9.. I live upon the brink of the
   grave, in great infirmity of body, and nothing is more uncertain, than
   whether I shall live to see it: but, I believe God will revive his work
   again before long, and that it will not wholly cease till it has
   subdued the whole earth. But God is now going and returning to his
   place, till we acknowledge our offence, and, I hope, to humble his
   church in New England, and purify it, and so fit it for yet greater
   comfort, that he designs in due time to bestow upon it. God may deal
   with his church, as he deals with a particular saint; commonly, after
   his first comfort, the clouds return, and there is a season of
   remarkable darkness, and hiding of God's face, and buffetings of Satan;
   but all to fit for greater mercy; and as it was with Christ himself,
   who, presently after the heavens were opened above his head, and the
   Spirit was poured out upon him, and God wonderfully testified his love
   to him, was driven into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil forty
   days. I hope God will show us our errors, and teach us wisdom by his
   present withdrawings. Now in the day of adversity, we have time and
   cause to consider, and begin now to have opportunity to see, the
   consequences of our conduct. I wish that God's ministers and people,
   every where, would take warning by our errors, and the calamities that
   are the issue of them. I have mentioned several things, in my letters
   to Mr. M'Laurin and Mr. Robe; another I might have mentioned, that most
   evidently proves of ill consequence, that is, we have run from one
   extreme to another, with respect to talking of experiences; that
   whereas formerly there was too great a reservedness in this matter, of
   late many have gone to an unbounded openness, frequency, and constancy,
   in talking of their experiences, declaring almost every thing that
   passes between God and their own souls, every where and before every
   body. Among other ill consequences of such a practice, this is one,
   that religion runs all into that channel; and religion is placed very
   much in it, so that the strength of it seems to be spent in it; that
   other duties, that are of vastly greater importance, have been looked
   upon as light in comparison of this, so that other parts of religion
   have been really much injured thereby: as when we see a tree
   excessively full of leaves, we find so much less fruit; and when a
   cloud arises with an excessive degree of wind, we have the less rain.
   How much, dear Sir, does God's church at such a day need the constant
   gracious care and guidance of our good Shepherd; and especially, we
   that are ministers.

   I should be glad, dear Sir, of a remembrance in your prayers, and also
   of your help, by informations and instructions, by what you find in
   your experience in Scotland. I believe it to be the duty of one part of
   the church of God thus to help another.

   I am, dear Sir, your affectionate

   Brother and servant in Jesus Christ,

   jonathan edwards."

   The following is the answer of Mr. M'Culloch to the preceding letter.

   "Cambuslang, Aug. 13, 1743.

   rev. and dear sir,

   The happy period in which we live, and the times of refreshing from the
   presence of the Lord, wherewith you first were visited, in Northampton,
   in the year 1734; and then, more generally, in New England, in 1740,
   and 1741; and then we, in several places in Scotland, in 1742, and
   1743; and the strong opposition made to this work, with you and with
   us, checked by an infinitely superior power; often brings to my mind
   that prophecy, Isa. lix.19. "So shall they fear the name of the Lord
   from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy
   shall come in as a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
   standard against him." I cannot help thinking that this prophecy
   eminently points at our times; and begins to be fulfilled in the
   multitudes of souls that are bringing in to fear the Lord, to worship
   God in Christ, in whom his name is, and to see his glory in his
   sanctuary. And it is, to me, pretty remarkable, that the prophet here
   foretells they should do so, in the period he points at, not from east
   to west, but from west to east; mentioning the west before the east,
   contrary to the usual way of speaking in other prophecies, as where
   Malachi foretells, that the name of the Lord should be great among the
   Gentiles, from the rising of the sun to the west, (Mal. i. 11.) and our
   Lord Jesus, that many should come from the east and west, &c. (Matt.
   viii. 11.) And in this order it was, that the light of the gospel came
   to dawn on the several nations, in the propagation of it through the
   world. But the prophet here, under the conduct of the Holy Spirit, who
   chooses all his words in infinite wisdom, puts the west before the
   east; intending, as I conceive, thereby to signify, that the glorious
   revival of religion, and the wide and diffusive spread of vital
   Christianity, in the latter times of the gospel, should begin in the
   more westerly parts, and proceed to these more easterly. And while it
   should be doing so, or shortly after, great opposition should arise,
   the enemy should come in as a flood: Satan should, with great violence,
   assault particular believing souls; and stir up men to malign and
   reproach the work of God; and, it's likely also, raise a terrible
   persecution against the church. But while the enemy might seem, for a
   time, to be thus carrying all before him, the Spirit of the Lord should
   lift up a standard against him; give a banner to them that fear him,
   and animate them to display it for the truth, and make his word
   mightily to prevail, and bear down all opposing power. For on what side
   soever the Almighty and Eternal Spirit of Jehovah lifts up a standard,
   there the victory is certain; and we may be sure he will lift it up in
   defence of his own work. The Chaldee paraphrase makes the words in the
   latter part of this verse, to allude to the river Euphrates, when it
   breaks over all its banks, and overflows the adjacent plains: thus when
   persecutors shall come in, as the inundation of the river Euphrates,
   they shall be broke in pieces by the word of the Lord.

   The whole of this verse seems to me to have an aspect to the present
   and past times, for some years. The Sun of righteousness has been
   making his course from west to east, and shedding his benign and
   quickening influences, on poor forlorn and benighted souls, in places
   vastly distant from one another. But clouds have arisen and intercepted
   his reviving beams. The enemy of salvation has broke in as an
   overflowing flood, almost overwhelmed poor souls, newly come into the
   spiritual world, after they had got some glimpse of the glory of
   Christ, with a deluge of temptations; floods of ungodly men, stirred up
   by Satan, and their natural enmity at religion, have affrighted them;
   mistaken and prejudiced friends have disowned them. Many such things
   have already befallen the subjects of this glorious work of God of late
   years. But I apprehend more general and formidable trials are yet to
   come: and that the enemy's coming in as a flood, may relate to a flood
   of errors or persecutions of fierce enemies, rushing in upon the church
   and threatening to swallow her up. But our comfort is, that the Spirit
   of the Lord of hosts will lift up a standard, against all the combined
   powers of earth and hell, and put them to flight; and Christ having
   begun to conquer, so remarkably, will go on from conquering to conquer,
   till the whole earth be filled with his glory. Rev. xii. 15. Isa. xvii.
   12, 13.

   I mention these things, dear Sir, not for your information, for I know
   that I can add nothing to you; but to show my agreement with you, in
   what you express as your sentiments, that what has now been a doing is
   the forerunner of something vastly greater, more pure, and more
   extensive, and that God will revive his work again, ere long, and that
   it will not wholly cease, till it has subdued the whole earth: and,
   without pretending to prophecy, to hint a little at the ground of my
   expectations. Only I'm afraid (which is a thing you do not hint at)
   that before these glorious times, some dreadful stroke or trial may yet
   be abiding us. May the Lord prepare us for it. But as to this, I cannot
   and dare not peremptorily determine. All things I give up to farther
   light, without pretending to fix the times and seasons for God's great
   and wonderful works, which he has reserved in his own power, and the
   certain knowledge of which he has locked up in his own breast."

   The same conveyance brought Mr. Edwards the following letter, from the
   Rev. Mr. Robe, of Kilsyth.

   "Kilsyth, Aug. 16, 1743.

   rev. sir, and very dear brother,

   We acknowledge, with praise and thanks, the Lord's keeping his work
   hitherto, with us, free from those errors and disorders, which, through
   the subtilty of the serpent, and corruptions even of good men, were
   mixed with it in New England. As this was no more just ground of
   objection against what was among you, being a real work of the Holy
   Spirit, than the same things were against the work of God in Corinth,
   and other places, at the first conversion of the pagans, and afterwards
   at the reformation from popery; so the many adversaries to this blessed
   work here, have as fully made use of all those errors, disorders, and
   blemishes, against it there, as objections, as if they had really been
   here. The most unseasonable accounts from America, the most scurrilous
   and bitter pamphlets, and representations from mistaking brethren, were
   much and zealously propagated. Only it was overruled by Providence,
   that those letters and papers dropped what was a real testimony to the
   goodness of the work they designed to defame and render odious. Many
   thinking persons concluded, from the gross calumnies forged and spread
   against the Lord's work here, within a few miles of them, that such
   stories from America could not be much depended on.

   What you write about the trial of extraordinary joys and raptures, by
   their concomitants and effects, is most solid; and our practice, by all
   I know, hath been conformable to it. It hath been in the strongest
   manner declared, that no degree of such rapturous joys evidenced them
   to be from God, unless they led to God, and carried with them those
   things which accompany salvation. Such conditional applications of the
   promises of grace and glory as you justly recommend, hath been all
   along our manner. A holy fear of caution and watchfulness, hath been
   much pressed upon the subjects of this work, who appeared to believe
   through grace. And what is greatly comfortable, and reason of great
   praise to our God, is, that there is, as is yet known to any one in
   these bounds, no certain instance of what can be called apostacy; and
   not above four instances of any who have fallen into any gross sin.

   As to the state and progress of this blessed work here, and in other
   places, it is as followeth. Since the account given in the several
   prints of my Narrative, which I understand is or will be at Boston; the
   awakening of secure sinners hath and doth continue in this
   congregation; but not in such multitudes as last year, neither can it
   be reasonably expected. What is ground of joy and praise is, that there
   scarce hath been two or three weeks, but wherein I have some instance
   of persons newly awakened, besides several come to my knowledge who
   have been awakened, and appear in a most hopeful state, before they
   were known to me. Of which I had an instance yesterday, of a girl
   awakened, as she saith, in October last. I have, at writing this, an
   instance of a woman who appears to have obtained a good issue of her
   awakening last year; though I supposed it had come to nothing, through
   her intermitting to come to me of a long time. There is this difference
   in this parish betwixt the awakening last year and now; that some of
   their bodies have been affected by their fears, in a convulsive or
   hysteric way; and yet the inward distress of some of them hath been
   very sharp. I have seen two or three, who have fainted under
   apprehension of the hiding of God's face, or of their having received
   the Lord's supper unworthily. In some of the neighbouring
   congregations, where this blessed work was last year, there are
   instances of discernible awakenings this summer. In the large parish of
   St. Ninians, to the north of this, I was witness to the awakening of
   some, and conversed with others awakened, the middle of July last. In
   the parish of Sintrie to the west of St. Ninians there were several
   newly awakened at the giving the Lord's supper, about the end of July.
   In Gargunnock, Kippen, Killern, farther north and west, the Lord's work
   is yet discernible. At Muthel, which is about twenty miles north from
   this, the minister wrote me about the middle of July, that this blessed
   work, which hath appeared there since last summer as at Cambuslang, yet
   continued; and hath spread into other parishes, and reacheth even to
   the Highlands bordering upon that parish.

   I am not without hopes of having good accounts of the outpouring of the
   Holy Spirit in the shires of Rosse and Nairn among the northernmost
   parts of Scotland. There was more than ordinary seriousness, in some
   parishes, in hearing the word, and in a concern about their souls, in
   the spring, when I saw some godly ministers from those bounds. This
   more than ordinary seriousness in hearing, and about communion times,
   is observable in several parts in Scotland, this summer. Societies for
   prayer setting up where there were none, and in other places
   increasing. A concern among the young are in some of the least hopeful
   places in Scotland, particularly in the Meuse near the English borders.
   There is a great likelihood of the Lord's doing good by the gospel, in
   this discernible way, in those bounds. Mr. M'Laurin, my dear brother,
   gives you an account of the progress of this work to the west of
   Glasgow, and other places. There have been very extraordinary
   manifestations of the love of God, in Christ Jesus, unto this people,
   in the use of the holy supper, and in the dispensation of the word
   about that time, this summer; which hath made the Lord's people desire
   it a second time in these congregations during the summer season. It
   was given here upon the first sabbath of July, and is to be given here
   next Lord's day, a second time, upon such a desire.

   Your affectionate brother and servant

   In our dearest Lord,

   james robe."
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XIII.

   FIRST INTERVIEW WITH DAVID BRAINERD--SEPARATIONS FROM CHURCHES--LETTER
   TO REV. MR. WHITMAN--CORRESPONDENCE WITH MR. CLAP--CHARACTER OF THAT
   GENTLEMAN--SERMON AT THE ORDINATION OF MR. ABERCROMBIE--LETTER TO MR.
   M'CULLOCH--VIEWS OF THE PROPHECIES RELATIVE TO THE CHURCH--SERMON AT
   THE ORDINATION OF MR. BUELL.

   In September, 1743, Mr. Edwards, while attending the public
   commencement at New-Haven, first became acquainted with David Brainerd,
   then a missionary at Kaunaumeek. Brainerd, when a sophomore in college,
   in consequence of some indiscreet remarks, uttered in the ardour of his
   religious zeal, respecting the opposition of two of the faculty to the
   preaching of Mr. Whitefield, but which a generous mind would have
   wholly disregarded, had been expelled from the college. As this was the
   commencement, at which his class were to receive the degree of A.B., he
   came to New-Haven to attempt a reconciliation with the faculty, and
   made to them a truly humble and christian acknowledgment of his fault.
   "I was witness," says Mr. Edwards, "to the very christian spirit which
   Brainerd showed at that time; being then at New-Haven, and one whom he
   thought fit to consult on that occasion. There truly appeared in him a
   great degree of calmness and humility; without the least appearance of
   rising of spirit for any ill-treatment which he supposed he had
   suffered, or the least backwardness to abase himself before those, who,
   as he thought, had wronged him. What he did was without any objection
   or appearance of reluctance, even in private to his friends, to whom he
   freely opened himself. Earnest application was made on his behalf, that
   he might have his degree then given him; and particularly by the Rev.
   Mr. Burr of Newark, one of the correspondents of the Honourable Society
   in Scotland; he being sent from New Jersey to New-Haven, by the rest of
   the commissioners, for that end; and many arguments were used, but
   without success. He desired his degree, as he thought it would tend to
   his being more extensively useful; but still, when he was denied it, he
   manifested no disappointment nor resentment."

   I have already alluded to the numerous separations of individual
   members, from the churches to which they belonged, which occurred about
   this period, and usually for the alleged want of piety, either of the
   minister or of the church. As these commonly took place without a
   regular dismission, it became a practical question of some interest,
   how the withdrawing members should be treated. Mr. Edwards, having been
   consulted on this subject, with reference to some of the members of the
   second church in Hartford, who had thus withdrawn, addressed the
   following letter to the minister of that church.

   "To the Rev. Elnathan Whitman, of Hartford, Connecticut.

   Northampton, Feb. 9, 1744.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Mr. P--was here this week, and requested my opinion, with respect to
   the proper treatment of a number of persons, who have absented
   themselves from your meeting, and have since attended public worship in
   W ----. I declined giving any opinion, except a very general one, to
   him; but, on reflection, have concluded to express my thoughts to you,
   as a friend, leaving you to attach to them such weight as you may see
   cause.

   "As to differences, among professing Christians, of opinion and
   practice, about things that appertain to religion, and the worship of
   God, I am ready to think that you and I are agreed, as to the general
   principles of liberty of conscience; and that men's using methods with
   their neighbours, to oblige them to a conformity to their sentiments or
   way, is in nothing so unreasonable, as in the worship of God; because
   that is a business, in which each person acts for himself, with his
   Creator and Supreme Judge, as one concerned for his own acceptance with
   him; and on which depends his own, and not his neighbour's, eternal
   happiness, and salvation from everlasting ruin. And it is an affair,
   wherein every man is infinitely more concerned with his Creator than he
   is with his neighbour. And so I suppose that it will be allowed, that
   every man ought to be left to his own conscience, in what he judges
   will be most acceptable to God, or what he supposes is the will of God,
   as to the kind, or manner, or means of worship, or the society of
   worshippers he should join with in worship. Not but that a great abuse
   may be made of this doctrine of liberty of conscience in the worship of
   God. I know that many are ready to justify every thing in their own
   conduct, from this doctrine, and I do not suppose that men's pretence
   of conscience is always to be regarded, when made use of to justify
   their charging the society of worshippers they unite with, or the means
   of their worship, or indeed the kind or manner of their worship. Men
   may make this pretence at times under such circumstances, that they
   may, obviously, be worthy of no credit in what they pretend. It may be
   manifest from the nature and circumstances of the case, and their own
   manner of behaviour, that it is not conscience, but petulancy, and
   malice, and wilfulness, and obstinacy, that influence them. And,
   therefore, it seems to me evident, that, when such pleas are made,
   those that are especially concerned with them as persons that are
   peculiarly obliged to take care of their souls, have no other way to
   do, but to consider the nature and circumstances of the case, and from
   thence to judge whether the case be such as will admit of such a plea,
   or whether the nature of things will admit of such a supposition, that
   the men act conscientiously in what they do, considering all things
   that appertain to the case. And in this, I conceive, many things are to
   be considered and laid together, as--the nature of that thing is the
   subject of controversy, or wherein they differ from others, or have
   changed their own practice--the degree in which it is disputable, or
   how it may be supposed liable to diversity of opinion, one way or the
   other, as to its agreeableness to the word of God, and as to the
   importance of it, with regard to men's salvation or the good of their
   souls--the degree of knowledge or ignorance of the persons, the
   advantages they had for information, or the disadvantages they have
   been under, and what has been in their circumstances that might mislead
   the judgment--the principles that have been instilled into them--the
   instructions they have received from those, of whose piety and wisdom
   they have had a high opinion, which might misguide the judgment of
   persons of real honesty, and sincerity, and tender conscience--the
   example of others--the diversity of opinion among ministers--the
   general state of things in the land--the character of the persons
   themselves--and the manner of their behaviour in the particular affair
   in debate.

   Now, Sir, with regard to those persons that have gone from you, to
   W--however you may look upon their behaviour herein as very disorderly,
   yet, if you suppose (the case being considered with all its
   circumstances) that there was any room for charity, that it might be
   through infirmity, ignorance, and error of judgment, so that they might
   be truly conscientious in it; that is, might really believe it to be
   their duty, and what God required of them, to do as they have done; you
   would, I imagine, by no means think, that they ought to be proceeded
   with, in the use of such means as are proper to be used with
   contumacious offenders, or those that are stubborn and obstinate in
   scandalous vice and wilful wickedness; or that you would think it
   proper to proceed with persons, towards whom there is this room left
   for charity, that possibly they may be honest and truly conscientious,
   acting as persons afraid to offend God, so as to cut them off from the
   communion of the Lord, and cast them forth into the visible kingdom of
   Satan, to be as harlots and publicans.

   Now, it may be well to examine, whether it can positively be
   determined, when all things are taken into consideration with respect
   to these persons, who have absented themselves from your assembly, that
   it is not possible in their case, that this might really be their
   honest judgment, that it was their duty to do so, and that God required
   it of them, and that they should greatly expose the welfare of their
   own souls, in attending no other public worship but that in your
   congregation. I suppose these persons are not much versed in
   casuistical divinity. They are of the common people, whose judgments,
   in all nations and ages, are exceedingly led and swayed. They are not
   very capable of viewing things in the extent of their consequences, and
   of estimating things in their true weight and importance. And you know,
   dear Sir, the state that things have been in, in the country. You know
   what opinions have lately prevailed, and have been maintained and
   propagated, by those that have been lifted up to heaven, in their
   reputation for piety and great knowledge in spiritual things, with a
   great part of the people of New England. I do not pretend to know what
   has influenced these people, in particular; but I think, under these
   circumstances, it would be no strange thing, if great numbers of the
   common people in the country, who are really conscientious, and
   concerned to be accepted with God, and to take the best course for the
   good of their souls, should really think in their hearts that God
   requires them to attend the ministry of those that are called New Light
   Ministers, and that it would be dangerous to their souls, and what God
   approved not of, ordinarily to attend the ministry of others; yea, I
   should think it strange if it were otherwise. It ought to be
   considered, how public controversy, and a great and general cry in
   matters of religion, strongly influences the conduct of multitudes of
   the common people, how it blinds their minds, and wonderfully misleads
   their judgments. And the rules of the gospel, and the example of the
   apostles, most certainly require that great allowances be made in such
   cases. And particularly the example of the apostle Paul, with regard to
   great numbers of professing Christians, in the church of Corinth; who,
   in a time of great and general confusion in that church, through the
   evil instructions of teachers whom they admired, who misled and blinded
   their judgments, ran into many and great disorders in their worship,
   and woeful schisms and divisions among themselves--particularly with
   regard to ministers, and even with regard to the apostle Paul himself,
   whom many of them seem for a time to have forsaken, to follow others
   who set up themselves in opposition to him; though, as he says, he had
   been their father who begat them through the gospel. Yet with how much
   gentleness does the apostle treat them, still acknowledging them as
   brethren; and though he required church censures to be used with regard
   to the incestuous person, yet there is no intimation of the apostle
   taking any such course, with those that had been misled by these false
   teachers, or with any that had been guilty of these disorders, except
   with the false teachers themselves. But as soon as they are brought off
   from following these false apostles any longer, he embraces them
   without further ado, with all the love and tenderness of a father;
   burying all their censoriousness, and schisms, and disorders, at the
   Lord's supper, as well as their ill treatment of him, the extraordinary
   messenger of Christ to them. And, indeed, the apostle never so much as
   gave any direction for the suspension of any one member from the Lord's
   supper, on account of these disorders, or from any other part of the
   public worship of God; but instead of this, gives them directions how
   they shall go on to attend the Lord's supper, and other parts of
   worship, in a better manner. And he himself, without suspension or
   interruption, goes on to call and treat them as beloved brethren,
   Christians, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints; and
   praises God in their behalf, for the grace that is given to them by
   Christ Jesus; and often and abundantly exhibits his charity towards
   them, in innumerable expressions which I might mention. And nothing is
   more apparent than that he does not treat them as persons, with respect
   to whom there lies a bar in the way of others treating them with the
   charity that belongs to saints, and good and honest members of the
   christian church, until the bar be removed by a church process. And,
   indeed, the insisting on a church process with every member that has
   behaved disorderly, in such a state of general confusion, is not a way
   to build up the church of God, (which is the end of church discipline,)
   but to pull it down. It will not be the way to cure a diseased member,
   but to bring a disease on the whole body.

   I am not alone in these sentiments; but I have reason to think that
   Col. Stoddard, from the conversation I have had with him, is in the
   like way of thinking. There came hither, the last fall, two young men
   belonging to the church at New-Haven, who had been members of Mr.
   Noyes's church, but had left it and joined the separate church, and
   entered into covenant with it, when that church was embodied. This was
   looked upon as a crime, that ought not to be passed over, by Mr. Noyes
   and the rector. They declared themselves willing to return to Mr.
   Noyes's meeting; but a particular confession was required of them in
   the meeting-house. Accordingly, each of them had offered a confession,
   but it was not thought sufficient; but it was required that they should
   add some things, of which they thought hard; and they consulting me
   about it, I acquainted Col. Stoddard with the affair, and desired his
   thoughts. He said he looked upon it unreasonable to require any
   confession at all; and that, considering the general state of confusion
   that had existed, and the instructions and examples these young men had
   had, it might well be looked upon enough, that they were now willing to
   change their practice, and return again to Mr. Noyes's meeting. Not
   that you, Rev. Sir, are obliged to think as Col. Stoddard does; yet I
   think, considering his character and relation, his judgment may well be
   of so much weight, as to engage you the more to attend to and weigh the
   reasons he gives.

   The objections, that these persons may have had against ordinarily
   attending your meeting, may be very trivial; but yet I suppose that,
   through infirmity, the case may be so with truly honest Christians,
   that trivial things may have great weight in their consciences, so as
   to have fast hold of them, until they are better enlightened: as in the
   former times of the country, it was with respect to the controversy
   between presbyterians and congregationalists. It was, as I have heard,
   in those days real matter of question with some, whether a
   presbyterian, living and dying such, could be saved. Some
   presbyterians, that have lived with us, have desired baptism for their
   children, who yet lived in neglect of the ordinances of the Lord Jesus
   Christ, because of a difference in some trivial circumstances of the
   administration, from the method of the church of Scotland. This matter
   being discoursed of, it was thought by Col. Stoddard in particular,
   that their neglect ought to be borne with, and they ought to be looked
   upon as Christians, and their children received to baptism; because,
   however trivial the foundation of their scruples were, yet through
   ignorance they might be honest and conscientious in them.

   As to the church covenant, that these persons have entered into,
   wherein they have obliged themselves ordinarily to join in the worship
   of that church; I suppose none interpret the promises of a church
   covenant in such a sense, as to exclude all reserves of liberty, in
   case of an alteration of the judgment, in the affairs of conscience and
   religion, in one respect or another. As if a person, after
   incorporating with a congregational church, should become a
   conscientious episcopalian, or anabaptist, or should, by any change of
   judgment, come to think the means or manner of worship unlawful; and so
   in other respects that might be mentioned.

   And if it be so that these persons, in some of their conversation and
   behaviour, have manifested a contentious, froward spirit, at the time
   of their withdrawing from your church; I confess this gives greater
   ground of suspicion of the sincerity of their plea of conscience; yet,
   as to this, I humbly conceive allowances must be made. It must be
   considered, that it is possible that persons, in an affair of this
   nature, may, in the thing itself, be conscientious, and yet, in the
   course of the management of it, may be guilty of very corrupt mixtures
   of passion and every evil disposition; as indeed is commonly the case
   with men, in long controversies of whatever nature, and even with
   conscientious men. And therefore it appears to me, that if persons in
   such a case are not obstinate, in what is amiss in them in this
   respect, and don't attempt to justify their frowardness and unchristian
   speeches, they notwithstanding may deserve credit, when they profess
   themselves conscientious in the affair in general.

   Thus, dear Sir, I have freely communicated to you some of my thoughts,
   with regard to some of the concerns of this difficult day, which prove
   a trouble to you; not however with any aim at directing your conduct,
   but merely to comply with the request to which I have alluded. I am
   fully sensible, that I am not the pastor of the second church of
   Hartford; and I only desire you would impartially consider the reasons
   I have offered. Begging of Christ, our common Lord, that he would
   direct you in your theory and practice, to that which will be
   acceptable in his sight,

   I remain, Rev. Sir,

   Your friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   In May, 1743, Mr. Edwards went, as he often did, to Boston, to attend
   the convention of the clergy, which is held the day after the General
   Election. He was on horseback, and had his eldest daughter on a pillion
   behind him. At Brookfield, they fell in company with the Rev. Mr. Clap,
   rector of Yale College, his wife and son-in-law, also on horseback,
   with several others, all traveling in the same direction; and Mr.
   Edwards, joining the company, rode side by side with Mr. Clap, during a
   considerable part of the journey. At the commencement of Harvard
   college in the following year, 1744, Mr. Clap stated, before a large
   number of gentlemen, both at Boston and Cambridge, that, while riding
   through Leicester, in May of the year preceding, he was informed by Mr.
   Edwards, that Mr. Whitefield told him, "that he had the design of
   turning out of their places the greater part of the ministers of New
   England, and of supplying their pulpits with ministers from England,
   Scotland, and Ireland." This statement surprised those who heard it;
   yet, coming from such a source, it was believed, and extensively
   circulated. Mr. Edwards heard of it with astonishment, and without
   hesitation denied that he had said so. Mr. Clap, hearing of this
   denial, addressed a letter to Mr. Edwards, dated Oct. 12, 1744, in
   which he stated anew the alleged conversation, in the same terms; but
   before the latter received it, he had forwarded a letter to Mr. Clap,
   dated Oct. 18, 1744, showing him his mistake, and calling on him to
   correct it. On Oct. 29th, he wrote a reply to Mr. Clap's letter of the
   12th; and receiving another, dated Oct. 28th, before he sent it, he
   replied to that also in the postscript, under date of Nov. 3d. Mr.
   Clap, finding that Mr. Edwards's contradiction of his statement was
   believed; and having heard, though incorrectly, that Mr. Edwards was
   about to publish such a contradiction; incautiously published a letter
   to his friend in Boston, in which he not only re-asserted his former
   statement, but declared that Mr. Edwards, in his private correspondence
   with him on the subject, had made a declaration, equally full and
   strong, to the same point. Mr. Edwards published a reply, in a letter
   to his friend in Boston, dated Feb. 4, 1745; in which he gave his two
   letters of Oct. 18, and Oct. 29, with the postscript of Nov. 3; from
   which it appears that, instead of admitting the truth of Mr. Clap's
   statement, he had most explicitly and solemnly denied it; and, in order
   to show how Mr. Clap might have been led into the mistake, acknowledged
   that he himself supposed that Mr. Whitefield was formerly of the
   opinion, that unconverted ministers ought not to be continued in the
   ministry; and that he himself supposed that Mr. Whitefield endeavoured
   to propagate this opinion, and a practice agreeable to it; and that all
   he had ever stated to any one was, his own opinion merely, and not any
   declared design of Mr. Whitefield. He also admitted, that Mr.
   Whitefield told him he intended to bring over a number of young men, to
   be ordained by the Messrs. Tennents, in New Jersey. He then asks,
   whether this is the same thing as Mr. Clap asserted, and suggests a
   variety of arguments, which seem absolutely conclusive, that he could
   never have made such a statement.

   Mr. Clap, in reply to this, in a letter to Mr. Edwards, dated April 1,
   1745, enters seriously upon the task of showing that Mr. Edwards's
   assertion--"that Mr. Whitefield told him, that he intended to bring
   over a number of young men, to be ordained by the Messrs. Tennents, in
   New Jersey"--connected with the assertion--that Mr. Edwards himself
   supposed, that Mr. Whitefield was formerly of the opinion, that
   unconverted ministers ought not to be continued in the ministry, and
   that Mr. Edwards himself supposed that Mr. Whitefield endeavoured to
   propagate this opinion, and a practice agreeable to it--was equivalent
   to Mr. Edwards's saying, that Mr. Whitefield told him, "that he had the
   design of turning out of their places the greater part of the ministers
   of New England, and of supplying their places with ministers from
   England, Scotland, and Ireland."

   Mr. Edwards, in a letter to Mr. Clap, of May 20, 1745, after exposing
   in a few words the desperate absurdity of this attempt, enters on the
   discussion of the question--Whether he ever made such a statement to
   Mr. Clap?--with as much calmness as he afterwards exhibited in
   examining the question of a self-determining power; and with such
   logical precision of argument, that probably no one of his readers ever
   had a doubt left upon his mind, with regard to it;--no, not even his
   antagonist himself; for he never thought proper to attempt a reply; and
   in the public protest of the faculty of Yale college, against Mr.
   Whitefield, he and his associates in office say, in alluding to this
   very conversation, "You told the Rev. Mr. Edwards of Northampton, that
   you intended to bring over a number of young men from England, to be
   ordained by the Tennents." Those who have an opportunity of reading
   these communications, will find, in those of Mr. Edwards, an example of
   a personal controversy, conducted throughout, and to a very uncommon
   degree, in the spirit of the gentleman and the Christian.

   This occurred at a period of great excitement, when many ministers had
   been removed, and many churches rent asunder; and when the minds of men
   were of course prepared beforehand to believe every thing that favoured
   their own side of the question. Mr. Clap was in this case obviously
   mistaken; still he was truly a man of respectability and worth. He had
   a powerful mind, rich in invention, and stored with knowledge, was
   profoundly versed in mathematics, physics, and astronomy, as well as
   the principles of law, and proved an able instructor and governor of
   the institution over which he presided. He was elected by a board of
   trustees, exclusively Arminian in sentiment, and all his associates in
   office held the same tenets. At the same time, though he entered warmly
   into the controversy relative to Mr. Whitefield, from a full conviction
   that it was his design to occasion the separation of churches, and to
   procure as far as possible the ejectment of all whom he regarded as
   unconverted ministers; and was doubtless happy in supposing himself
   able to prove that such was his avowed design, on the testimony of one
   of his warmest friends; yet he was far from taking the low ground of
   orthodoxy assumed by many on the same side, but always adhered to the
   doctrines of grace, and ultimately became their champion. Some time
   after this, he showed his magnanimity, by introducing the Essay on the
   Freedom of the Will, as a classic in the college.

   In August, 1744, Mr. Edwards preached the sermon entitled, "The True
   Excellency of a Gospel Minister," at the ordination of Mr. Robert
   Abercrombie, to the ministry of the gospel, at Pelham. This gentleman
   was from Scotland, having been made known to Mr. Edwards by his
   correspondents in that country; and through his kind offices was
   introduced to the people at Pelham. The sermon was immediately
   published.

   The reader will probably recollect, that Mr. M'Culloch, in his letter
   of August 13, 1743, had expressed the opinion, that the church of God,
   previous to her ultimate extension and triumph, was destined to meet
   with "more extensive and formidable trials," than she had ever before
   experienced. Mr. Edwards, from a minute investigation of the scriptural
   prophecies, having been convinced that this, which was at that time the
   commonly received opinion of the church, was erroneous; expresses his
   dissent from it in the following answer.

   "To the Rev. Mr. M'Culloch.

   Northampton, March 5, 1744.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I return you thanks for your most obliging, entertaining, and
   instructive letter, dated Aug. 13, 1743, which I received about the
   latter end of October: my answering which has been unhappily delayed,
   by reason of my distance from Boston, and not being able to find any
   opportunity to send thither, till the ship was gone that brought your
   letter; which I much regretted. My delaying to answer has been far from
   arising from any indifference with respect to this correspondence, by
   which I am sensible I am highly honoured and privileged.

   "Tis probable that you have been informed, by other correspondents,
   before now, what the present state of things in New England is: it is,
   indeed, on many accounts very melancholy; there is a vast alteration
   within these two years; for about so long I think it is, since the
   Spirit of God began to withdraw, and this great work has been on the
   decline. Great numbers in the land, about two years ago, were raised to
   an exceedingly great height in joy and elevation of mind; and through
   want of watchfulness, and sensibleness of the danger and temptation
   that there is in such circumstances, many were greatly exposed, and the
   devil taking the advantage, multitudes were soon, and to themselves
   insensibly, led far away from God and their duty; God was provoked that
   he was not sanctified in this height of advancement, as he ought to
   have been; he saw our spiritual pride and self-confidence, and the
   polluted flames that arose of intemperate, unhallowed zeal; and he
   soon, in a great measure, withdrew from us; and the consequence has
   been, that the enemy has come in like a flood, in various respects,
   until the deluge has overwhelmed the whole land. There had from the
   beginning been a great mixture, especially in some places, of false
   experiences, and false religion with true; but from about this time,
   the mixture became much greater, many were led away with sad delusions;
   and this opened the door for the enemy to come in like a flood in
   another respect, it gave great advantages to these enemies and opposers
   of this work, furnished them with weapons and gave them new courage,
   and has laid the friends of the work under such disadvantage, that
   nothing that they could do would avail any thing to withstand their
   violence. And now it is come to that, that the work is put to a stop
   every where, and it is a day of the enemy's triumph; but I believe also
   a day of God's people's humiliation, which will be better to them in
   the end than their elevations and raptures. The time has been amongst
   us when the sower went forth to sow, and we have seen the spring
   wherein the seed sprang up in different sorts of ground, appearing then
   fair and flourishing; but this spring is past, and we now see the
   summer, wherein the sun is up with a burning heat, that tries the sorts
   of ground; and now appears the difference, the seed in stony ground,
   where there was only a thin layer of earth on a rock, withers away, the
   moisture being dried out; and the hidden seeds and roots of thorns, in
   unsubdued ground, now spring up and choke the seed of the word. Many
   high professors are fallen, some into gross immoralities, some into a
   rooted spiritual pride, enthusiasm, and an incorrigible wildness of
   behaviour, some into a cold frame of mind, showing a great indifference
   to the things of religion. But there are many, and I hope those the
   greater part of those that were professed converts, who appear hitherto
   like the good ground, and notwithstanding the thick and dark clouds,
   that so soon follow that blessed sunshine that we have had; yet I
   cannot but stedfastly maintain a hope and persuasion that God will
   revive his work, and that what has been so great and very
   extraordinary, is a forerunner of a yet more glorious and extensive
   work.--It has been slanderously reported and printed concerning me,
   that I have often said, that the Millennium was already begun, and that
   it began at Northampton. A doctor of divinity in New England has
   ventured to publish this report to the world, from a single person, who
   is concealed and kept behind the curtain: but the report is very
   diverse from what I have ever said. Indeed I have often said, as I say
   now, that I looked upon the late wonderful revivals of religion as
   forerunners of those glorious times so often prophesied of in the
   Scripture, and that this was the first dawning of that light, and
   beginning of that work, which, in the progress and issue of it, would
   at last bring on the church's latter-day glory; but there are many that
   know that I have from time to time added, that there would probably be
   many sore conflicts and terrible convulsions, and many changes,
   revivings, and intermissions, and returns of dark clouds, and
   threatening appearances, before this work shall have subdued the world,
   and Christ's kingdom shall be every where established and settled in
   peace, which will be the lengthening of the Millennium or day of the
   church's peace, rejoicing, and triumph on earth, so often spoken of. I
   was much entertained and delighted, dear Sir, with your thoughts on
   that text in Isa. lix. 19. which you signify in your letter, and so
   have many others been to whom I have communicated them; and as to what
   you say of some dreadful stroke or trial yet abiding, before the happy
   days of the promised peace and prosperity of the church, I so far agree
   with you, that I believe that, before the church of God shall have
   obtained the conquest, and the visible kingdom of Satan on earth shall
   receive its overthrow, and Christ's kingdom of grace be every where
   established on its ruins, there shall be a great and mighty struggle
   between the kingdom of Christ and the kingdom of Satan, attended with
   the greatest and most extensive convulsions and commotion, that ever
   were upon the face of the earth, wherein doubtless many particular
   Christians will suffer, and perhaps some parts of the church.

   "But that the enemies of the church of God should ever gain such
   advantages against her any more, as they have done in times past, that
   the victory should ever any more be on their side, or that it shall
   ever be given to the beast again to make war with the saints, and to
   prevail against them, and overcome them, (as in Rev. xiii. 7. and Rev.
   xi. 7. and Dan. vii. 21.) to such a degree as has been heretofore, is
   otherwise than I hope. Though in this I would be far from setting up my
   own judgment, in opposition to others, who are more skilled in the
   prophecies of Scripture than I am. I think that what has mainly induced
   many divines to be of that opinion, is what is said in Rev. xi. chap.
   xi. concerning the slaying of the witnesses, Rev. xi. 7, 8.ver. 7, 8.
   And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast, that
   ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and
   shall overcome them, and kill them. And their dead bodies shall lie in
   the street of the great city,' &c.

   The event here spoken of, seems evidently to be that wherein the
   enemies of the church gain the greatest advantage against her that ever
   they have, and have the greatest conquest of her that ever they
   obtained, and bring the church nearest to a total extinction. For a
   long time the church is very small, represented by two witnesses, and
   they had been long in a very low state, prophesying in sackcloth; but
   now they are dead and their enemies triumph over them, as having gotten
   a complete victory, and look upon it that they are now past all
   possibility of recovery, there being less prospect of the church's
   restoration than ever there was before. But are we to expect this, dear
   Sir, that Satan will ever find means to bring things to pass, that
   after all the increase of light that has been in the world, since the
   Reformation, there shall be a return of a more dark time than in the
   depth of the darkness of popery, before the Reformation, when the
   church of God shall be nearer to a total extinction, and have less of
   visibility, all true religion and light be more blotted out of the
   memories of mankind, Satan's kingdom of darkness be more firmly
   established, all monuments of true religion be more abolished, and that
   the state of the world should be such, that it should appear further
   from any hope of a revival of true religion than it ever has done; is
   this conceivable or possible, as the state of things now is all over
   the world, even among papists themselves, without a miracle, a greater
   than any power short of divine can effect, without a long tract of
   time, gradually to bring it to pass, to introduce the grossest
   ignorance and extinguish all memory and monuments of truth; which was
   the case in that great extinction of true religion that was before the
   Reformation. And besides, if we suppose this war of the beast that
   ascends out of the bottomless pit with the witnesses, wherein he
   overcomes them and kills them, to be that last war which the church
   shall have with the beast, that great and mighty conflict that shall be
   just before the final overthrow of antichrist, that we read of in the
   16th chap. the 13th and following verses, and in the 19th chapter how
   shall we make them consist together? In the 11th chapter the church
   conflicts in sorrow, clothed in sackcloth, and in blood; in the 19th
   chap. the saints are not represented as fighting in sorrow and blood,
   though the battle be exceedingly great, but in strength, glory, and
   triumph. Their Captain goes forth to this battle, in great pomp and
   magnificence, on a white horse, and on his head many crowns, and on his
   vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of
   Lords; and the saints follow him, not in sackcloth, but coming forth on
   white horses, clothed in pure linen, clean and white, the raiment of
   triumph, the same raiment that the saints appear in, Rev. vii. 14. when
   they appear with palms in their hands, after they had washed their
   robes, that had been stained with their own blood, and made themselves
   white in the blood of the Lamb. In the conflict spoken of in chap. xi.
   the beast makes war with the witnesses, and overcomes them, and kills
   them: the same is foretold, Dan. vii. 21. and Rev. xiii. 7. But in that
   last great battle, just before the fall of antichrist, we find the
   reverse of this; the church shall obtain a glorious victory over the
   beast, and the beast is taken and cast into the lake of fire. Rev.
   xvii. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb; and the Lamb shall
   overcome them; for he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings; and they that
   are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful:' compared with chap.
   xix. 16, to the end, and chap. xvi. 16, 17. In that conflict, chap. xi.
   the beast has war with the witnesses, and kills them, and their dead
   bodies lie unburied, as if it were to be meat for the beasts of the
   earth and fowls of heaven; but in that last conflict, Christ and his
   church shall slay their enemies, and give their dead bodies to be meat
   for the beasts of the earth and fowls of heaven, chap. xix. 17. &c.
   There is no manner of appearance in the descriptions that are given of
   that great battle, of any great advantages gained in it against the
   church, before the enemy is overcome, but all appearance of the
   contrary. The descriptions in the16th and 19th chapters of Rev. will by
   no means allow of such an advantage, as that of the overcoming and
   slaying of the church, or people of God, and their lying for some time
   unburied, that their dead bodies may be for their enemies to abuse and
   trample on, and make sport with. In the 16th chap. we have an account
   of their being gathered together into the place called Armageddon; and
   then the first thing we hear of after that, is the pouring out of the
   seventh vial of God's wrath, and a voice saying, It is done; and so in
   chap. xix. we read of the beast, and the kings of the earth and their
   armies being gathered together, to make war against him that sat on the
   horse, and against his army; and then the next thing we hear of is the
   beast's being taken, &c. The event of the conflict of the beast with
   the church, chap. xi. is the triumph of the church's enemies, when they
   of the people, and kindred, and tongues, and nations, and they that
   dwell on the earth, shall see the dead bodies of the saints lying in
   the streets, and shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and send
   gifts one to another. But the event of that great and last battle,
   before the fall of antichrist, is quite the reverse of this, even the
   church's triumphing over their enemies, as being utterly destroyed.
   Those events, that are consequent on the issue of the war with the
   witnesses, chap. xi. do in no wise answer to those, that are
   represented as consequent on that last conflict of antichrist with the
   church. Tis said that when the witnesses ascended into heaven, the same
   hour there was an earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell; and
   in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand! but this don't seem
   at all to answer what is described, chap. xvi. and xix. The great city
   was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and
   great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give her the cup of
   the wine of the fierceness of his wrath; and every island fled away,
   and the mountains were not found. And it had been said before, that
   there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the
   earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. And in chap. xix. instead
   of slaying seven thousand men, it seems as if there was a general
   slaughter of all the enemies of the church, through the world. And
   besides, if we read this 11th chapter through, we shall see that the
   falling of the tenth part of the city and the rising of the witnesses,
   and their standing on their feet and ascending into heaven, are
   represented there as entirely distinct from the accomplishment of the
   church's glory, after the fall of antichrist, and God's judging and
   destroying the enemies of the church. The judgment here spoken of, as
   executed on God's enemies, are under another woe, and the benefits
   bestowed on the church, are under another trumpet: for immediately
   after the account of the rising and ascending of the witnesses, and its
   consequences, follow these words, ver.14, 15. The second woe is past,
   and behold the third woe cometh quickly. And the seventh angel sounded,
   and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this
   world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he
   shall reign for ever and ever.' And in the following verses, we have an
   account of the praises sung to God on the occasion; and in the last
   verse we have a brief hint of that same great earthquake, and the great
   hail, and those thunders, and lightnings, and voices, that we have an
   account of in the latter part of chap. xvi. so that the earthquake
   mentioned in the last verse of Rev. xi.chap. xi. seems to be the great
   earthquake, that attends the last great conflict of the church and her
   enemies, rather than that mentioned ver. 13.

   The grand objection against all this is, that it is said, that the
   witnesses should prophesy one thousand two hundred and sixty days,
   clothed in sackcloth; and when they have finished their testimony, the
   beast should make war against them, and kill them, &c. and that it
   seems manifest that after this they are no longer in sackcloth; for
   henceforward they are in an exalted state in heaven: and that
   therefore, seeing the time of their wearing sackcloth is one thousand
   two hundred and sixty days, i.e. during the time of the continuance of
   antichrist; hence their being slain, and their rising again, must be at
   the conclusion of this period, at the end of antichrist's reign.

   In answer to which I would say, with submission to better judgments,
   that I humbly conceive that we can justly infer no more from this
   prophecy than this, viz. that the one thousand two hundred and sixty
   days is the proper time (as it were) of the church's trouble and
   bondage, or being clothed in sackcloth, because it is the appointed
   time of the reign of antichrist; but this don't hinder but that God,
   out of great compassion to his church, should, in some respect, shorten
   the days, and grant that his church should in some measure anticipate
   the appointed great deliverance that should be at an end of these days,
   as he has in fact done in the Reformation; whereby his church has had a
   great degree of restoration granted her, from the darkness, power, and
   dominion of antichrist, before their proper time of restoration, which
   is at the end of the one thousand two hundred and sixty days; and so
   the church, through the compassion of her Father and Redeemer,
   anticipates her deliverance from her sorrows; and has, in some
   respects, an end put to her testifying in sackcloth, as many parts of
   the church are henceforward brought out from under the dominion of the
   antichristian powers, into a state of liberty; though in other
   respects, the church may be said still to continue in her sackcloth,
   and in the wilderness, (as chap. xii. 14.) till the end of the days.
   And as to the witnesses standing on their feet, and ascending into
   heaven; I would propose that it may be considered, Whether any more can
   be understood by it, than the protestant church's being now (at least
   as to many parts of it) able to stand on her own legs, and in her own
   defence, and being raised to such a state, that she henceforward is out
   of the reach of the Romish powers; that, let them do what they will,
   they shall never any more be able to get the church under their power,
   as they had before; as oftentimes in the Scriptures God's people
   dwelling in safety, out of the reach of their enemies, is represented
   by their dwelling on high, or being set on high; Ps. lix. 1. Isa.
   xxxiii. 16. Ps. lxix. 29. and Ps. xci. 14. and Ps. cvii. 41. Prov.
   xxix. 25.; and the children of Israel, when brought out of Egypt, were
   said to be carried on eagle's wings, that is lofty in its flight, flies
   away towards heaven where none of her enemies can reach her.

   I might here observe, that we have other instances of God's shortening
   the days of his church's captivity and bondage, either at the beginning
   or latter end, in some measure parallel with this. Thus the proper time
   of the bondage of the posterity of Abraham, in a strange land, was four
   hundred years, Gen. xv. 13.; but yet God in mercy delayed their
   bondage, whereby the time was much shortened at the beginning. So the
   time wherein it was foretold, that the whole land of Israel should be a
   desolation and an astonishment, and the land should not enjoy her
   sabbaths, was seventy years, Jer. xxv. 11, 12.; and these seventy years
   are dated in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 20, 21. from Zedekiah's captivity; and yet
   from that captivity to Cyrus's decree was about fifty-two years, though
   it was indeed about seventy years before the temple was finished. So
   the proper time of the oppression of Antiochus Epiphanes, wherein both
   the sanctuary and the host should be trodden under-foot by him, was two
   thousand and three hundred days, Dan. vii. 13, 14. and yet God gave
   Israel a degree of deliverance by the Maccabees, and they were holpen
   with a little help, and the host ceased to be trodden under-foot before
   that time was expired. Dan. xi. 32, 34.

   But in these things, dear Sir, I am by no means dogmatical; I do but
   humbly offer my thoughts on what you suggested in your letter,
   submitting them to your censure. Tis pity that we should expect such a
   terrible devastation of the church, before her last and most glorious
   deliverance, if there be no such thing to be expected. It may be a
   temptation to some of the people of God, the less earnestly to wish and
   pray for the near approach of the church's glorious day, and the less
   to rejoice in the signs of its approach.

   But, let us go on what scheme we will, it is most apparent from the
   Scriptures, that there are mighty strugglings to be expected, between
   the church of God and her enemies, before her great victory; and there
   may be many lesser strugglings before that last, and greatest, and
   universal conflict. Experience seems to show that the church of God,
   according to God's method of dealing with her, needs a great deal
   gradually to prepare her for that prosperity and glory that he has
   promised her on earth; as the growth of the earth, after winter, needs
   gradually to be prepared for the summer heat: I have known instances,
   wherein by the heat's coming on suddenly in the spring, without
   intermissions of cold to check the growth, the branches, many of them,
   by a too hasty growth, have afterwards died. And perhaps God may bring
   on a spiritual spring as he does the natural, with now and then a
   pleasant sunshiny season, and then an interruption by clouds and stormy
   winds, till at length, by the sun more and more approaching, and the
   light increasing, the strength of the winter is broken. We are
   extremely apt to get out of the right way. A very great increase of
   comfort that is sudden, without time and experience, in many instances,
   has appeared to wound the soul, in some respects, though it seems to
   profit it in others. Sometimes, at the same time that the soul seems
   wonderfully delivered from those lusts, that are more carnal and
   earthly, there is an insensible increase of those that are more
   spiritual; as God told the children of Israel, that he would put out
   the former inhabitants of the land of Canaan, by little and little, and
   would not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field should
   increase upon them.--We need much experience, to teach us the
   innumerable ways that we are liable to err, and to show us the evil and
   pernicious consequences of those errors. If it should please God,
   before many years, to grant another great revival of religion in New
   England, we should perhaps be much upon our guard against such errors
   as we have run into, and which have undone us this time, but yet might
   run insensibly into other errors that now we think not of.

   You inquire of me, Rev. Sir, whether I reject all those for
   counterfeits that speak of visions and trances. I am far from doing of
   it: I am and always have been, in that matter, of the same opinion that
   Mr. Robe expresses, in some of those pamphlets Mr. M'Laurin sent me,
   that persons are neither to be rejected nor approved on such a
   foundation. I have expressed the same thing in my discourse on the
   Marks of a Work of the True Spirit,' and have not changed my mind.

   I am afraid, dear Sir, that I have been too bold with you, in being so
   lengthy and tedious, and have been too impertinent and forward to
   express my opinion upon this and that; but I consider myself as writing
   to a candid, christian friend and brother, with whom I may be free and
   bold, and from whom I may promise myself excuse and forgiveness. Dear
   brother, asking your earnest prayers for me and for New England, I am
   your affectionate brother, and engaged friend and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   The opinion here expressed by Mr. Edwards, was not the result of a
   slight and cursory examination of the subject in discussion. He had a
   considerable time before examined, at great length, the prophecies of
   Daniel and John, with regard to this very point; and, as we shall soon
   have occasion to remark, had been convinced that the opinion, then
   commonly received, that the severest trials of the church were yet
   future, was erroneous.

   The Rev. Samuel Buell, whom I have already mentioned, as having
   preached at Northampton during the absence of Mr. Edwards, in January,
   1742, with uncommon fervour and success, continued his labours, as an
   evangelist among the churches, upwards of four years; and at length
   accepted of an invitation from the people of East Hampton, a village in
   the S. E. corner of Long Island, to become their minister. At his
   request, Mr. Edwards went to East Hampton, and there preached his
   installation sermon, on the 19th of September, 1746, from Isaiah lxii.
   4, 5..
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XIV.

   MISTAKES EXTENSIVELY PREVALENT AT THIS TIME, AS TO THE NATURE AND
   EVIDENCES OF TRUE GODLINESS--"TREATISE ON RELIGIOUS AFFECTIONS"--DESIGN
   AND CHARACTER OF THE WORK--REPUBLISHED ABROAD--LETTER FROM MR.
   GILLESPIE CONCERNING IT--LETTER FROM MR. EDWARDS TO MR.
   M'CULLOCH--REPLY TO MR. GILLESPIE--PROPOSAL MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR
   UNITED EXTRAORDINARY PRAYER--EFFORTS OF MR. EDWARDS TO PROMOTE
   IT--LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--"HUMBLE ATTEMPT TO PROMOTE EXTRAORDINARY
   PRAYER." MISTAKES EXTENSIVELY PREVALENT AT THIS TIME, AS TO THE NATURE
   AND EVIDENCES OF TRUE GODLINESS--"TREATISE ON RELIGIOUS
   AFFECTIONS"--DESIGN AND CHARACTER OF THE WORK--REPUBLISHED
   ABROAD--LETTER FROM MR. GILLESPIE CONCERNING IT--LETTER FROM MR.
   EDWARDS TO MR. M'CULLOCH--REPLY TO MR. GILLESPIE--PROPOSAL MADE IN
   SCOTLAND, FOR UNITED EXTRAORDINARY PRAYER--EFFORTS OF MR. EDWARDS TO
   PROMOTE IT--LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--"HUMBLE ATTEMPT TO PROMOTE
   EXTRAORDINARY PRAYER."

   From the facts already recited, it will be obvious to the reader, that
   few ministers, even in the course of a long ministry, have as full an
   opportunity of learning, from their own observation, the true nature of
   a revival of religion, and the differences between imaginary and saving
   conversion, as Mr. Edwards had now enjoyed. He had early discovered,
   that there was a radical difficulty attending not only every revival of
   religion, but, in a greater or less degree, also, every instance of
   supposed conversion:--a difficulty arising from erroneous conceptions,
   so generally entertained, respecting the question, What is the nature
   of true religion? or, What are the distinguishing marks of that
   holiness, which is acceptable in the sight of God?--Perceiving, at an
   early period of his christian life, that no other subject was equally
   important to man, that no other was more frequently or variously
   illustrated by the scriptural writers, and yet, that on no other had
   professing Christians been less agreed; his attention, as he himself
   informs us, had been particularly directed to it, from his first
   commencement of the study of theology; and he was led to examine it
   with all the diligence, and care, and exactness of search and inquiry,
   of which his mind was capable. In addition to this, he had not only
   witnessed, in two successive instances, a solemn and universal
   attention to religion, among the young as well as among grown persons
   in his own congregation, and in both, almost all of the latter, as well
   as very many of the former, gathered into the church; but he had been
   the spiritual counsellor and guide of multitudes in other
   congregations, where he had occasionally laboured, as well as of great
   numbers who visited him for this purpose at Northampton. These
   advantages of observation, it may easily be believed, were not lost on
   a mind like his.

   This subject, at the time of which we are speaking, had become, also, a
   subject of warm and extended controversy. The advocates of revivals of
   religion, had too generally been accustomed to attach to the mere
   circumstances of conversion--to the time, place, manner, and means, in
   and by which it was supposed to be effected--an importance, no where
   given them in the Scriptures; as well as to conclude, that all
   affections which were high in degree, and accompanied with great
   apparent zeal and ardour, were of course gracious in their nature;
   while their opposers insisted, that true religion did not consist at
   all in the affections, but wholly in the external conduct. The latter
   class attributed the uncommon attention to religion, which they could
   not deny had existed for four years in New England, to artificial
   excitement merely; while the former saw nothing in it, or in the
   measures taken to promote it, to condemn, but everything to approve.
   Mr. Edwards, in his views of the subject, differed materially from both
   classes. As he knew from his own experience, that sin and the saving
   grace of God might dwell in the same heart; so he had learned, both
   from observation and testimony, that much false religion might prevail
   during a powerful revival of true religion, and that at such a time,
   multitudes of hypocrites might spring up among real Christians. Thus it
   was in the revival of religion in the time of Josiah, in that which
   attended the preaching of John the Baptist, in those which occurred
   under the preaching of Christ, in the remarkable outpouring of the
   Spirit in the days of the apostles, and in that which existed in the
   time of the Reformation. He clearly saw, that it was this mixture of
   counterfeit religion with true, which in all ages had given the devil
   his chief advantage against the kingdom of Christ. "By this," observes
   Mr. Edwards, "he hurt the cause of Christianity, in and after the
   apostolic age, much more, than by all the persecutions of both Jews and
   heathens. By this he prevailed against the Reformation, to put a stop
   to its progress, more than by all the bloody persecutions of the church
   of Rome. By this he prevailed against the revivals of religion, that
   have occurred since the Reformation. By this he prevailed against New
   England, to quench the love of her espousals, about a hundred years
   ago. And I think I have had opportunity enough to see plainly, that by
   this the devil has prevailed against the late great revival of religion
   in New England, so happy and promising in its beginning. I have seen
   the devil prevail in this way, against two great revivings of religion
   in this country. By perverting us from the simplicity that is in
   Christ, he hath suddenly prevailed to deprive us of that fair prospect
   we had a little while ago, of a kind of paradisaic state of the church
   of God in New England."

   These evils, it was obvious, must exist in the church, until their
   cause was removed, and men had learned to distinguish accurately
   between true and false religion. To contribute his own best endeavours
   for the accomplishment of this end, Mr. Edwards prepared and published
   his "Treatise on Religious Affections." The great design of this
   treatise is, to show, in what true religion consists, and what are its
   distinguishing marks and evidences; and thus to enable every man, who
   will be honest and faithful with himself, to decide whether he is, or
   is not, a real Christian. Similar attempts had been made, by many
   earlier writers; but it may, I believe, safely be asserted, that no one
   of their efforts, taken as a whole, and viewed as an investigation of
   the entire subject would now be regarded as in any high degree
   important or valuable. The subject itself is one of the most difficult
   which theology presents; and demands for its full investigation, not
   only ardent piety, and a most intimate acquaintance with the
   Scriptures, but an exact and metaphysical inspection of the faculties
   and operations of the human mind; which unfortunately few, very few,
   writers on experimental religion have hitherto discovered. The work of
   Mr. Edwards is at once a scriptural and a philosophical view of the
   subject;--as truly scientific in its arrangement, and logical in its
   deductions, as any work on the exact sciences. That it is also a
   thorough and complete view of it, we have this decisive evidence--that
   no work of the kind, of any value, has appeared since, for which the
   author has not been indebted, substantially, to the "Treatise on the
   Affections;" or which has not been that very treatise, in part, or in
   whole, diluted to the capacity of weaker understandings. The trial, to
   which the mind of the honest, attentive, and prayerful reader of its
   pages is subjected, is the very trial of the final day. He who can
   endure the trial of the "Treatise on the Affections," will stand unhurt
   amidst a dissolving universe; and he who cannot will assuredly perish
   in its ruins. It ought to be the vade mecum, not only of every
   minister, and every Christian, but of every man, who has sobriety of
   thought enough to realize, that he has any interest in a coming
   eternity. Every minister should take effectual care that it is well
   dispersed among the people of his own charge, and that none of them is
   admitted to a profession of religion, until, after a thorough study of
   this treatise, he can satisfy both himself and his spiritual guide, not
   only that he does not rely upon the mere negative signs of holiness,
   but that he finds within himself those distinguishing marks and
   evidences of its positive existence, which the Divine Author of
   holiness has pronounced sure and unerring. It is indeed said, that
   anxious inquirers will often be discouraged by this
   course--particularly by a perusal of the Second Part of the
   treatise--from making a profession of religion, and led to renounce the
   hope of their own conversion; and the answer is, that he, who, on
   finding himself discouraged from a profession of religion by the Second
   Part, is not encouraged to make it by a perusal of the Third Part,
   should of course, unless his views are perverted by disease or
   melancholy, consider the call to repent and believe the gospel, as
   still addressed immediately to himself; and that he, who on the perusal
   of this Treatise, is led to renounce the hope which he had cherished of
   his own piety, while he has the best reason to regard it as a false
   hope, will find almost of course that that hope is soon succeeded by
   one which will endure the strictest scrutiny. It is also said that many
   persons cannot understand this treatise; and the answer is, that he who
   is too young to understand it in its substance, is too young to make a
   profession of religion; and that he whose mind is too feeble to receive
   it substantially, when communicated by a kind and faithful pastor,
   cannot understandingly make such a profession. Pre-eminently is this
   treatise necessary to every congregation during a revival of religion.
   It was especially designed by its author to be used on every such
   occasion; and the minister who then uses it as he ought, will find it
   like a fan in his hand, winnowing the chaff from the wheat. And until
   ministers, laying aside the miserable vanity which leads them, in the
   mere number of those whom they denominate their spiritual children,' to
   find an occasion of boasting, and of course to swell that number as
   much as they can, shall be willing thus faithfully and honestly to make
   a separation among their inquirers; every revival of religion will open
   a great and effectual door, through which the enemies as well as the
   friends of religion, will gain an admission into the house of God. And
   when they are thus admitted, and the ardour of animal feeling has once
   subsided, the minister will generally find not only that he has wounded
   Christ in the house of his friends, but that he has destroyed his own
   peace, and that of his church, and prepared the way for his own speedy
   separation from his people.

   To prevent this miserable system of deception on the part of ministers
   and churches, as well as of candidates for a profession of religion,
   Mr. Edwards wrote the treatise in question. As at first prepared, it
   was a series of sermons, which he preached from his own pulpit, from
   the text still prefixed to it, 1 Peter i. 8. "Whom having not seen, ye
   love: in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
   with joy unspeakable and full of glory." It was thus written and
   preached, probably in the years 1742 and 1743. Being afterwards thrown
   into the form of a treatise by the author, it was published early in
   1746. In its style it is the least correct of any of the works of Mr.
   Edwards, published in his life-time; but, as a work exhibiting genuine
   Christianity in distinction from all its counterfeits, it possesses
   such singular excellence, that were the books on earth destined to a
   destruction so nearly universal, that only one beside the Bible could
   be saved; the church of Christ, if aiming to preserve the volume of the
   greatest value to man, that which would best unfold to a bereaved
   posterity the real nature of true religion, would unquestionably select
   for preservation, the "Treatise on the Affections."

   This treatise was immediately republished in England and Scotland, and
   was cordially welcomed by all the friends of evangelical religion in
   those countries, as well as in America. Its appearance in Scotland gave
   rise to an interesting correspondence, between Mr. Edwards and the Rev.
   Thomas Gillespie, of Carnock, near Edinburgh; which was commenced by
   the latter gentleman with the following letter.

   Letter from Mr. Gillespie.

   "Carnock, Nov. 24, 1746

   very dear sir,

   I have ever honoured you for your work's sake, and what the great
   Shepherd made you the instrument of, from the time you published the
   then very extraordinary account of the revival of religion at
   Northampton, I think in the year 1735. The two performances you
   published on the subject of the late glorious work in New England, well
   adapted to that in Scotland, gave me great satisfaction, especially the
   last of them, for peculiar reasons. This much I think myself bound to
   say. I have many a time, for some years, designed to claim humbly the
   privilege of correspondence with you. What has made me defer doing it
   so long, when some of my brethren and good acquaintances have been
   favoured with it for a considerable time, it is needless now to
   mention. I shall only say, I have blamed myself for neglect in that
   matter. I do now earnestly desire a room in your prayers and
   friendship, and a letter from you sometimes, when you have occasion to
   write to Scotland; and I shall wish to be as regular as I can in making
   a return. With your permission, I propose to trouble you now and then
   with the proposal of doubts and difficulties that I meet with, and am
   exercised by; as for other reasons, so because some solutions in the
   two mentioned performances were peculiarly agreeable to me, and I find
   from these discourses, that wherein I have differed in some things from
   many others, my sentiments have harmonized with Mr. Edwards. This
   especially was the case in some things contained in your Thoughts
   concerning the Revival of Religion in New England.' All the apology I
   make for using such freedom, though altogether unacquainted, is that
   you will find from my short attestation in Mr. Robe's Narrative, I am
   no enemy to you or to the work you have been engaged in, and which you
   have defended in a way I could not but much approve of. Also my friend
   and countryman, the Rev. Mr. Robert Abercrombie, will inform you about
   me, if you have occasion to see him or hear from him.

   I longed to see somewhat about impressions respecting facts and future
   events, &c. whether by scripture texts or otherwise, made on the minds
   of good people, and supposed to be from the Lord; for I have had too
   good occasion to know the hurtful, yea, pernicious tendency of this
   principle, as commonly managed, upon many persons in manifold instances
   and various respects. It has indeed surprised me much, that wise, holy,
   and learned divines, as well as others, have supposed this a spiritual
   experience, an answer of prayers, an evidence of being highly favoured
   by the Lord, &c. and I was exceeding glad, that the Lord had directed
   you to give so seasonable a caveat against what I am assured you had
   the best reason to term, A handle in the hand of the devil,' &c. I was
   only sorry your then design had not permitted you to say more on that
   point. It merits a volume; and the proper full discussion of it would
   be one of the most seasonable and effectual services done the church of
   Christ, and interest of vital religion through the world, that I know
   of. I rejoice to find there is a good deal more on that subject
   interspersed in your Treatise of Religious Affections,' which I have
   got, but could not as yet regularly peruse. I humbly think the Lord
   calls you, dear Sir, to consider every part of that point in the most
   critical manner, and to represent fully the consequences resulting from
   the several principles in that matter, which good people, as well as
   others, have been so fond of. And as (if I do not mistake) Providence
   has already put that in your hand as a part of your generation-work, so
   it will give me, as well as others, vast satisfaction to find more said
   on the subject by you, if you do not find what is in the mentioned
   treatises sufficient, as to which I can form no judgment, because, for
   myself, I have not as yet considered it. If any other author has
   treated that subject, I do not remember to have met with it, and I
   believe hell has been no less delighted than surprised, that a regular
   attack has not been made on them on that side before now. I doubt not
   they dread the consequences of such assault with exquisite horror. The
   neglect or oversight, if not the mistakes, of so many learned authors,
   who have insisted on doctrines that bear similitude or relation to this
   matter, while it was passed over, I humbly think should teach us
   humility, and some other useful lessons I need not name to Mr. Edwards.

   I hope, dear Sir, it will not offend you, that I humbly offer some
   remarks, with all due deference, upon what I have observed in looking
   into your Treatise on Religious Affections:' and, upon further perusal,
   shall frankly represent what I may find difficulty about, if any such
   passage should cast up; expecting you will be so good as to set me
   right, if I shall mistake or not perceive your meaning.

   Pages 78, 79, [26] there are several passages I do not well understand.
   Page 78, line 6, ad finem, you say, That they should confidently
   believe and trust, while they yet remain without spiritual light or
   sight, is an antiscriptural and absurd doctrine you are refuting.' But
   this doctrine, as it is understood by many, is, that Christians ought
   firmly to believe and trust in Christ without light or sight, and
   though they are in a dark, dead frame, and for the present having no
   spiritual experiences and discoveries. Had you said they could not or
   would not believe or trust without spiritual light or sight, this is
   what could not be doubted: but I humbly apprehend, the position will
   not hold as you have laid it, whether it is applied to a sinner or a
   saint, as I suppose you understand it; for though the sinner never will
   believe on the Lord Jesus, till he has received a saving manifestation
   of his glory by the work of the Spirit, yet every sinner, we know, is
   indispensably bound, at all seasons, by the divine authority, to
   believe instantly on the Lord Jesus. The command of the Lord, 1 John
   iii. 23. that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, no
   less binds the sinner to immediate performance, than the command not to
   kill, to keep the sabbath day, or any other duty, as to the present
   performance of which, in way of duty, all agree, the sinner is bound. I
   suppose none of us think we are authorized, or will adventure to
   preach, that the sinner should delay to attempt to believe in the
   Saviour, till he finds light from heaven shining into his mind, or has
   got a saving sight or discovery of the Lord Jesus, though it is certain
   he cannot believe, nor will do it eventually, till favoured with such
   light or sight; because we should, in that event, put in a
   qualification where the apostle Paul and Silas did put none; such is
   their exhortation to the jailor, Acts xvi. 31. Also, as it may be the
   last call the sinner is to receive, in the dispensation of the word, we
   are bound to require him instantly to believe, whatever he does or does
   not feel in himself. If you did intend not the sinner, but the saint,
   in the before-mentioned positions, as I am apt to think your scope
   plainly intimates, still I apprehend these your assertions are not
   tenable; for I humbly suppose the Christian is bound to trust the
   divine faithfulness plighted in the promise for needful blessings, be
   his case with respect to light or darkness, sight, &c. what it will;
   and that no situation the saint can be in, looses him from obligation
   to glorify the Lord on all occasions, by trusting in him and expecting
   the fulfilment of his word suiting his case. Also, I would imagine, in
   Isa. l. 10. the saint is required to believe, in the precise
   circumstances mentioned in your assertion above mentioned. Pardon my
   freedom. You do indeed say, It is truly the duty of those who are thus
   in darkness to come out of darkness into light and believe,' page 78,
   line 5; but how to reconcile that with the mentioned assertion that
   immediately follows, or with Isa. l. 10. or other scriptures, or said
   assertions, and the other, of which before, I am indeed at a loss.
   Sometimes I think it is not believing the promise, or trusting the
   Lord, and trusting in him, you mean in the positions I have cited; but
   the belief of the goodness of one's state that he is a saint. If that
   was what you intended, I heartily wish you had said so much in the
   book; but as this is not ordinarily what is meant by believing in
   Scripture, I must suppose it was not the idea affixed to your words;
   and an expression of yours seems to make it evident. Had you plainly
   stated the distinction, betwixt the impossibility of one's actually
   believing, and its yet being his duty to believe, in the circumstances
   you mentioned, danger of mistake and a handle for cavil had been cut
   off.

   Page 78, line 20, &c., you say, To press and urge them to believe,
   without any spiritual light or sight, tends greatly to help forward the
   delusions of the prince of darkness.' Had you said, to press them to
   believe that the Lord was their God, when going on in a course of sin,
   or when sinning presumptuously, was of such tendency, which probably
   was in part what you designed, it would, in my humble apprehension,
   have been much more safe, for the reasons given. Also, as it is
   ordinarily and justly observed, that they who are most humbled think
   they are least so, when under a saving work of the Spirit, perhaps in
   like manner, spiritual light and sight may, in some instances, be
   mistaken or not duly apprehended; in which case, the person, upon
   admitting and proceeding upon your suppositions, may perhaps be apt to
   give way to unbelief, and to say, If I am not to be urged by the Lord's
   servants to believe in my present circumstances, it would surely be
   presumptuous in me to entertain thoughts of attempting it. Or, it may
   be, he shall think he has not that degree of spiritual light or sight,
   that is absolutely necessary in order to his believing; and thus the
   evil heart of unbelief shall make him depart from the living God, and
   neglect to set to his seal that he is true, perhaps from the
   apprehension that it is his duty to remain as he is, or at least in the
   persuasion it would be in vain to essay to believe, till matters be
   otherwise with him. If I have deduced consequences from your words and
   manner of reasoning, which you think they do not justly bear, I will be
   glad to be rectified by you, dear Sir, and would be satisfied to know
   from you, how the practice you remark upon in the fore-mentioned
   passage tends to help forward the delusions of Satan. I am apt to
   believe the grounds upon which you proceed, in the whole paragraph I
   have mentioned, is, that you have with you real Antinomians, who teach
   things about faith and believing, subversive of new obedience and
   gospel holiness, and inconsistent with the scripture doctrines
   concerning them. But as we have few, if any such at all, (I believe I
   might say more,) in this country, and at the same time have numbers who
   would have the most accurate and judicious evangelical preachers to
   insist a great deal more upon doing, and less upon believing, Mark x.
   17-23. for what reasons you will perceive, I am afraid your words will
   be misrepresented by them, and a sense put upon your expressions, which
   you were far from intending. I expect a mighty clamour by the Seceders,
   if the book shall fall into their hands. All I shall say about what is
   expressed by you, page 78, line 32, &c. is, that I have frequently
   heard it taught by those accounted the most orthodox, that the believer
   was bound to trust in the Lord, in the very worst frame he could be in,
   and that the exercise of faith was the way to be delivered from
   darkness, deadness, backsliding, &c. It is impossible one should err,
   who follows the course prescribed by the Lord in his word. I suppose no
   person is bound or allowed to defer believing one single moment,
   because he finds himself in a bad situation, because the Spirit
   breathes not on him, or he finds not actual influence from heaven
   communicated to him at that season, rendering him capable or meet for
   it; for this reason, that not our ability or fitness, but the Lord's
   command, is the rule of duty, &c. It merits consideration, whether the
   believer should ever doubt of his state, on any account whatever;
   because doubting, as opposed to believing, is absolutely sinful. I know
   the opposite has been prescribed, when the saint is plunged in
   prevailing iniquity; but does not doubting strengthen corruption? is
   not unbelief the leading sin, as faith is the leading grace?

   Page 258, (Note,) you cite as an authority Mr. Stoddard, affirming, One
   way of sin is exception enough against men's salvation, though their
   temptations be great.' I well remember the singularly judicious Dr.
   Owen somewhere says to this effect, Prevalence of a particular sin over
   a person for a considerable time, shows him to be no saint, except when
   under the power of a strong temptation.' I would suppose such texts as
   Isaiah lxiv. 6. page 65, 3, &c. warranted the Doctor to assert as he
   did. It is, I own, no small difficulty to steer the middle course,
   betwixt affording hypocrites ground unwarrantably to presume on the one
   hand, and wounding the Lord's dear children on the other; and all the
   little knowledge of the Scriptures I would hope the Lord has given me,
   makes me think Mr. Shepherd, good and great man as he was, verged not a
   little to the last extreme, with whom, if I mistake not, Mr. Stoddard
   symbolizes in the above assertion; for such as I have mentioned, I
   apprehend is the drift and tendency of Mr. Shepherd's principles. In
   some instances, daily experience and observation confirm me still more,
   that we should be very cautious and modest when asserting on that head,
   and should take care to go no further in the matter, than we have plain
   Scripture to bear us out. The consideration, that indwelling sin
   sometimes certainly gets such ascendant, that the new creature is, for
   the time the Lord seems meet, as fire buried under ashes, undiscerned
   and inactive, lays foundation, in my humble apprehension, for saying
   somewhat stronger on that point, than I would choose to utter in public
   teaching; and how long a saint may have been in the case now hinted, I
   suppose it belongs not to us precisely to determine.

   Page 259, you say, Nor can a true saint ever fall away, so that it
   shall come to this, that ordinarily there shall be no remarkable
   difference in his walk and behaviour since his conversion, from what
   was before.' I do not remember that the Scripture any where mentions,
   that David or Solomon were sanctified from the womb. I think the
   contrary may be presumed; and it is evident for a considerable time,
   with the first ordinarily, and for a long time, in the case of the
   latter ordinarily, there was a remarkable difference for the worse, in
   the walk and behaviour of both of them, when we are sure they were
   saints, from what it appears it had been in their younger years.
   Besides, let us suppose a person of a good natural disposition, bred up
   in aversion to all vicious practices, by a religious education and
   example, and virtuous inclination thus cultivated in him, 2 Peter ii.
   20. and he is converted when come to maturity, and afterwards
   corruption in him meets with peculiar temptations; I doubt much if
   there would be a remarkable difference betwixt his then conversation
   and walk, and that in unregeneracy. The contrary I think is found in
   experience, and the principles laid down leave room to suppose it.

   I own in what I have above said I have perhaps gone further than
   becomes a man of my standing in writing to one of Mr. Edwards's
   experience, and am heartily sorry my first letter to you is in such a
   strain, and on such a subject. But love to you, dear Sir, and concern
   lest you should be thought to patronize what I am sure you do not, and
   to oppose what are your real sentiments, made me write with such
   freedom, and break over restraints, which modesty, decency, &c. should
   otherwise have laid me under, that you might have an opportunity to
   know in what light these things I mention to you appear to some who are
   your real friends in this country. A valuable minister, in looking into
   what is noticed in pages 78 and 79, said to me; it would be right some
   should write you about it; and I take this first opportunity, that you
   may have access to judge of the matter, and what it may be proper for
   you to do or not to do in it.

   I will expect an answer with your convenience. I hope you will deal
   freely with me; for I can say, I would sit down and learn at your feet,
   dear Sir, accounting myself as a child in knowledge of the Scriptures,
   when compared with others I will not name, and the longer I live I see
   the greater advantage in improvements of that kind. Conceal nothing
   that you think will tend to put me right if you find my views are not
   just. I proposed in the beginning of this letter to trouble you with
   some questions or doubts, and shall mention one or two at present. What
   should one do who is incessantly harassed by Satan; can by no means
   keep him out of his mind; has used all means prescribed in Scripture
   and suggested by divines for resistance known to him, in vain; it may
   be for a long time has cried to Christ, but he hears not, seems not to
   regard him; all his efforts are swallowed up in the deluge of the foe;
   do what he will, seems to gain no ground against the powers of
   darkness; is apt to dread he shall sink under the load, and never shall
   be delivered in this world? What would you advise such a person to do?
   What construction, think you, should be put on the sovereign conduct
   and dispensation of Heaven toward him? I have occasion to be conversant
   about this case practically demonstrated, of many years continuance,
   without interruption; and will therefore be glad to have your mind
   about it in a particular manner, and as much at large as you
   conveniently can. It is said, all things work for good, &c. As degrees
   of glory will be in proportion to those of grace, how can it be made
   appear it is for one's good what sometimes happens to saints, their
   being permitted to fall under backslidings and spiritual decays, and to
   die in that state, perhaps after continuing in it a considerable while,
   and when their situation has been attended with the melancholy
   circumstances and consequences that sometimes have place in that state
   of matters? The solution of this I would gladly receive from you.

   Are the works of the great Mr. Boston known in your country, viz. the
   Fourfold State of Man, View of the Covenant of Grace, and a Discourse
   on Afflictions, and Church Communion, &c. If not, inform me by your
   letter. I have now need to own my fault in troubling you with so long a
   letter, and so I shall end," &c.

   Letter from Mr. Edwards to Mr. M'Culloch, of Cambuslang.

   "To the Rev. Mr. M'Culloch.

   Northampton, Jan. 21, 1747.

   rev. and dear brother,

   The time seems long to me since I have received a letter from you; I
   have had two letters from each of my other correspondents in Scotland
   since I have had any from you. Our correspondence has been to me very
   pleasant, and I am very loth it should fail.

   Great changes have been, dear Sir, since I have had a letter from you,
   and God has done great things, both in Scotland and America; though not
   of the same nature, with those that were wrought some years ago, by the
   outpourings of his Spirit, yet those wherein his providence is on many
   accounts exceedingly remarkable: in Scotland, in the suppression of the
   late rebellion; and in America, in our preservation from the great
   French armada, from Brest, and their utter disappointment and
   confusion, by the immediate and wonderful hand of Heaven against them,
   without any interposition of any arm of flesh. The nearest akin to
   God's wonderful works of old, in the defence of his people in Moses's,
   Joshua's, and Hezekiah's time, perhaps of any that have been in these
   latter ages of the world. I have been writing some account of it to Mr.
   M'Laurin; but since then I have seen a thanksgiving sermon of Mr.
   Prince's, preached on that occasion; in which is a much more distinct,
   particular, and (I suppose) exact account of the matter (which sermon
   you will doubtless see). Though there is something that I observed in
   my letter to Mr. M'Laurin, of the coming of that fleet, its being
   overruled for our preservation, in this part of the land where I dwell,
   when eminently exposed, and when we have all reason to think our
   enemies in Canada had formed designs against us, that Mr. Prince does
   not mention.

   In my last letter to you, I wrote you some thoughts and notions I had
   entertained, concerning the pouring out of the sixth vial on the river
   Euphrates, and the approach of the happy day of the church's prosperity
   and glory, and the utter destruction of antichrist, and other enemies
   of the church, so often spoken of in the Holy Scriptures: I signified
   it as what appeared to me probable, that one main thing intended by the
   drying up the river Euphrates, was the drying up the temporal supplies
   and income of the antichristian church and kingdom; and suggested it to
   consideration whether God, appearing so wonderfully for the taking Cape
   Breton, and the American fishery, thereon depending, out of the hands
   of the French, and thereby drying up so great a fountain of the wealth
   of the kingdom of France, might not be looked upon as one effect of the
   sixth vial. I would now also propose it to be considered, whether God's
   so extraordinarily appearing to baffle the great attempt of the French
   nation, to repossess themselves of this place, be not some confirmation
   of it; and whether or no the almost ruining the French East India
   trade, by the dreadful hand of Heaven, in burying their stores at Port
   L'Orient, and the taking so many of their ships by Commodore Barnet,
   and also the taking so many of their South Sea ships, vastly rich, and
   several other things of like nature, that might be mentioned, may not
   probably be further effects of this vial. But whatever be thought of
   these particular events, and the application of the prophecies to them;
   yet it appears to me, that God's late dealings, both with Great Britain
   and the American plantations, if they be duly considered, as they are
   in themselves and circumstances, afford just reason to hope that a day
   is approaching for the peculiar triumphs of divine mercy and sovereign
   grace, over all the unworthiness, and most aggravated provocations of
   men. If it be considered what God's past dealings have been with
   England and Scotland for two centuries past, what obligations he has
   laid those nations under, and particularly the mercies bestowed more
   lately; and we then well consider the kind, manner, and degree, of the
   provocations and wickedness of those nations, and yet that God so
   spares them, and has of late so remarkably delivered them, when so
   exposed to deserved destruction: and if it be also considered what
   God's dealings have been with this land, on its first settlement, and
   from its beginning hitherto, and how long we have been revolting and
   growing worse, and what great mercy he has lately granted us, on the
   late remarkable striving of his Spirit with us, and how his Spirit has
   been treated, his mercy and grace despised, and bitterly opposed, how
   greatly we have backslidden, what a degree of stupidity we are sunk
   into, and how full the land has been of such kinds of wickedness, as
   have approached so near to the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost,
   and how obstinate we are still in our wickedness, without the least
   appearances of repentance or reformation; and it be then considered how
   God has of late made his arm bare, in almost miraculous dispensations
   of his providence, in our behalf, to succeed us against our enemies,
   and defend us from them:--I say, if these things be considered, it
   appears evident to me, not only that God's mercies are infinitely above
   the mercies of men; but also that he has, in these things, gone quite
   out of the usual course of his providence and manner of dealings with
   his professing people, and I confess, it gives me great hope that God's
   appointed time is approaching, for the triumphs and displays of his
   infinite, sovereign grace, beyond all that ever has been before, from
   the beginning of the world; at least I think there is much in these
   things, considered together with other remarkable things God has lately
   done, to encourage and animate God's people unitedly to cry to God,
   that he would appear for the bringing on those glorious effects of his
   mercy, so often foretold to be in the latter days; and particularly to
   continue that concert for prayer, set on foot in Scotland, and which it
   is now proposed to continue seven years longer. My wife and children
   join with me in respectful, cordial salutations to you and yours.

   That we may be remembered in your prayers, is the request, dear Sir, of
   your affectionate brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   To the letter from Mr. Gillespie, Mr. Edwards returned the following
   answer.

   "Northampton, Sept. 4, 1747.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I received your letter of Nov. 24, 1746, though very long after it was
   written. I thank you for it, and for your proposing a correspondence.
   Such an offer I shall gladly embrace, and esteem it a great privilege,
   more especially from the character I have received of you from Mr.
   Abercrombie, who I perceive was intimately acquainted with you.

   As to the objections you make against some things contained in my work
   on Religious Affections, I am sorry you did not read the book through
   before you made them; if you had, perhaps the difficulties would not
   have appeared quite so great. As to what is contained in the 78th and
   79th pages, I suppose there is not the least difference of opinion
   between you and me, unless it be concerning the signification and
   propriety of expressions. I am fully of your mind, and always was
   without the least doubt of it; That every one, both saint and sinner,
   is indispensably bound, at all seasons, by the Divine authority, to
   believe instantly on the Lord Jesus; and that the command of the Lord,
   1 John iii. 23. that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
   Christ, as it is a prescription of the moral law, no less binds the
   sinner to immediate performance, than the commandment not to kill, to
   keep the sabbath day, or any other duty, as to the present performance
   of which, in way of duty, all agree the sinner is bound; and that men
   are bound to trust the divine faithfulness, be their case with respect
   to light and darkness, sight, &c. what it will; and that no situation
   they can be in, looses them from obligation to glorify the Lord at all
   seasons, and to expect the fulfilment of his words; and that the sinner
   who is without spiritual light or sight is bound to believe, and that
   it is a duty at that very time incumbent on him to believe.' But I
   conceive that there is a great deal of difference between these two
   things, viz. its being the duty of a man, who is without spiritual
   light or sight, to believe, and its being his duty to believe without
   spiritual light or sight, or to believe while he yet remains without
   spiritual light or sight. Just the same difference, which there is
   between these two things, viz. its being his duty who has no faith to
   believe, and its being his duty to believe without faith, or to believe
   without believing. I trust none will assert the latter, because of the
   contradiction which it implies. As it is not proper to say, it is a
   man's duty to believe without faith, because it implies a
   contradiction; so I think it equally improper to say, it is a man's
   duty to believe without those things which are essentially implied in
   faith, because that also implies a contradiction. But a spiritual sight
   of Christ, or knowledge of Christ, is essentially implied in the very
   nature and notion of faith; and therefore it is absurd to talk of
   believing on Christ, without spiritual light or sight. It is the duty
   of a man, who is without those things which essentially belong to
   faith, to believe; and it is the duty of a man, who is without those
   things which essentially belong to love, to love God; because it is an
   indispensable obligation that lies on men at all times, and in all
   circumstances, to love God: but yet it is not a duty to love God
   without loving him, or continuing without those things which
   essentially belong to his love. It is the duty of those who have no
   sense of the loveliness of God and have no esteem of him, to love him,
   and they are not in the least excused, by the want of this sense and
   esteem in not loving him one moment; but yet it would be properly
   nonsense to say it is their duty to love him, without any sense of his
   loveliness, or esteem of him. It is indeed their duty this moment to
   come out of their disesteem, and stupid wicked insensibility of his
   loveliness, and to love him. I made the distinction (I thought) very
   plainly, in the midst of those sentences you quote as exceptionable. I
   say expressly, p. 74, It is truly the duty of those who are in
   darkness, to come out of darkness into light and believe; but, that
   they should confidently believe and trust, while they yet remain
   without spiritual light or sight, is an anti-scriptural and absurd
   doctrine.' The misunderstanding between us, dear Sir, I suppose to be
   in the different application of the particle without, in my use of it,
   and your understanding of it, or what we understand as spoken of and
   supposed in the expression, without spiritual light or sight. As I use
   it, I apply it to the act of believing, and I suppose it to be very
   absurd to talk of an act of faith without spiritual light or sight,
   wherein I suppose you will allow me to be in the right. As you
   understand it, it is applied to duty or obligation, and you suppose it
   to be not at all absurd, to talk of an obligation to believe without
   spiritual light or sight, but that the obligation remains full, where
   there is no spiritual light or sight, wherein I allow you are in the
   right. I think, Sir, if you read what I have said in my book on this
   head again, it will be exceedingly apparent to you, that it is thus
   that I apply the preposition without, and not as you before understood
   it. I thought I had very plainly manifested, that what I meant by being
   in darkness was being in spiritual blindness, and so in a dead, stupid,
   and unchristian frame, and not what is commonly called being without
   the light of God's countenance, under the hidings of his face. Great
   numbers in this country proceed on the supposition, in their opinions
   and practice, that there really is such a manner of believing, such a
   kind of faith as this, viz. a confident believing and firm trusting in
   God in the dark, in the sense just mentioned, which is the subject
   matter of Divine prescription, and which many actually have. Indeed
   there are innumerable instances of such as are apparently in a most
   negligent, apostate, and every way unchristian and wicked frame; who
   yet, encouraged by this principle, retain a strong confidence of their
   piety, and imagine that herein they do their duty and glorify God,
   under the notion of trusting God in the dark, and hoping against hope,
   and not relying on their own righteousness; and they suppose it would
   show a legal spirit to do otherwise. I thought it would be manifest to
   every reader that I was arguing against such persons as these.

   You say, It merits consideration, whether the believer should ever
   doubt of his state, on any account whatever, because doubting, as
   opposed to believing, is absolutely sinful.' Here, Sir, you seem to
   suppose that a person's doubting of his own good estate, is the proper
   opposite of faith; and these and some other expressions in your letter
   seem to suppose that doubting of one's good estate, and unbelief, are
   the same thing; and so, that confidence in one's good estate, and
   faith, are the same thing. This, I acknowledge, I do not understand; I
   do not suppose faith, and a person's believing that he has faith, to be
   the same thing. Nor do I take unbelief, or being without faith, and
   doubting whether he has it, to be the same thing, but entirely
   different. I should have been glad either that you had taken a little
   more notice of what I say on this head, p. 79, 80, or that you had said
   something to convince me that I am wrong in this point. The exercise of
   faith is doubtless the way to be delivered from darkness, deadness,
   backsliding, &c. or rather is the deliverance; as forsaking sin is the
   way to deliverance from sin, and is the deliverance itself. The
   exercise of grace is doubtless the way to deliverance from a graceless
   frame, which consists in the want of the exercise of grace. But as to
   what you say, or seem to intimate, that a person's being confident of
   his own good estate, is the way to be delivered from darkness,
   deadness, backsliding, and prevailing iniquity; I think, whoever
   supposes this to be God's method of delivering his saints, when sunk
   into an evil, careless, carnal, and unchristian frame, first to assure
   them of their good estate and his favour, while they yet remain in such
   a frame, and to make that the means of their deliverance, does surely
   mistake God's method of dealing with such persons. Among all the
   multitudes I have had opportunity to observe, I never knew one dealt
   with after this manner. I have known many brought back from great
   declension, who appeared to me to be real saints; but it was in a way
   very different from this. In the first place, conscience has been
   awakened, and they have been brought into distressing fears of the
   wrath of God. Thus they have become the subjects of a new work of
   humiliation, and have been led deeply to feel that they deserve his
   wrath, even while they have feared it, before God has delivered them
   from their apprehensions, and comforted them with a renewed sense of
   his favour.

   As to what I say of the necessity of universal obedience, or of one way
   of known sin, (i.e. so as properly to be said to be the way and manner
   of the man,) being exception enough against a man's salvation; I should
   have known better what to have said further about it, if you had
   briefly shown how the passages of Scripture which I mention, and the
   arguments which I deduce from them, are insufficient for the proof of
   this point. I confess they appear to me to approve it as fully, as any
   thing concerning the necessary qualifications of a Christian can be
   proved from Scripture.

   You object against my saying, p. 259, Nor can a true saint ever fall
   away to such a degree, that ordinarily there shall be no remarkable
   difference between his behaviour, after his conversion, and before.'
   This, I think, implies no more than that his behaviour, in similar
   circumstances, and under similar trials, will have a remarkable
   difference. As to the instances of David and Solomon, I am not aware
   that the Scriptures give us any where so full a history of their
   behaviour before their conversion, as to enable us to compare it with
   their subsequent life. These examples are uncertain. But I think those
   doctrines of the Scriptures are not uncertain, which I mention in the
   passage you cite, to prove that converts are new men, new creatures,
   that they are renewed not only within but without, that old things are
   passed away and all things become new, that they walk in newness of
   life, that the members of their bodies are new, that whereas they
   before were the servants of sin, and yielded their members servants of
   iniquity, now they yield them servants of righteousness unto holiness.

   As to the doubts and cases of difficulty you mention, I think it
   needless for a divine of your character, to apply for the solution of
   them to one, who ought rather to take the attitude of a learner.
   However, since you are pleased to insist on my giving my mind upon
   them, I would observe, with regard to the first case you mention, that
   of a person incessantly harassed by Satan, &c. you do not point out the
   nature of the temptations with which he is harassed; and without this,
   I think it impossible to give proper advice and directions concerning
   it. Satan is to be resisted in a very different manner, in different
   kinds of onsets. When persons are harassed with those strange, horrid
   impressions, to which persons afflicted with hypochondria are often
   subject, he is to be resisted in a very different manner, from what is
   proper in cases of violent temptation to gratify some worldly lust. In
   the former case, I should by no means advise men to resist the devil by
   entering the lists with him, and engaging in a violent struggle with
   the grand adversary; but rather by diverting the mind from his
   frightful suggestions, by going on stedfastly and diligently in the
   ordinary course of duty, without allowing themselves time and leisure
   to attend to his sophistry, and by committing themselves to God in
   prayer. That is the best way of resisting the devil, which crosses his
   design most; and he more effectually disappoints him in such cases, who
   treats him with neglect, than he who engages in a direct conflict, and
   tries his strength and skill with him, in a violent dispute or combat.
   The latter course rather gives him an advantage; and if he can get
   persons thus engaged in a violent struggle, he gains a great point. He
   knows that hypochondriacal persons are not qualified to maintain it. By
   this he diverts him from the ordinary course of duty; and having gained
   his attention to what he says, he has opportunity to use all his craft
   and subtilty. By such a struggle he raises a deeper melancholy, weakens
   the mind still more, gets the unhappy man faster and faster in his
   snares, and increases his anxiety of mind; which is the very thing by
   which he mainly accomplishes all his purposes with such persons.

   As to the difficulty of verifying Rom. viii. 28. All things shall work
   together for good to them that love God,' in the case of a Christian
   who falls under backsliding and spiritual decays; it is not perfectly
   obvious how this is to be interpreted, and how far it may hence be
   inferred, that the temptations of Christians from Satan and an evil
   world, and their declensions and sins, shall surely work for their
   good. However, since you desire my thoughts, I will endeavour to
   express them.

   Two things may be laid down, as certain and indubitable, concerning
   this doctrine of the apostle.

   First. The meaning cannot be that God's actual dispensations towards
   each Christian are the best for him of all that are possible; or that
   all things which are ordered for him, or done with respect to him, are
   in all respects better for him than any thing which God could have
   ordered or done, issuing in the highest good and happiness to which he
   can possibly be brought; for that implies that God will confer on every
   one of his elect as much happiness as he can confer, in the utmost
   exercise of his omnipotence; and this sets aside all those different
   degrees of grace and holiness here, and glory hereafter, which he
   bestows according to his sovereign pleasure.

   All things work together for good to the saints; all may have a
   concurring tendency to their happiness, and may finally issue in it,
   and yet not tend to, or issue in, the highest possible degree of
   happiness. There is a certain measure of holiness and happiness, to
   which each one of the elect is eternally appointed, and all things that
   relate to him work together to bring to pass this appointed measure of
   good. The text and context speak of God's eternal purpose of good to
   the elect, predestinating them to a conformity to his Son in holiness
   and happiness; and the implicit reasoning of the apostle leads us to
   suppose that all things will purely concur to bring to effect God's
   eternal purpose. Hence from his reasoning it may be inferred, that all
   things will tend to, and work together to accomplish, that degree of
   good which God has purposed to bestow upon them, and not any more.
   Indeed it would be in itself unreasonable to suppose any thing else;
   for as God is the supreme orderer of all things, doubtless all things
   shall be so ordered, that with one consent they shall help to bring to
   pass his ends and purposes; but surely not to bring to pass what he
   does not aim at, and never intended. God, in his government of the
   world, is carrying on his own designs in every thing; but he is not
   carrying on that which is not his design, and therefore there is no
   need of supposing, that all the circumstances, means, and advantages of
   every saint, are the best in every respect that God could have ordered
   for him, or that there could have been no circumstances or means of
   which he could have been the subject, which would with God's usual
   blessing have issued in his greater good. Every Christian is a living
   stone, that, in this present state of preparation, is fitting for the
   place appointed for him in the heavenly temple. In this sense all
   things undoubtedly work together for good to every one who is called
   according to God's promise. He is, all the while he lives in this
   world, by all the dispensations of Providence towards him, fitting for
   the particular mansion in glory which is appointed and prepared for
   him.

   Secondly. When it is said, that all things work together for good to
   them that love God,' it cannot be intended that all things, both
   positive and negative, are best for them; in other words, that not only
   every positive thing, of which Christians are the subjects, or in which
   they are concerned, will work for their good, but also, that when any
   thing is absent or withheld from them by God in his providence, that
   absence or withholding is also for their good, in such a sense, as to
   be better for them than the presence or bestowment would have been; for
   this would have the same absurd consequence which was mentioned before,
   viz. That God makes every Christian as happy as he possibly can make
   him. And if so, it would follow that God's withholding from his people
   greater degrees of the sanctifying influences of his Spirit, is for
   their good, and that it is best for them to live and die with so small
   a measure of piety as they actually possess, which is the same as to
   say, that it is for their good to have no more good, or that it is for
   their happiness to have no more happiness here and hereafter. If we
   carefully examine the apostle's discourse in Rom. viii. it will be
   apparent that his words imply no such thing. All God's creatures, and
   all that he does in disposing of them, is for the good of the
   Christian; but it will not thence follow, that all God's forbearing to
   do is also for his good, or that it is best for him that God does no
   more for him.

   Hence, with regard to the position, that the sins and temptations of
   Christians are for their good; I suppose the following things to be
   true:

   1. That all things, whatsoever, are for their good, things negative as
   well as positive, in this sense, that God intends that some benefit to
   them shall arise from every thing, so that somewhat of the grace and
   love of God will hereafter be seen to have been exercised towards them
   in every thing. At the same time, the sovereignty of God will also be
   seen, with regard to the measure of the good or benefit aimed at, in
   that some other things, if God had seen cause to order them, would have
   produced a higher benefit. And with regard to negative
   disposals--consisting, not in God's doing but forbearing to do, not in
   giving, but withholding--some benefit, in some respect or other, will
   ever accrue to them, even from these; though sometimes the benefit will
   not be equal to the benefit withheld, if it had been bestowed. As for
   instance, when a Christian lives and dies comparatively low in grace;
   some good improvement shall be made even of this, in his eternal state,
   whereby he shall receive a real benefit, though the benefit shall not
   be equal to the benefit of a higher degree of holiness, if God had
   bestowed it.

   2. God carries on a design of love to his people, and to each
   individual Christian, not only in all things of which they are the
   subjects while they live, but also in all his works and dispensations,
   and in all his acts from eternity to eternity.

   3. That the sin, in general, of Christians, is for their good, in this
   respect, viz. that through the sovereign grace and infinite wisdom of
   God, the fact that they have been sinful fallen creatures, and not from
   the beginning perfectly innocent and holy as the elect angels, will
   issue in a high advancement of their eternal happiness; and that they
   shall obtain some additional good, on occasion of all the sin of which
   they have been the subjects, or have committed, beyond what they would
   have had if they never had been fallen creatures.

   4. The sin of Christians cannot in this sense be for their good, that
   it should finally be best for them, that while they lived in this
   world, their restoration and recovery from the corruption to which they
   became subject by the fall, was no greater, that the mortification of
   sin, and spiritual vivification of the soul, was carried on to no
   higher degree, that they were so deficient in love to God, love to men,
   humility, and heavenly-mindedness, that they did so few good works, and
   consequently, that in general, they had so much sin, and so little
   holiness; for in proportion as one of these is more, the other will be
   less, as infallibly, as darkness is more or less, in proportion to the
   diminution or increase of light. It cannot finally be better for
   Christians, that in general, while they live, they had so much sin of
   heart and life, rather than more holiness of heart and life; because
   the reward of all at last will be according to their works. He that
   sowed sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sowed bountifully
   shall reap also bountifully; and he that builds wood, hay, and stubble,
   shall finally suffer loss, and have a less reward, than if he had built
   gold, silver, and precious stones, though he himself shall be saved.
   But notwithstanding this,

   5. The sins and falls of Christians may be for their good, and for the
   better, in this respect, that the issue may be better than if the
   temptation had not happened, and so the occasion not given, either for
   the sin of yielding to the temptation, or the virtue of overcoming it:
   and yet not in this respect, (with regard to their sins or falls in
   general,) that it should be better for them in the issue, that they
   have yielded to the temptation offered, than if they had overcome. For
   the fewer victories they obtain over temptation, the fewer are their
   good works, and particularly of that kind of good works to which a
   distinguished reward is promised in Rev. ii. and Rev. iii. iii. and in
   many other parts of Scripture. The word of God represents the work of a
   Christian in this world as a warfare, and it is evident in the
   Scriptures, that he who acquits himself as the best soldier, shall win
   the greatest prize. Therefore, when Christians are brought into
   backslidings and decays, by being overcome by temptations, the issue of
   their backslidings may be some good to them, beyond what they would
   have received if the temptations had never existed; and yet their
   backslidings in general may be a great loss to them in this respect,
   that they shall have much less reward, than if the temptations had been
   overcome, and they had persevered in spiritual vigour and diligence.
   But yet this don't hinder, but that,

   6. It may be so ordered by a sovereign and all-wise God, that the falls
   and backslidings of Christians, through their being overcome by
   temptations in some particular instances, may prove best for them, not
   only because the issue may be greater good to them, than they would
   have received if the temptation had not happened, but even greater in
   that instance, than if the temptation had been overcome. It may be so
   ordered, that their being overcome by that temptation, shall be the
   occasion of their having greater strength, and on the whole, obtaining
   more and greater victories, than if they had not fallen in that
   instance. But this is no where promised, nor can it be so, that, in the
   general, it should prove better for them that they were foiled so much,
   and did overcome so little, in the course of their lives, and that
   finally their decay is so great, or their progress so small. From these
   things it appears,

   7. That the saying of the apostle, all thing work together for good to
   them that love God, though it be fulfilled in some respects to all
   Christians, at all times and in all circumstances, yet it is fulfilled
   more especially and eminently to Christians continuing in the exercise
   of love to God, not falling from the exercises, or failing in the
   fruits of divine love in times of trial. Then it is, that temptations,
   enemies, and suffering, will be best for them, working that which is
   most for their good every way; and they shall be more than conquerors
   over tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, and
   sword, Rom. viii. 35-37.

   8. As God is carrying on a design of love to each individual Christian,
   in all his works and dispensations whatsoever, so the particular design
   of love to them which he is carrying on, is to fit them for and bring
   them to their appointed place in the heavenly temple, or to that
   identical degree of happiness and glory in heaven, which his eternal
   love designed for them, and no other. For God's design of love or of
   happiness to them, is only just what it is, and is not different from
   itself; and to fulfil this particular design of love, every thing which
   God does, or in any respect disposes, whether it be positive,
   privative, or negative, contributes; because, doubtless, every thing
   which God does, or in any respect offers, tends to fulfill his aims and
   designs. Therefore, undoubtedly,

   9. All the while the Christian lives in the world, he is preparing for
   his appointed mansion in glory, and fitting for his place in the
   heavenly building. All his temptations, though they may occasion, for
   the present, great spiritual injuries, yet at last shall be an occasion
   of his being more fitted for his place in glory. Hence we may
   determine, that however the Christian may die in some respects under
   the decay of spiritual comfort, and of some religious affections, yet
   every Christian dies at that time when his habitual fitness for his
   place in the heavenly temple is most complete, because otherwise, all
   things which happen to him while he lives, would not work together to
   fit him for that place.

   10. God brings his people, at the end of their lives, to this greatest
   fitness for their place in heaven, not by diminishing holiness in their
   hearts, but by increasing it, and carrying on the work of grace in
   their souls. If it be not so, that cannot be true, that where God has
   begun a good work he will perform it, or carry it on to the day of
   Christ; for if they die with a less degree of holiness than they had
   before, then it ceases to be carried on before the day of Christ comes.
   If holiness finally decreases, then Satan so far finally obtains the
   victory. He finally prevails to diminish the fire in the smoking flax;
   and then how is that promise verified, that God will not quench the
   smoking flax, till he bring forth judgment unto victory? So that it
   must needs be, that although Christians may die under decay, in some
   respects, yet they never die under a real habitual decay of the work of
   grace in general. If they fall, they shall rise again before they die,
   and rise higher than before, if not in joy, and some other affections,
   yet in greater degrees of spiritual knowledge, self-abasement, trust in
   God, and solidity and ripeness of grace.

   If these things which have been observed are true, then we may infer
   from them these corollaries.

   1. That notwithstanding the truth of the apostle's declaration in Rom.
   viii. 28. Christians have cause to lament their leanness and
   unfruitfulness, and the fact that they are guilty of so much sin, not
   only as it is to the dishonour of God, but also as it is likely to
   redound to their own eternal loss and damage.

   2. That nothing can be inferred from this promise, which is calculated
   to set aside or make void the influence of motives to earnest
   endeavours to avoid all sin, to increase in holiness, and abound in
   good works, from an aim at a high and eminent degree of glory and
   happiness in a future world.

   3. That though it is to the eternal damage of Christians, ordinarily,
   when they yield to and are overcome by temptations; yet Satan and the
   other enemies of Christians, from whom these temptations come, are
   always wholly disappointed in the temptation, and baffled in their
   design to hurt them, inasmuch as the temptation and the sin which it
   occasions, are for the saints' good, and they receive a greater benefit
   in the issue, than if the temptation had not been, and yet less than if
   the temptation had been overcome.

   As to Mr. Boston's View of the Covenant of Grace, I have had some
   opportunity to examine it, and I confess I do not understand the scheme
   of thought presented in that book. I have read his Fourfold State of
   Man, and liked it exceedingly well. I think, in that, he shows himself
   to be a truly great divine.

   Hoping that you will accept my letter with candour, and remember me in
   your prayers, I subscribe myself

   Your affectionate and obliged

   brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   In October, 1744, a number of ministers in Scotland, among whom, I
   believe, were all the correspondents of Mr. Edwards in that country,
   thinking that the state of the church and the world called loudly for
   united extraordinary prayer to God, that he would deliver the nations
   from their miseries, and fill the earth with his glory; proposed that
   Christians universally should, for the two years then next ensuing, set
   apart a portion of time, on Saturday evening and sabbath morning, every
   week, to be spent in prayer for this purpose; and that they should
   still more solemnly devote the first Tuesday in the last month of each
   quarter of the year, to be spent either in private, social, or public
   prayer to God, for the Your affectionate and obliged

   bestowment of those blessings on the world. Mr. Edwards not only
   welcomed the proposal as soon as he received it, but did all in his
   power to promote its general acceptance by the American churches; and
   the following letter, alluding to a more particular account of the
   subject in one to Mr. M'Laurin, which I have not been able to procure,
   will in some measure apprize the reader of the efforts which he made
   for this purpose.

   "To the Rev. William M'Culloch

   Northampton, Sept. 23, 1747.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I thank you for your letter of March 12, 1747, which I suppose lay a
   long while at Mr. Prince's in Boston, before I received it, through Mr.
   Prince's forgetfulness. It seems he had forgotten that he had any such
   letter; and when I sent a messenger to his house, on purpose to inquire
   whether I had any letter lodged there for me from Scotland, he told him
   no; when I suppose this letter had been long in his house: and I should
   probably never have had it at last, had not one of my daughters had
   occasion to go to Boston, who made a visit at the house, and made a
   more full inquiry.

   I am sorry to hear of your affliction, through your indisposition that
   you speak of, and desire to be thankful to the God of all mercy for his
   goodness, in restoring you again to health.

   I have, in my letter to Mr. M'Laurin, given a particular account of
   what I know, concerning the propagation of the Concert for United
   Prayer, in America; which you will doubtless have opportunity to see.
   The propagation of it is but slow; but yet so many do fall in with it,
   and there is that prospect of its being further spread, that it is a
   great encouragement to me. I earnestly hope, that they, that have begun
   extraordinary prayer for the outpouring of the Spirit of God, and the
   coming of Christ's kingdom, will not fail, or grow dull and lifeless,
   in such an affair, but rather that they will increase more and more in
   their fervency. I have taken a great deal of pains to promote this
   concert here in America, and shall not cease to do so, if God spares my
   life, as I have opportunity, in all ways that I can devise. I have
   written largely on the subject, insisting on persuasions, and answering
   objections; and what I have written is gone to the press. The
   undertaker for the publication encourages me that it shall speedily be
   printed. I have sent to Mr. M'Laurin a particular account of it.

   You desire to hear how it was with the people of New England, when we
   were threatened with an invasion by the French fleet, the last summer.
   As to the particular circumstances of that wonderful deliverance, the
   fullest and best account I have ever seen of it, is in Mr. Prince's
   Thanksgiving Sermon on that occasion; which, in all probability, you
   have seen long before this time. Nor need you be informed by me, of the
   repeated mercy of God to us, in confounding our enemies in their
   renewed attempt this year, by delivering up their fleet, in its way
   hither, into the hands of the English. In all probability, that fleet
   was intended for the execution of a very extensive design, against the
   English colonies, in conjunction with the French forces in Canada. For
   there was an army lay waiting at Nova Scotia, which, on the news of the
   sailing of their fleet, immediately left the country, and returned to
   Canada, over the lake Champlain, towards New England and New York; and
   they, or a part of them, attacked Fort Saratoga, in New York
   government, and killed or took about fifty men that were drawn out of
   the fort; but desisted from any further attempts, about the time we may
   suppose they received the news of the defeat of their fleet. And very
   soon after they received this news in Canada, the French there released
   most of our captives, and sent one ship loaded with them, to the number
   of about one hundred and seventy, to Boston, and another ship with
   about sixty, if I remember right, to Louisburg. The reasons that
   induced them so to do, are not known, and can only be guessed at by us;
   but, by their doing it very soon after they received the news of the
   loss of their fleet, it looks as though that had great influence in the
   affair. New England has had many other surprising deliverances from the
   French and Indians; some of which I have given a particular account of,
   in my letter to Mr. M'Laurin; which it would be needless for me to
   repeat, seeing you have such frequent opportunities with him. These
   deliverances are very wonderful and affecting; our enemies own that the
   heavens are on our side, and fight for us; but there are no such
   effects of these mercies upon us that are the subjects of them, as God
   requires, and most justly expects. The mercies are acknowledged in
   words, but we are not led to repentance by them; there appears no such
   thing as any reformation or revival of religion in the land. God's so
   wonderfully protecting and delivering a people, whose provocations have
   been so great, and who do so continue in apostasy and provocation, is
   very marvellous; and I can think of no account that can be given of it,
   so probable as this, that God has a design of mercy to the rising
   generation, and that there are a great number of the elect among our
   children, born and unborn, and that for these elect's sake, God will
   not suffer us to be destroyed, having a design to bring forth a seed of
   the posterity of this people, to inherit and dwell in this land, that
   shall be a holy seed, and a generation of his servants. And so that
   those words are applicable to us, Isa. lxv. 8, 9. Thus saith the Lord,
   As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not,
   for a blessing is in it; so will I do for my servants' sakes, that I
   may not destroy them all. And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob,
   and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains; and mine elect shall
   inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.' I am full of
   apprehensions, that God has no design of mercy to those that were left
   unconverted, of the generation that were on the stage, in the time of
   the late extraordinary religious commotion, and striving of God's
   Spirit; unless it be perhaps a small gleaning from among them. But it
   may be, when their little ones, the generation that was then in their
   childhood, are brought fully on the stage of action, God will
   abundantly pour out his Spirit, and revive and carry on his work, here
   and elsewhere in the christian world. [27]

   I thank you for taking the pains of writing to me your thoughts of the
   forty-two months of the treading down of the holy city, which are new
   and entertaining. The chief objection against what you propose, that I
   can think of, is, that the forty-two months of the treading down the
   holy city, seems to be the same period with the one thousand two
   hundred and sixty days of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth,
   mentioned in the very next verse, in immediate connexion with this; and
   that the same with the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the
   woman's being in the wilderness, chap. xii. 6.; and that the same with
   the time, times, and an half of the woman's being in the wilderness, v.
   14.; and that the same with the time, times, and an half of the reign
   of the little horn, Dan. vii. 25.; and with the forty-two months of the
   reign of the beast, Rev. xiii. 5.; and that this evidently signifies
   the duration of the reign of antichrist; which is a thing entirely
   diverse from the sum of the times of the city of Jerusalem's being
   under the dominion of pagans, Saracens, Persians, and Turks, as you
   represent. However, it is possible that what you mention may be one way
   wherein that prophecy, Rev. xi. 2. may be fulfilled. For God's word is
   oftentimes fulfilled in various ways: as one way, wherein the
   prophetical representation of the beast with the seven heads is
   fulfilled, is in the seven successive forms of government that
   idolatrous Rome is under; and another way that it was fulfilled, was by
   Rome's being built on seven hills. One way that the seventy years
   captivity of the Jews was fulfilled, was in its being seventy years
   from Jehoiachim's captivity to Cyrus's decree; and another way that it
   was fulfilled, was in its being seventy years from Zedekiah's captivity
   to Darius's decree, Ezra vi.; and another way that it was fulfilled,
   was in its being seventy years from the last carrying away of all, Jer.
   lii. 30. to the finishing and dedication of the temple. But I expect no
   certainty as to these things, or any of the various conjectures
   concerning the time of the calling of the Jews, and the fall of the
   kingdom of the beast, till time and fulfilment shall decide the matter.
   However, I cannot think otherwise, than that we have a great deal of
   reason to suppose, that the beginning of that glorious work of God's
   Spirit, which, before it is finished, shall accomplish these things, is
   not very far off; and there is very much in the word of God, and in the
   present aspects of Divine Providence, to encourage us greatly in our
   begun concert for extraordinary united prayer for the coming of
   Christ's kingdom. Let us therefore go on with what we have begun in
   that respect, and continue instant in prayer, with all perseverance,
   and increase more and more in faith and fervency; and not keep silence,
   nor give God any rest, till he establish, and make Jerusalem a praise
   in the earth.

   And remember in your prayers, dear Sir,

   Yours, in great esteem and affection,

   Jonathan Edwards."

   The continuation of this concert for united and extraordinary prayer
   was proposed in a Memorial from Scotland, dated August 26, 1746, signed
   by twelve clergymen of that country, and circulated soon after in all
   the American colonies. To secure the general adoption of the proposed
   measure, Mr. Edwards first preached to his people a series of sermons
   in its favour, and then published them in the form of a treatise, with
   the title, "An Humble Attempt to promote Explicit Agreement and Visible
   Union among God's People, in Extraordinary Prayer for the Revival of
   Religion, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to
   Scripture Promises, and Prophecies concerning the Last Time." This work
   was immediately republished in England and Scotland, and extensively
   circulated in both countries, as well as in America, and had great
   influence in securing the general adoption of the measures proposed--a
   measure which was pursued for more than half a century by many of the
   American churches, and only discontinued on the adoption of a more
   frequent concert--the monthly concert--for united and extraordinary
   prayer, for the same great object, proposed at an association of the
   ministers of the Baptist churches, in the counties of Northampton,
   Leicester, &c. held at Nottingham in 1784, and observed the first
   Monday evening of each month; and now extensively adopted throughout
   the christian world.

   In the course of this treatise, Mr. Edwards was led, in answering
   objections, to examine an interpretation of prophecy, until then most
   generally if not universally received: viz. That the kingdom of Christ
   could not come, until there had previously been a time of most extreme
   calamity to the church of God, and prevalence of her antichristian
   enemies against her, as represented in Rev. xi. by the slaying of the
   witnesses. Some years before this, Mr. Edwards had examined the
   Apocalypse with great care, in connexion with the prophecy of Daniel;
   in order to satisfy himself whether the slaying of the witnesses was to
   be regarded as past or future. This he did with his pen in his hand;
   and a brief abstract of his views on this point, is found in the
   answers to the 4th and 5th objections in the Humble Attempt. The views
   of prophecy, here presented by Mr. Edwards, were, I believe, at the
   time wholly new to the christian world, and were at first regarded by
   many as doubtful if not erroneous; but have since produced the general
   conviction that the downfall of popery and the ultimate extension of
   the kingdom of Christ, are far less distant than has been supposed--a
   conviction remarkably supported by the whole series of providential
   dispensations. And there can be no doubt that this conviction has been
   a prime cause of the present concentrated movement of the whole church
   of God, to hasten forward the reign of the Messiah. As long as it was
   the commonly received opinion of Christians that the church was yet
   destined to experience far more severe and overwhelming calamities,
   than any she had hitherto known--calamities amounting to an almost
   total extinction--before the time of her final prosperity; the efforts
   and the prayers of Christians for the arrival of that period of
   prosperity were chiefly prevented: inasmuch as it was, in effect, to
   labour and pray for the almost total extinction of the church of
   Christ, during a period of indefinite extent, as well as to labour and
   pray, if speedy success should crown their efforts, for the
   destruction, if not of their own lives, yet of those of their children
   and immediate descendants. In the sections referred to, he endeavours
   to show, and by arguments which are yet unanswered, that the severest
   trials announced in prophecy against the church of God were already
   past, that her warfare was even then almost accomplished, and that the
   day of her redemption was drawing nigh. By establishing this point; and
   by presenting the arguments in a manner so clear and convincing, as
   wholly to supersede the necessity of any subsequent treatise on the
   subject; the work in question, through the Divine blessing, has exerted
   an influence, singularly powerful, in rousing the church of Christ to
   that series of efforts which is to result in her final victory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [26] See vol. i. pp. 258, 259.

   [27] It was postponed to the time of the children of the generation
   here referred to.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XV.

   ARRIVAL OF DAVID BRAINERD AT NORTHAMPTON--HIS SICKNESS AND DEATH AT THE
   HOUSE OF MR. EDWARDS--HIS PAPERS--DEATH OF JERUSHA, THE SECOND DAUGHTER
   OF MR. E.--HER CHARACTER--CORRESPONDENCE OF MR. E. WITH REV. JOHN
   ERSKINE--ABSTRACT OF MR. E. S FIRST LETTER TO MR. ERSKINE--PLAN
   CONCEIVED OF THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL--DEATH OF COL. STODDARD--KINDNESS
   OF MR. ERSKINE--LETTER OF MR. E. TO HIM--SECOND LETTER FROM MR.
   GILLESPIE--LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--LETTER TO MR. ERSKINE--LETTER FROM
   MR. WILLISON--LIFE AND DIARY OF BRAINERD--LETTERS TO MESSRS. ERSKINE,
   M'CULLOCH, AND ROBE--ORDINATION OF REV. JOB STRONG--ANECDOTE OF REV.
   MR. MOODY--LETTER OF MR. E. TO HIS DAUGHTER MARY--SECOND LETTER TO MR.
   GILLESPIE.

   The reader will recollect, that while Mr. Edwards was at New-Haven, in
   September, 1743, he formed an acquaintance with david brainerd, then a
   missionary to the Indians at Kaunaumeek [28] , and became his
   counsellor at a most interesting period of his life. In March 1747,
   Brainerd, in consequence of extreme ill health, took leave of his
   Indians in New Jersey, and in April came into New England; when he was
   invited by Mr. Edwards to take up his abode in his own house. He came
   there on the 28th of May, apparently very much improved in health,
   cheerful in his spirits, and free from melancholy, yet at that time
   probably in a confirmed consumption. Mr. Edwards had now an opportunity
   of becoming most intimately acquainted with him, and regarded his
   residence under his roof as a peculiar blessing to himself and his
   family. "We enjoyed," he observes, "not only the benefit of his
   conversation, but had the comfort and advantage of having him pray in
   the family from time to time." He was at this time very feeble in
   health; but in consequence of the advice of his physician, he left
   Northampton for Boston, on the 9th of June, in company with the second
   daughter of Mr. Edwards. They arrived on the evening of the 12th, among
   the family relatives of Mr. Edwards in Boston, and for a few days the
   health of Brainerd appeared much amended; but a relapse on the 18th
   convinced his friends that his recovery was hopeless. Contrary to their
   expectations, however, he so far revived, that on the 20th of July they
   were able to leave Boston, in company with his brother, Mr. Israel
   Brainerd, and on the 25th they reached Northampton. Here his health
   continued gradually to decline, until early in October it was obvious
   that he would not long survive. "On the morning of Lord's day, Oct. 4,"
   says Mr. Edwards, "as my daughter Jerusha, who chiefly attended him,
   came into the room, he looked on her very pleasantly, and said, Dear
   Jerusha, are you willing to part with me?--I am quite willing to part
   with you: I am willing to part with all my friends: though if I thought
   I should not see you and be happy with you in another world, I could
   not bear to part with you. But we shall spend a happy eternity
   together." He died on Friday, Oct. 9, 1747, and on the Monday
   following, Mr. Edwards preached the sermon at his funeral, from 2 Cor.
   v. 8. entitled, "True Saints when absent from the Body are present with
   the Lord;" which was published in the December following.

   Brainerd, after destroying the early part of his Diary, left the
   residue in the hands of Mr. Edwards, to dispose of as he thought best.
   Mr. Edwards concluded to publish it, in connexion with a brief Memoir
   of his life.

   In the ensuing February, Jerusha, the second daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
   Edwards, was removed by death. Her father, in a note to the Memoirs of
   Brainerd, thus alludes to this distressing event. "Since this, it has
   pleased a holy and sovereign God, to take away this my dear child by
   death, on the 14th of February, next following, after a short illness
   of five days, in the 18th year of her age. She was a person of much the
   same spirit with Brainerd. She had constantly taken care of and
   attended him in his sickness, for nineteen weeks before his death;
   devoting herself to it with great delight, because she looked on him as
   an eminent servant of Jesus Christ. In this time, he had much
   conversation with her on the things of religion; and, in his dying
   state, often expressed to us, her parents, his great satisfaction
   concerning her true piety, and his confidence that he should meet her
   in heaven, and his high opinion of her not only as a real Christian,
   but as a very eminent saint: one whose soul was uncommonly fed and
   entertained with things which pertain to the most spiritual,
   experimental, and distinguishing parts of religion: and one, who, by
   the temper of her mind, was fitted to deny herself for God, and to do
   good, beyond any young woman whatsoever whom he knew. She had
   manifested a heart uncommonly devoted to God in the course of her life,
   many years before her death; and said on her death-bed, that she had
   not seen one minute, for several years, wherein she desired to live one
   minute longer, for the sake of any other good in life, but doing good,
   living to God, and doing what might be for his glory."

   In the course of the year 1747, an epistolary correspondence was
   commenced between Mr. Edwards and the Rev. John Erskine of
   Kirkintilloch, afterwards the Rev. Dr. Erskine of Edinburgh, which was
   continued to the close of Mr. Edwards's life. This gentleman,
   possessing superior talents, and having every advantage of birth,
   fortune, and education, made choice of the clerical profession, in
   opposition to the prevailing wishes of his family; and in May, 1744,
   took charge of the parish of Kirkintilloch near Glasgow. In 1753, he
   was translated to a parish in the borough of Culross, and, in the
   autumn of 1758, to one of the parishes in Edinburgh. Distinguished
   alike for his learning and piety, for his honourable and munificent
   spirit, and for his firm attachment to evangelical religion, he adorned
   every station which he filled by a faithful and conscientious discharge
   of its various duties--private, social, and public;--enjoyed the high
   respect of the wise and good, not only in Great Britain, but
   extensively in both continents; and died in 1803, in his 82d year,
   having been the correspondent, successively, of President Edwards, of
   his son Dr. Edwards, president of Union College, and of his grandson
   President Dwight, for the period of fifty-six years.

   Mr. Erskine began the correspondence with Mr. Edwards early in 1747,
   through the intervention of Mr. M'Laurin of Glasgow, by sending him the
   "Remains of Mr. Hall"--a memoir, written by himself, of a most
   respectable and beloved fellow-student in theology, a young gentleman
   of uncommon promise. I have none of the letters of Mr. Erskine to Mr.
   Edwards, and not having been able to procure the first letter of Mr.
   Edwards to Mr. Erskine, written in the summer of 1747, must be indebted
   for the following account of it to the "Life of Dr. Erskine," by the
   Hon. and Rev. Sir H. M. Wellwood.--"On this occasion Mr. Edwards
   expressed, with great tenderness and delicacy, his sympathy with one,
   who had lost his most intimate and estimable friend in the prime of
   life, the companion of his youth, and, for a considerable time before
   his death, the delightful and affectionate associate of his studies and
   of his piety.

   "In a postscript to this letter, he mentioned his book on Religious
   Affections, then just published, and at the same time sent his
   correspondent a copy of it in a book of which it is not too much to
   say, that it is not only worthy of the talents and sincerity of its
   author, but that while it shows that he was neither forward nor rash in
   estimating striking or sudden impressions of religion, it contains more
   sound instruction on its particular subject, and lays down more
   intelligible and definite rules to distinguish true from false
   religion, and to ascertain by distinct characters the genuine spirit of
   vital piety, separated from all fanatical delusions, than any other
   book which has yet been given to the world.

   "In the same postscript to Mr. Edwards's first letter to Dr. Erskine,
   he gave him a general sketch of a plan which he had then formed, and
   which he afterwards executed with so much ability in his book on the
   Freedom of the Will;--a book which, whether his opinions be questioned
   or adopted, has certainly given him an eminent station both among
   philosophers and divines. I have thought,' he says, of writing
   something particularly and largely on the Arminian controversy in
   distinct discourses on the various points in dispute, to be published
   successively, beginning first with a discourse concerning the Freedom
   of the Will, and Moral Agency; endeavouring fully and thoroughly to
   state and discuss those points of liberty and necessity, moral and
   physical inability, efficacious grace, and the ground of virtue and
   vice, reward and punishment, blame and praise, with regard to the
   dispositions and actions of reasonable creatures.'

   "Such was the first idea of a work from which Mr. Edwards afterwards
   derived his chief celebrity as an author; but a considerable time
   intervened before he found it possible to make any progress in his
   design."

   The death of Col. Stoddard, which occurred at Boston, on the 19th of
   June this year, was a loss severely felt, not only by Mr. Edwards and
   the people of Northampton, but by the county and the province at large.
   He was eminently distinguished for his strength of understanding and
   energy of character, and had for a long period unrivalled influence in
   the council of the province. He was also a man of decided piety, and a
   uniform friend and supporter of sound morals and evangelical religion.
   Mr. Edwards preached a sermon on his death from Ezek. xix. 12. which
   was immediately published.

   Early in the next year Mr. Edwards received from Mr. Erskine a number
   of books which he valued very highly, as containing the ablest
   exhibition and defence of the system of doctrines usually styled
   Arminianism, which had at that time appeared before the public. In the
   following letter he acknowledges the kindness of his correspondent, and
   at the same time alludes to the decease of his daughter.

   "To the Rev. John Erskine

   Northampton, Aug. 31, 1748.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I, this summer, received your kind letter of Feb. 9, 1748, with your
   most acceptable present of Taylor on Original Sin, and his Key to the
   Apostolic Writings, with his Paraphrase on the Epistle to the Romans;
   together with your Sermons and Answer to Doct. Campbell. I had your
   Sermons before, sent either by you or Mr. M'Laurin. I am exceedingly
   glad of those two books of Taylor's. I had before borrowed and read
   Taylor on Original Sin; but am very glad to have one of my own; if you
   had not sent it, I intended to have sought opportunity to buy it. The
   other book, his Paraphrase, &c. I had not heard of; if I had I should
   not have been easy till I had seen it, and been possessed of it. These
   books, if I should live, may probably be of great use to me. Such
   kindness from you was unexpected. I hoped to receive a letter from you,
   which alone I should have received as a special favour.

   I have for the present been diverted from the design I hinted to you,
   of publishing something against some of the Arminian tenets, by
   something else that Divine Providence unexpectedly laid in my way, and
   seemed to render unavoidable, viz. publishing Mr. Brainerd's Life, of
   which the enclosed paper of proposals give some account.

   It might be of particular advantage to me, here in this remote part of
   the world, to be better informed what books there are that are
   published on the other side of the Atlantic; and especially if there be
   any thing that comes out that is very remarkable. I have seen many
   notable things that have been written in this country against the
   truth, but nothing very notable on our side of the controversies of the
   present day, at least of the Arminian controversy. You would much
   oblige me, if you would inform me what are the best books that have
   lately been written in defence of Calvinism.

   I have herewith sent the two books of Mr. Stoddard's you desired. The
   lesser of the two was my own; and though I have no other, yet you have
   laid me under such obligations that I am glad I have it to send to you.
   The other I procured of one of my neighbours.

   I have lately heard some things that have excited hope in me, that God
   was about to cause there to be a turn in England, with regard to the
   state of religion there for the better; particularly what we have
   heard, that one Mr. West, a clerk of the privy council, has written in
   defence of Christianity, though once a notorious deist; and also what
   Mr. Littleton, a member of the house of commons, has written. I should
   be glad if you would inform me more particularly in your next
   concerning this affair, and what the present state of infidelity in
   Great Britain is.

   It has pleased God, since I wrote my last to you, sorely to afflict
   this family, by taking away by death, the last February, my second
   daughter, in the eighteenth year of her age; a very pleasant and useful
   member of this family, and one that was esteemed the flower of the
   family. Herein we have a great loss; but the remembrance of the
   remarkable appearances of piety in her, from her childhood, in life,
   and also at her death, are very comfortable to us, and give us great
   reason to mingle thanksgiving with our mourning. I desire your prayers,
   dear Sir, that God would make up our great loss to us in himself.

   Please to accept of one of my sermons on Mr. Brainerd's death, and also
   one of my sermons on Mr. Buell's instalment. I desire that for the
   future your letters to me may be directed to be left with Mr. Edward
   Bromfield, merchant in Boston. My wife joins with me in respectful and
   affectionate salutations to you and Mrs. Erskine. Desiring that we may
   meet often at the throne of grace in supplications for each other,

   I am, dear brother, your obliged friend,

   Fellow labourer, and humble servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   P.S. I desired Mr. Prince to send to you one of my books on the subject
   of the concert for prayer for a general revival of religion the last
   year; and he engaged to do it; but I perceive he forgot it, and it was
   long neglected. But I have since taken some further care to have the
   book conveyed; so that I hope that ere this time you have received it.

   In the conclusion of your letter of Feb. 9, you mention a design of
   writing to me again by a ship that was to sail the next month for
   Boston. That letter I have not received."

   Mr. Gillespie, imagining that the difficulties which he had stated in
   his former letter, were not satisfactorily cleared up in the answer of
   Mr. Edwards, addressed to him the following reply.

   Letter from Mr. Gillespie.

   "Sept. 19, 1748.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I had the favour of yours in spring last, for which I heartily thank
   you. I did not want inclination to make you a return long ago, as I
   prize your correspondence, but some things concurred that effectually
   prevented me, which has given me concern.

   It was my desire to be informed, and my inclination to make you
   understand, how some passages in your book on Religious Affections did
   appear to me and some others, your real friends and well-wishers in
   this country, that determined me to presume to offer you some few
   remarks on the passages mentioned in my former letter; and desire of
   further information engages me now, with all respect, to make some
   observations upon some things in your letter. I hope you will pardon my
   freedom, and bear with me in it, and set me right wherein you may find
   me to misapprehend your meaning, or to mistake in any other respect.

   You say, You conceive that there is a great difference between these
   two things, viz. its being a man's duty, who is without spiritual light
   or sight, to believe; and its being his duty to believe without
   spiritual light or sight, or to believe while he yet remains without
   spiritual light or sight: it is not proper to say, it is a man's duty
   to believe without faith,' &c. Now, dear Sir, the difference here, I am
   not able to conceive; for all are bound to believe the divine testimony
   and to trust in Christ, which you acknowledge; and the want of
   spiritual light or sight does not loose from the obligation one is laid
   under by the divine command to believe instantly on Christ, and at all
   season, as his circumstances shall require, nor does it excuse him in
   any degree for not believing. I own that a person who has no spiritual
   light or sight cannot eventually believe, if by light or sight is meant
   the influence or grace of the Spirit, by which one's mind is irradiated
   to take up the object and grounds of faith, so as to be made to have a
   spiritual sight of Christ, and to act that grace; yet still, even when
   one, wants this, it is his duty, and he is bound to believe, for we
   know it is a maxim, 'ability is not the rule of duty.' I also
   acknowledge, that no person who is, and always has been, without
   spiritual light or sight, is bound, nor is it his duty, to believe that
   he has actually believed, or to conclude he is really a partaker of the
   faith of God's elect. I have some apprehension this is all you meant by
   the expressions I have noticed, and the reasoning in consequence of
   them; or else certainly different ideas are affixed to words with you
   and among us. There is indeed a great deal of difference betwixt its
   being one's duty to believe, or to act faith, and its being his duty to
   believe he has believed, or has acted divine faith; i.e. you say you
   apply the particle without, respecting spiritual light or sight, to the
   act of believing, by which I suppose you intend, all should believe,
   though none do really believe, without spiritual light or sight;' in
   which I entirely agree with you. The word duty indeed, which you use
   when treating that matter, is ordinarily supposed to signify the
   obligation the person is under by the divine authority to believe, as
   applied to the matter of faith, and not to the act of faith put forth
   in consequence of such obligation. Had I not supposed you plainly meant
   by the expressions I quoted from the book, the duty or obligation to
   believe, and not an act of faith exerted, I should have made no remarks
   on them. It is indeed as absurd for one to conclude he has really
   believed without spiritual light or sight, as to say one should believe
   he had believed, without those things that are essentially implied in
   faith. But I must differ from you in thinking it is not very proper to
   say, it is a man's duty to believe without faith, i.e. while he yet
   remains without spiritual light or sight, or to put forth an act of
   faith on the Saviour, however void of spiritual light or sight; for if
   this was not the truth, the finally impenitent sinner could not be
   condemned for unbelief, as the Holy Ghost declares he will be, John
   iii. 19, 20, 24.. and that notwithstanding the power of the Spirit of
   faith must make him believe. I should be glad to know the precise idea
   you affix to the words faith and believing. I do not remember a
   person's reflecting on his act of faith, any where in Scripture termed
   believing. You remark, That I seem to suppose that a person's doubting
   of his good estate is the proper opposite of faith;' and I own, as it
   is a believer's duty to expect salvation through Christ, which, in
   other words, is to believe his good estate, Acts. xv. ll. Gal. ii. 20.
   Eph. ii. 4. Job xix. 25. doubting of it must be his sin, an effect of
   unbelief, a part of it, and thus the proper opposite of faith,
   considered in its full compass and latitude. Thus once doubting of his
   good estate by a true believer, and unbelief in one branch of it, or
   one part and manner of its acting, are the same thing. Faith and
   unbelief are opposed in Scripture, and what is the opposite of one
   ingredient in unbelief must be faith in one part of it,--one thing that
   belongs to its exercise. A person's believing is owned to be his
   indispensable duty, and this comprehends or supposes his being
   confident of his good estate, and is properly divine faith, because it
   has the divine testimony now cited, on which it bottoms, Jer. iii. 19.
   The Lord says, Thou shalt call me, My father, and shalt not turn away
   from me;' which is evidently faith, and no less manifestly belief of
   one's good estate, or being confident of it, because the expression
   must denote the continued exercise of faith, in not turning away from
   the Lord. Crying Abba Father, Rom. viii. 15. is faith in the Lord as
   one's father, which must have a being confident of one's good estate
   inseparable from it, or rather enwrapped in it. I suppose what I have
   mentioned is very consistent with what you say, That faith, and persons
   believing that they have faith, are not the same;' for one's believing
   that he has faith, simply and by itself, has for its object the man's
   inward frame, or the actings and exercises of his spirit, and not a
   divine testimony. This is not divine faith; but, as I have laid the
   matter, a being confident of one's good estate has for its foundation
   the word of God, Heb. xiii. 5., &c. ultimately,--at least; to be sure
   this is one way in which faith is acted, or one thing in its exercise.
   I am far from thinking unbelief, or being without faith, and doubting
   whether they have faith, to be the same thing in an unconverted sinner,
   whom your words, 'being without faith,' must mean, and therein we
   entirely agree. But I must think, as to the believer, his doubting
   whether or not he has faith, is sinful, because it is belying the Holy
   Ghost, denying his work in him, so there is no sin to which that
   doubting can so properly be reduced as unbelief. You know, dear Sir,
   doubting and believing are opposed in Scripture, Matt. xiv. 31. Matt.
   xxi. 21. Mark xi. 23. and I cannot exclude from the idea of doubting, a
   questioning the truth and reality of a work of grace on one's soul; for
   the Holy Ghost requires us to believe the reality of his work in us, in
   all its parts, just as it is, and never would allow us, much less call
   us to sin, or to believe a falsehood, that one is void of grace, when
   he has it, that good might come of it, i.e. that the person might be
   awakened from security, &c. 1 John iii. 3. Every man that hath this
   hope in him purifieth himself, as he is pure;' I think intimates, that
   in proportion to the degree of one's hope, that the Lord is his Father,
   will be his aim after sanctification, and his attainment of it; if so,
   to renounce this hope, to throw it up at any season, on any account,
   must be unlawful; whence I infer, for the believer to doubt of his
   gracious state, to call it in question for any reason whatever, so as
   to raze it, it is simply sinful, 1 John ii. 12, 15. I write unto you,
   little children, because your sins are forgiven you, viz. Love not the
   world.' Here forgiveness of sin is used as a motive or incitement not
   to love the world; and this reasoning of the apostle would lose all its
   force, were it incumbent on a believer, at some seasons, to think he
   was not within the bond of the new covenant,--he is bound ever to hold
   that conclusion fixed. The exhortation, not to cast away one's
   confidence, certainly comprehends a call to persevere in believing in
   our interest in the Lord, and to practise it at all seasons, Heb. x.
   35. Job's friends endeavoured to make him question, whether the root of
   the matter was in him, and to conclude that he was a hypocrite. He
   resolved, though the Lord should slay him, he would trust in him, chap.
   xiii. 15 being confident of his own good estate, chap. xxvii. 3, 5. All
   the while my breath is in me;' and ver. 5. Till I die, I will not
   remove my integrity from me;' and we see, from the whole tenor of his
   book, what there he resolved, he actually did practise; he never
   entertained the thought of supposing the Lord was not his God,
   notwithstanding the grievous eruptions of iniquity in him, in
   quarrelling with the sovereignty of God, &c. And in the end, the Lord
   condemned his friends for speaking of him the things that were not
   right,' and pronounced that Job, his servant, had said of him the thing
   that is right,' Job iv. 1.; from which, it is to be presumed, he was
   approved in guarding against razing his state [29] . Also, 2 Cor. i.
   12. what the apostle terms there, his rejoicing,' was what supposed his
   being confident of his good estate, that he was participant of a
   principle of grace, which made him capable of acting, as he did, with
   godly sincerity. All which, with other considerations, do satisfy me,
   that a believer never should raze his state on any account whatever;
   and that, as has been mentioned, doubting of his gracious state is
   sinful, one way of unbelief, its acting in him, though not the direct
   and immediate opposite of that acting of faith by which a person
   renounces his own righteousness and closes with Christ, yet the
   opposite of the posterior exercise of faith in him, and upon the
   promise, in certain respects. Your book is now lent, and therefore I
   cannot take notice, as you wish and I incline, of what you say on this
   head, p. 80, 81. more particularly than I have done. However, I have, I
   think, touched the precise point in difference between us.

   You observe, I seem to intimate, A person's being confident of his own
   good estate is the way to be delivered from darkness, deadness,
   backsliding, and prevailing iniquity.' And you add, that you think
   whoever supposes this to be God's method of delivering his saints, when
   sunk into an evil, careless, carnal, and unchristian frame, first to
   assure them of their good estate and his favour, while they yet remain
   in such a frame, and so to make that the means of their deliverance,
   does surely mistake God's method of dealing with such persons.' Here I
   think you represent the case too strong; for the words in my letter to
   which you refer, were, I have heard it taught that the believer was
   bound to trust in the Lord in the very worst frame he could be in, and
   that the exercise of faith was the way to be delivered from darkness,
   deadness, backsliding,' &c. And afterwards, I said, when questioning
   whether the believer should ever doubt of his estate on any account
   whatever, I know the opposite has been prescribed; when the saint is
   plunged in the mire of prevailing iniquity.' Now, as a believer may be
   thus plunged, and yet sin at that instant be his grief and burden, Rom.
   vii. 24. and he may have the hope and expectation of being relieved
   from it even then, Psalm lxv. 3. I do not think my words convey the
   idea you affix to them. Also you will observe, I do not say, that a
   person's being confident of his own good estate is the way to be
   delivered from,' &c. but that the believer was bound to trust the Lord
   in the worst frame,' &c. This I mention, precisely to state my words,
   and they are, I think, very defensible; for the believer is called to
   trust in the Lord for ever,' Isa. xxvi. 4.. If so, when in the
   situation mentioned; for this is a trusting in the Lord as one's God.
   The woman with the issue of blood, her touching Christ, and the
   success, is, I suppose, a call and encouragement to touch him by faith,
   for having the worst soul-maladies healed, Mark v. 25.. Trusting in the
   Lord for needful blessings, in the situation mentioned, gives him the
   glory of his faithfulness, and engages him to act in the believer's
   behalf; thus to do, it is both duty and interest. Jonah, when in a
   course of grievous rebellion, and under awful chastisement for it, when
   perhaps he had actually disclaimed interest in the Lord, or was in
   danger of it, said, he would look again toward the Lord's holy temple,'
   chap. ii. 4. evidently in exercise of faith in the Lord as his God, the
   Lord assuring him of his good estate and his favour, by the operation
   of the Spirit causing him so to act, and to be conscious of it; and,
   verse 7. when my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my
   prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple.' Here is my assertion
   exemplified in practice, by a believer, I may venture to say, in an
   evil frame, when the Spirit breathed upon him. Though a prophet, he
   deliberately disobeyed the express instructions of his Lord, chap. i.
   2, 3. and in a careless frame, for he slept securely in the sides of
   the ship, during a tempest raised for his sake, and when the heathen
   mariners every one called upon his god, chap. i. 5, 6. So far was he
   from dreading, as he had reason to do, that the Lord would plead a
   controversy with him for the part he acted, that dismal security, awful
   carelessness, and a carnal frame had seized him; for he declared to the
   Lord, that he said to him in his country, he would repent of the evil
   he had said he would do to the Ninevites, if they turned from their
   evil way, and assigned that for the reason why he fled to Tarshish,
   chap. iv. 2.; and thus would rather that the Lord should want the
   honour, that would redound to his name by the repentance, though only
   outward, of the Ninevites, than that the whole city should be
   destroyed, one of the largest the sun shone upon, and the most
   populous, and that himself should lose the honour and comfort of being
   the instrument of its preservation, than that he should fall under the
   imputation of being a false prophet, for which there would yet have
   been no foundation. Horrid carnality this! for as it was dreadful
   selfishness, it may, in that view, be termed carnality,--astonishing
   pride! this filthiness of the spirit' is worse than that of the flesh;
   and, all circumstances of his conduct considered, he was not only in an
   ungodly frame, but in an inhumane one, and he sinned presumptuously in
   one of the highest degrees, we may suppose, in which it is possible for
   a believer so to act; notwithstanding it appears the happy turn was
   begun in him, under the influence of the Spirit, by renewing his faith
   in the Lord as his God, and being confident of his good estate; upon
   which he prayed, as already mentioned, and was heard by his God, see
   verses 7, 8. was delivered out of his then dismal and dangerous
   circumstances, chap. ii. 12.--Thus I have done more than I was bound to
   do, and have proved the point, not only in the manner in which I have
   expressed it, but in the strong light your words, a comment on mine,
   had set it; for one plain scripture instance, such certainly as that I
   have given, is sufficient, as agreed, to prove any thing. It is so far
   from being a mistaking of God's method of dealing with such persons, as
   you suggest, (pardon me, dear Sir,) to say, that it is the Lord's
   method of delivering his saints when in a backsliding condition, first
   to assure them of their good estate and his favour, and so to make that
   the means of their deliverance;' that I give you the words of the Holy
   Ghost for it is as express and full as any thing possibly can be, Jer.
   iii. 12, 13, 14.; verse 14. Turn, O backsliding children, saith the
   Lord, for I am married unto you.' This was, to be sure, the Lord's
   intimating the new covenant relation in which he stood to the spiritual
   Israel among them; and verse 22 of that chapter, the Lord says, Return,
   ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings;' and in the
   close of the verse, we have the Lord's thus assuring them of their good
   estate and his favour, shown to be the effectual mean of the
   backsliding being healed: Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the
   Lord our God.' Hos. xiv. 4. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for
   thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.' Here the first words of the Lord's
   message to his spiritual Israel, are, that 'the Lord was their God,'
   and the expression, fallen by iniquity,' conveys a very strong idea,
   when applied to a believer, perhaps as strong, as is comprehended in
   your words, 'evil, &c. frame;' and I must think this verse is so
   expressed to work on holy ingenuousness in them, for its revival when
   under the ashes of corruption. It would perhaps be no difficult matter
   to multiply scripture testimonies of such kind; but these adduced are,
   I think, full proof of the point, for confirmation of which they are
   brought. The love of Christ constrains the believer to return from
   folly, as well as to other things in other respects, 2 Cor. v. 14.. I
   might argue here from the efficacy of the love of God apprehended, the
   genius of the new creature, and nature in believers, and a variety of
   other topics, but choose, without expatiating, to confine myself to
   precise scripture testimonies. As to what you say, that among all the
   multitudes you have had opportunity to observe, you never knew one
   dealt with in this manner, but have known many brought back from great
   declensions, that appeared to be true saints, but it was in a very
   diverse way from this: first conscience awakened; they brought into
   great fear of the wrath of God; his favour hid; the subjects of a kind
   of new work of humiliation; brought to great sense of deserving God's
   wrath, while they yet feared it, before God had delivered them from
   apprehension of it, and comforted with a renewed sense of his favour.'
   All I observe upon this is, that the way I have laid down, is obviously
   that which the Lord declares in his word, he takes, for bringing back
   his people from declensions, and thus that in it mercy is to be
   expected, whatever the Lord may be pleased to do in sovereignty, and he
   will not be limited; also, persons do not perceive every thing that
   passes within them, far less are they capable to give a full distinct
   account of every thing of each kind. Experiences of Christians are to
   be brought to the touch-stone of the infallible bar, and to stand or
   fall by it; the Bible is not to be brought to their test, and judged of
   by them. I own we may mistake the sense of Scripture, but it is so
   obvious in the passages I have quoted, that I cannot see how it can be
   misapprehended.

   I cannot say any thing now, about the other remarks I made on your
   book, touched on in your letter, because I have not now the book to
   look into. I understand the passages about prevalence of sin, so as to
   denominate a person not in a gracious state, better, by what you have
   wrote; and, if any difficulty shall remain after comparing your book
   and letter, I may come to propose it to you afterwards.

   What you wrote about the case of temptation was very agreeable, and I
   thank you for it. I shall now state the case more plainly, because I
   want much your further thoughts upon it. It is precisely this. A person
   finds himself beset by evil angels, what if I remember right Voetius
   terms obsessio, and one in that situation obsessus; they incessantly
   break into his body and mind, sometimes by vain, at other seasons by
   vile thoughts, now by the thoughts of a business neglected, which was a
   seasonable thing to be done, then by a scripture text, or an engaging
   thought of some spiritual truth, when entrance is not to be had another
   way, and by a variety of other methods. They do all they can,
   perpetually to teaze, defile, and discourage; he is conscious of the
   whole transaction, and finds his spirit broken by it, and goes not
   about to reason with Satan, knows the expediency of this course, is
   aware Satan wants no better, than that he pray much and long against
   his temptations, and so wont pray himself out of breath, by his
   instigation; is convinced the remedy is to get them kept out of body
   and mind; trusts, in dependence on the Lord, to the use of medical,
   moral, and religious means for that end, because experience shows all
   of them are expedient and advantageous in their place; but all is in
   vain, no relief for him, relish of divine things wore off the mind, no
   comfort, is rendered callous by cruel constant buffetings, he cries,
   but the Lord hears not. By what I understand, this is a just
   representation of the case, and will lead you to the knowledge of other
   circumstances in it. What would you advise such a person to do? How
   shall he recover savour of spiritual truths and objects?

   I wondered you said nothing in your letter, about what I mentioned in
   mine, respecting supposed immediate revelations of facts and future
   events, as special favours conferred on some special favourites of
   heaven. I give in to your sentiments on that point, expressed in the
   three treatises you have published, and greatly like what Mr. Brainerd
   said on the subject, as mentioned, I think, by you, in the funeral
   sermon on him, which I perused with a great deal of pleasure; and shall
   now mention some things, said in favour of that principle, of which
   people are very tenacious, that I may have your answers to them, which
   will be a singular favour done me, for certain reasons: for example,
   John xvi. 13. is affirmed to be an express promise of such a thing:--it
   is urged, the thing is not contrary to Scripture, and therefore, may
   be;--it is urged, John xiii. 24-27. is an example of it, an intimation
   what the Lord will do in such kind when it pleaseth him, till the end
   of time. It is pretended, and indeed this is the strength of the cause,
   that the thing is a matter of fact, has nothing to do with the Bible,
   therefore nothing about it is to be expected in Scripture, and simply
   to deny it in all cases, is daringly to limit the power of God. The
   Lord has not said he will not grant it, and how dare any say it cannot
   be? It is reasoned, there are numbers of well attested instances of the
   thing in different ages and places, facts are stubborn things, and to
   deny them all is shocking, an overturning of all moral evidence. It is
   insisted on, that the thing has been formerly; it is confessed, and why
   may it not be now? We are told, a considerable time before a thing
   happened, that it has been impressed on the mind in all its
   circumstances, which exactly happened in every point; if when asked,
   what one can say to this, he says, perhaps it was from Satan, to this
   it is answered, does he know future contingent events? The reply is at
   hand, it is not above him to figure a thing on the fancy long before,
   which he is resolved by some means to bring about; but to all this it
   is answered by advocates for immediate revelations, such reasoning
   tends to sap one of the main pillars of evidence of the divinity of the
   scripture prophecies.

   I have, by what I remember, given you the force of the argument, to
   establish what has had, I too well know, very bad effects, as commonly
   managed, in Britain, as well as in New England; a history of instances
   of them would not be without its use, and materials for it are not
   wanting. I will long much to see what you say in way of reply to all
   this. I am sure you cannot employ time better than in framing it. I
   should have mentioned that the authority of eminent divines is brought
   to bear upon them, whose stomachs stand at swallowing things, like
   additions to the Bible,--Mr. Fleming, in the Fulfilling of the
   Scriptures, Dr. Goodwin, &c. But on this, it has been pleasantly
   observed, that the authority of the worthies in the eleventh of the
   Hebrews, would have done a good deal better. I have some apprehension
   this is a point of truth, which the Lord is to clear up in this age.

   I have read your Humble Attempt, and with much satisfaction; was
   charmed with the scriptures of the latter day of glory set in one point
   of light. I do think humbly your observations on Lowman have great
   strength of reason. The killing of the witnesses, as yet to come, has
   been to me a grievous temptation; for which reason, I peruse with
   peculiar pleasure what you say on this subject; but if you answer the
   objection, It would appear that the seventh trumpet is to sound soon
   after the resurrection of the witnesses, and the kingdoms of the world,
   &c. but that has not happened, therefore the witnesses are not killed;'
   I say, if this you answer, I have forgot.

   I should have also mentioned, that it seems evident, the doctrine of
   immediate revelations must be simply denied as unscriptural, and thus
   well-founded in no case; or it must be allowed in its full compass, and
   latitude, let the consequences of it be what they will, for if the
   thing is allowed possible, reasonings about its effects will not
   conclude nor avail; I can see no middle way between the two things.
   That principle taken for granted by almost all, in all times past, is,
   as I mentioned in my last letter, to me a surprising thing.

   Mr. Whitefield arrived at Edinburgh Wednesday last, and was to preach
   on Thursday evening; but as I am fifteen miles from that city, of which
   two miles by sea, I have not yet heard of the effects of his preaching,
   or the number of the audiences; I wish they may be as frequent as when
   he was last here. May Divine power specially attend his ministrations!
   We need it much, as we are generally fallen under great deadness. I
   believe he will find use for all his prudence and patience in dealing
   with us, for different reasons. With great pleasure, friends to vital
   religion, and to him, are informed he is to make no collections at this
   time! I was glad to hear you write, that he laboured with success in
   New England, in rectifying mistakes he had favoured, about intimations
   made by the Lord to his people, &c. and heartily wish he may be
   directed to apply an antidote here, where it is also needed.

   I have tired you with a long epistle, and shall therefore now break
   off. What you was pleased to favour me with, upon the difficulty
   started from Rom. viii. 28. was very acceptable, and I thank you much
   for it. I will expect a letter from you the first opportunity after
   this comes to hand; and in it all the news of New England, particularly
   some account of the state of religion with you. It gives me pleasure to
   think, I may write you my sentiments upon every thing without reserve.
   Please make my affectionate compliments to my friend Mr. Abercrombie,
   when you see him, or write to him, and tell him, I remember I am in his
   debt for a letter. I hope the ship I am informed of, for carrying this,
   is not sailed, and therefore it will not be so long in coming to your
   hand, after being writ, as my last.

   I am, &c."

   Letter to Mr. M'CULLOCH.

   "To the Rev. Mr. M'CULLOCH.

   Northampton, Oct. 7, 1748.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I thank you for your letter of Feb. 19, 1748, which I received the week
   before last. I had also, long before that, received the letter you
   speak of, which you wrote the spring before, dated March 12, 1747,
   which I wrote an answer to, and sent it to Mr. Prince of Boston, and
   committed it to his care; and am very sorry that you never received it.
   I am far from being weary of our correspondence. I ever looked on
   myself as greatly honoured and obliged by you, in your beginning this
   correspondence; and have found it pleasant and profitable; and
   particularly your last letter, that I have but now received, has been
   very agreeable and entertaining; especially on account of the good news
   it contains. I cannot but think many things mentioned in your letter,
   and the letters of my other correspondents in Scotland, which came with
   yours, are great things, worthy to be greatly taken notice of, and to
   be an occasion of much rejoicing and praise to all that love Zion: viz.
   The remarkable change in one of the clerks of the privy council; God's
   stirring up him and Mr. Littleton to write in defence of Christianity;
   the good effect of this among men of figure and character; the good
   disposition of the king, and the Prince and Princess of Wales; the late
   awakening of two of the princesses, Amelia and Caroline, and the
   hopeful conversion of one or both of them; the hopeful, real piety of
   the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his good disposition towards
   experimental religion and the dissenters; several of the clergy of the
   church of England lately appearing to preach the doctrines of grace;
   several of the magistrates, in various towns in England, exerting
   themselves with uncommon zeal to put the laws in execution against
   vice; and the eminent piety of the Prince of Orange, now the
   stadtholder of the Seven United Provinces. These things (at least some
   of them) are great in themselves, and are of that nature that they have
   a most promising aspect on the interests of Zion, and appear to be
   happy presages and forerunners of yet better and greater things that
   are coming. They look as if the tide was turning, and glorious things
   approaching, by the revolution of the wheel of God's providence. I
   think we, and all others, who have lately united by explicit agreement
   in extraordinary prayer for a general revival of religion and the
   coming of Christ's kingdom, may, without presumption, be greatly
   encouraged and animated in the duty we have engaged in, by the
   appearance of such a dawning of light from such great darkness; and
   should be ungrateful if we did not acknowledge God's great goodness in
   these things, and faithfulness in fulfilling the promises of his word;
   such as these in particular, If any two of you shall agree on earth as
   touching any thing you shall ask, it shall be done of my Father which
   is in heaven;' and, Before they call, I will answer; and while they are
   yet speaking, I will hear.' I have already communicated these things to
   some belonging to this town, and other places; some have appeared much
   affected with them; and one that belongs to another town, has taken
   extracts of these passages. I design, God willing, to communicate these
   things to my congregation, before the next quarterly day for prayer,
   and also to the neighbouring ministers, who, according to our stated
   agreement, will be met together on that day, to spend the former part
   of the day in prayer among ourselves, and the latter part in public
   services in one of our congregations; and shall also probably
   communicate these things to some of my correspondents in New Jersey and
   elsewhere, and I cannot but think they will tend to do a great deal of
   good, in various respects; and particularly will tend to promote the
   Concert for Prayer, in these parts of the world. I desired Mr. Prince
   of Boston to send you one of my books on the Concert, soon after it was
   published; who engaged to do it; but long forgot it, as I perceived
   afterwards to my surprise; but since that more thorough care has been
   taken about that matter; and I hope you, and each of my other
   correspondents in Scotland, have before now received one of those
   books.

   I thank you, dear Sir, for sending me your thoughts on some things in
   the prophecies of the Revelation of St. John, and for being at so much
   trouble as to send it twice (supposing the first letter had
   miscarried.) This I take as a particular mark of respect, for which I
   am obliged to you. I received, as I said before, your former letter,
   (which contained the same observations,) and sent an answer to it,
   wherein I gave you my thoughts, such as they were, on those subjects.
   But if you have received my book on United Prayer, &c. therein you have
   seen more fully my thoughts on some things in the Revelation, that have
   a near relation to the same matter that you write about; the substance
   of which I before had written to you in a large letter, desiring your
   opinion of what I wrote.

   The letter I think you received, by some intimations contained in yours
   of March 12, 1747. But you was not pleased to favour me with any thing
   at all of your thoughts of what I had so largely communicated to you,
   to that end, that I might have your opinion. But I am not the less
   willing again to communicate my thoughts on your remarks.

   As to what you observe concerning the number six hundred and sixty-six,
   and that number being found in the name of the present king of France;
   it is indeed something remarkable, that that number should be found
   both in his Latin and French names, as you observe; and I do not know
   but that the omniscient Spirit of God (who doubtless in his predictions
   has sometimes his eye on several things in which he knows they will be
   fulfilled) might have some respect to his name in the prophecy; but I
   can hardly think that this individual king of France, or any other
   particular prince in Europe, is what is chiefly intended by the beast,
   so largely described in the 13th chapter of Revelation, whose number is
   said to be six hundred and sixty-six. Of all the conjectures concerning
   the number of the beast, that I have lit on in my small reading, that
   of Mr. Potter's seems to me the most ingenious, who supposes the true
   meaning is to be found by extracting the root of the number. But after
   all, I have ever suspected that the thing chiefly aimed at by the Holy
   Spirit, was never yet found out, and that the discovery is reserved for
   later times. Yet one reason why Mr. Potter's conjecture does not fully
   satisfy me, is, the difficulty without adjusting the fractions in the
   root, when extracted. With respect to your very ingenious conjectures,
   concerning the period of forty-two months, or one thousand two hundred
   and sixty days, of the outer court and holy city's being trodden
   under-foot of the Gentiles; you know, Sir, that that forty-two months,
   or one thousand two hundred and sixty days, spoken of Rev. xi. 2. has
   been universally understood, as being the very same period with the
   1260 days of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, spoken of in the
   next verse; and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the
   woman's being led in the wilderness, chap. xiii. 6. and the time,
   times, and half a time, of her being nourished in the wilderness from
   the face of the serpent, ver. 14. and the forty-two months of the
   continuance of the beast, chap. xiii. 5. But it does not appear to me
   probable that these forty-two months of the continuance of the beast,
   means the sum of the diverse periods in which the plat of ground,
   whereon the ancient literal Jerusalem stood, was under the dominion of
   the Romans, Saracens, Persians, and Turks; but the space of time during
   which the reign of antichrist or the popish hierarchy continues; and as
   to the particular time of the downfall of antichrist, you see my
   reasons in the forementioned pamphlet, why I think it certain that it
   will not be known till it be accomplished: I cannot but think that the
   Scripture is plain in that matter, and that it does, in effect, require
   us to rest satisfied in ignorance till the time of the end comes.

   However, I should be very foolish, if I were dogmatical in my thoughts
   concerning the interpretation of the prophecies: especially in
   opposition to those who have had so much more opportunity to be well
   acquainted with things of this nature. But since you have insisted on
   my thoughts, I conclude you will not be displeased that I have
   mentioned them, though not altogether agreeable to yours. I am
   nevertheless greatly obliged to you for your condescension in
   communicating your thoughts to me. If we do not exactly agree in our
   thoughts about these things, yet in our prayers for the accomplishment
   of these glorious events in God's time, and for God's gracious presence
   with us, and his assistance in endeavours to promote his kingdom and
   interests, in the mean time, we may be entirely agreed and united. That
   we may be so, is the earnest desire of, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate brother and servant,

   in our common Lord,

   jonathan edwards."

   In perusing the following letter, while the reader will deeply regret
   the loss of that from Mr. Erskine to which it is an answer, he will
   feel a lively interest in the mass of religious intelligence which it
   contains, as well as in the interesting development which it gives of
   the character of Governor Belcher.

   "To the Rev. Mr. Erskine.

   Northampton, Oct. 14, 1748.

   rev. and dear sir,

   A little while ago I wrote a letter to you, wherein I acknowledged the
   receipt of your letter, and the books that came with it, viz. Taylor on
   Original Sin; and on the Romans: with your sermons, and Answer to Mr.
   Campbell; for which most acceptable presents I would most heartily and
   renewedly thank you.

   I sent my letter to Boston, together with one of Mr. Stoddard's Benefit
   of the Gospel to the Wounded in Spirit, and his Nature of Saving
   Conversion, with a sermon on Mr. Brainerd's death, and some account of
   a history of his life now in the press, to be sent to Scotland by the
   first opportunity; whether there has been any opportunity or no, I
   cannot tell. I have very lately received another letter from you, dated
   April 4, 1748, which was indeed exceedingly acceptable, by reason of
   the remarkable and joyful accounts it contains of things, that have a
   blessed aspect on the interests of Christ's kingdom in the world: such
   as the good effects of the writings of Mr. West and Mr. Littleton on
   some at court, and the religious concern in Mr. Randy's and Mr. Gray's
   parishes, the hopeful true piety of the Archbishop of Canterbury; this
   and the king's disposition, not only to tolerate but comprehend the
   dissenters; and their indifference with respect to the liturgy,
   ceremonies, and episcopal ordination; the piety of the prince who is
   now advanced to the stadtholdership, and has it established in his
   family for ever; the awakening of the Princess Caroline; and the good
   disposition of the Princess of Wales. I think it very fit that those,
   who have lately entered into an union of extraordinary prayer for the
   coming of Christ's kingdom and the prosperity of Zion, should inform
   one another of things which they know of, that pertain to the
   prosperity of Zion, and whereby their prayers are in some degree
   answered; that they may be united in joy and thanksgiving, as well as
   in supplication; and that they may be encouraged and animated in their
   prayers for the future, and engaged to continue instant therein with
   all perseverance. I think these things forementioned, which you have
   sent me an account of, are worthy greatly to be observed, by those that
   are united in the Concert for Prayer, for their comfort, praise, and
   encouragement. I intend to communicate these things to my own people,
   before the next quarterly season for prayer, and to the neighbouring
   ministers, who are united in this affair; and also to my correspondents
   in this province, and other provinces of America. I doubt not but they
   will have a happy tendency and influence in many respects. I hope, dear
   Sir, you will continue still to give me particular information of
   things that appear, relative to the state of Zion and the interests of
   religion, in Great Britain or other parts of Europe. In so doing, you
   will not only inform me, but I shall industriously communicate any
   important informations of that kind, and spread them amongst God's
   people in this part of the world; and shall endeavour to my utmost to
   make such a use of them, as shall tend most to promote the interest of
   religion. And among other things I should be glad to be informed of any
   books that come out, remarkably tending either to the illustration or
   defence of that truth, or the promoting the power of godliness, or in
   any respect peculiarly tending to advance true religion.

   I have given an account of some things, which have a favourable aspect
   on the interests of religion, in these American parts of the world, in
   my letters to Mr. Robe, and Mr. M'Laurin, sent with this; which you
   will have opportunity to see.

   In your last letter you desired to be particularly informed of the
   present state of New Jersey college, and of things remarkable of a
   religious nature respecting the Indians. As to the former, viz. the
   state of New Jersey college: by the last accounts I had, it was in
   somewhat of an unsettled state. Governor Belcher had a mind to give
   them a new charter, that he thought would be more for the benefit of
   the society. Accordingly a draft of a new charter was drawn; wherein it
   was proposed to make considerable alteration in the corporation of
   trustees; to leave out some of the former trustees; and that the
   governor, for the time being, should be a trustee, and three or four of
   the council of that province. Those two things made considerable
   uneasiness, viz. leaving out some of the former trustees, and making it
   a part of the constitution that the governor and so many of the council
   should be members of the corporation. Some feared that this would not
   be for the health of the society; because the men in chief authority in
   that province have, for the most part been men of no religion, and many
   of them open and professed contemners of it. How this matter has been
   settled, or whether these difficulties are got over, I have not been
   informed. As to Governor Belcher himself, he appears thoroughly engaged
   to promote virtue and vital religion in those parts, which already has
   had some good effects; vice and open profaneness, by the means, is
   become less fashionable among the great men, and virtue and religion
   more creditable. The disposition of Governor Belcher may in some
   measure be seen, by the following extract of a letter from him, in
   answer to one I wrote to him on a special occasion.

   'Burlington, New Jersey, Feb. 5, 1748.

   You will, Sir, be sure of me as a friend and father to the missionaries
   this way, and of all my might and encouragement for spreading the
   everlasting gospel of God our Saviour, in all parts and places where
   God shall honour me with any power or influence.

   As to myself, Sir, it is impossible to express the warm sentiments of
   my heart, for the mercies without number with which I have been loaded,
   by the God who has fed me all my life long to this day; and my
   reflection upon his goodness covers me with shame and blushing, for I
   know my utter unworthiness, and that I am less than the least of all
   his mercies. I would therefore abhor myself, and repent in dust and
   ashes. You are sensible, my good friend, that governors stand in a
   glaring light, and their conduct is narrowly watched by friends and
   enemies: the one often unreasonably applaud them, while the other
   perhaps too justly censure them. Yet in this I am not anxious; but to
   approve myself to the Searcher of hearts, from whose mouth I must hear
   pronounced, at the great and general audit, those joyful words, Enter
   thou, &c.--or that terrible sentence, Depart from me, &c. Join with me
   then in thankfulness to God, for all the blessings and talents he has
   intrusted me with, and in prayer that I may employ them to his honour
   and glory, to the good of the people over whom he hath placed me, and
   so to the comfort of my own soul: that I may always remember that he
   ruleth over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.'

   In another letter which I have received, dated Burlington, N. J. May
   31, 1748, he says as follows.

   'I will prostrate myself before my God and Saviour, and on the bended
   knees of my soul, (abhorring myself in every view,) I will beg for a
   measure of divine grace and wisdom; that so I may be honoured, in being
   an instrument of advancing the kingdom of the blessed Jesus in this
   world, and in that way be bringing forth fruit in old age [30] . I
   bless God, my heavenly Father, that I am not ashamed of the cross of
   Christ; and I humbly ask the assistance of sovereign grace, that, in
   times of temptation, I may never be a shame to it, I mean that my
   conversation may always be such as becometh the gospel of Christ. And I
   tell you again, that all such as minister at the altar, and in the
   course of their ministry approve themselves faithful to the great Head
   of the church, will not only find my countenance and protection, but my
   love and esteem.

   'As to our embryo college, it is a noble design; and if God pleases,
   may prove an extensive blessing. I have adopted it for a daughter, and
   hope it may in time become an Alma Mater, to this and the neighbouring
   provinces. I am getting the best advice and assistance I can in the
   draught of a charter, which I intend to give to our infant college, and
   I thank you, Sir, for all the kind hints you have given me, for the
   service of this excellent undertaking: and as St. Luke says of Mary,
   She kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart; so you may
   depend, what you have said about the college will not be lost with me;
   but, as far as God shall enable me, I shall exert and lay out myself in
   every way to bring it to maturity, and then to advance its future
   welfare and prosperity; for this I believe will be acceptable in the
   sight of God our Saviour; a relish for true religion and piety, being
   great strangers to this part of America. The accounts I receive from
   time to time, give me too much reason to fear that Arminianism,
   Arianism, and even Socinianism, in destruction to the doctrines of free
   grace, are daily propagated in the New England colleges. How horribly
   and how wickedly, are these poisonous notions rooting out those noble
   pious principles, on which our excellent ancestors founded those
   seminaries! and how base a return is it of the present generation, to
   that God, who is constantly surrounding them with goodness and mercy!
   and how offensive is it in the eyes of that God, who is jealous of his
   glory, and will take vengeance on his adversaries, and reserveth wrath
   for his enemies! And from these things I am led to thank you for your
   book, wrote in consequence of the Memorial from Scotland, for promoting
   a Concert in Prayer. I am much pleased with this proposal and imitation
   to all good Christians, and with your arguments to encourage and
   corroborate the design. The two missionaries you mention, Messrs.
   Spencer and Strong, I am told are present at Boston. I have once and
   again desired Mr. Brainerd to assure them of my kindness and respect.
   But their affairs have not yet led them this way. I rejoice in their
   being appointed to carry the gospel, in its purity, to the Six Nations;
   and when Mr. Brainerd and they proceed to Susquehannah, they shall have
   all my assistance and encouragement; by letters to the king's governors
   where they may pass, and my letters to the sachem or chief of those
   Indians.'

   With regard to the missionaries, Governor Belcher mentions: The
   commissioners in Boston, of the corporation in London, for the
   propagation of the gospel among the Indians in New England and parts
   adjacent, a little before Mr. David Brainerd went to Boston, the summer
   before his death, had received a sum of money from the estate left by
   the famous Dr. Williams, for the maintenance of two missionaries among
   the Six Nations: and having entertained a very great esteem of Mr.
   Brainerd, from the opportunity they had of acquaintance with him while
   in Boston, the committee intrusted to him the affair of finding and
   recommending the persons proper to be employed in this business.'
   Accordingly he, after much deliberation, recommended one Mr. Spencer,
   belonging to Haddam, his native town; and Mr. Strong, belonging to this
   town, Northampton; who are undoubtedly well qualified persons, of good
   abilities and learning, and of pious dispositions. The commissioners,
   on his recommendation, accepted these persons; and after Mr. Brainerd's
   death, sent to them; and they went down to Boston, and accepted the
   mission. But the commissioners did not think proper immediately to send
   them forth among the Six Nations; but ordered them to go and live,
   during the winter, in New Jersey with Mr. John Brainerd, among the
   christian Indians, there to follow their studies, and get acquaintance
   with the manners and customs of Indians; and in the spring to go with
   Mr. Brainerd to Susquehannah, to instruct the Indians on that river,
   before they went to the Six Nations. Accordingly they went and lived in
   New Jersey; but were discouraged as to their intended journey to
   Susquehannah; for they understood that the Susquehannah Indians greatly
   objected against entertaining missionaries, without the consent of the
   Six Nations, (to whom they are subject, and of whom they stand it seems
   in great fear,) and insisted that the missionaries should go to the Six
   Nations first. Therefore, in the spring, Messrs. Spencer and Strong
   returned to Boston, for new orders from the commissioners; who saw
   cause to order them to come and live at my house, till the time of an
   appointed interview of the governors of Boston and New York with the
   chiefs of the Six Nations, at Albany, in the latter part of the summer;
   when it was proposed that some, that should go to Albany with Gov.
   Shirley, should, on the behalf of the commissioners, treat with the Six
   Nations concerning their receiving missionaries. Messrs. Spencer and
   Strong did accordingly; they lived with me in the summer, and went to
   Albany at the time of the treaty; and the nation of the Oneidas, in
   particular, were dealt with concerning receiving these missionaries;
   who appeared free and forward in the matter. Messrs. Spencer and
   Strong, at that time, got some acquaintance with the chiefs of the
   tribe; who appeared fond of them, and very desirous of their going with
   them. But the grand difficulty then in the way, was the want of an
   interpreter; which occasioned their not going with the Indians at that
   time, but returning again to New England. Mr. Strong, also, was taken
   much out of health, which discouraged him from entertaining any
   thoughts of throwing himself into the fatigues and hardships of their
   undertaking, till the next spring. But the difficulty of the want of an
   interpreter is now got over; a very good one has been found; and Mr.
   Spencer was ordained on the 14th of the last month, and is gone with
   the interpreter, to go to the country of the Oneidas, about 170 miles
   beyond Albany, and about 130 miles distant from all settlements of the
   white people.

   It is a thing, that has a favourable aspect on the design of
   propagating the gospel among the Indians, that many of late have been
   remarkably spirited to promote it, and liberally to open their hands in
   order to it. Mr. Brainerd's going to Boston before his death, and
   people there having some acquaintance with him, and with his labours
   and success among the Indians, gave occasion to a considerable number
   in Boston, men of good substance and of the best character, and some of
   them principal men in the town, to form themselves into a charitable
   society, that by their joint endeavours and contributions, they might
   promote the instruction and spiritual good of the Indians; who have
   done some very liberal things for the Indians in New Jersey, and also
   for the Six Nations. The people of Northampton have also had their
   hearts remarkably opened, to contribute to the maintenance of Mr.
   Spencer's interpreter; and one individual at Springfield, has been
   moved to devote a considerable part of his estate, to promote the
   propagation of the gospel among the Six Nations.

   As to my writing against Arminianism; I have hitherto been remarkably
   hindered; so that probably it will be a considerable time before I
   shall have any thing ready for the press; but do intend, God allowing
   and assisting, to prosecute that design: and I desire your prayers for
   the Divine assistance in it. The books you sent me, will be a great
   help to me; I would on no account have been without them.

   I condole with you and Mrs. Erskine, on the loss of your noble and
   excellent father; which is doubtless a great loss to the church of God.
   But the glorious King of Zion, who was dead, is alive, and lives for
   evermore, and can raise up others in exalted stations to favour Zion;
   and seems to be so doing at this day, by things you give an account of
   in your letter. I have been the subject of an afflictive dispensation
   of late, tending to teach me how to sympathize with the afflicted;
   which I think I mentioned in my last letter to you, viz. the death of
   my second daughter, the last February.

   Please to present my most affectionate and respectful salutations to
   your dear consort. That I and mine may be remembered in your and her
   prayers, is the request of

   Your affectionate and obliged

   Friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   Letter from Mr. Willison to Mr. Edwards.

   "To the Rev. Mr. Edwards.

   Dundee, March 17, 1749.

   rev. and dear brother,

   I thank you for yours of October last, with your two sermons, which Mr.
   M'Laurin sent me; which two sermons give me cause to sing of mercy as
   well as of judgment, that as on shining and successful youth is laid
   aside from labouring in the gospel, another is sent forth to it.
   Indeed, worthy Mr. Brainerd was one among a thousand, for carrying the
   gospel among the heathen, as appears by the account you give of him in
   your sermon, and by his Journals which have been published here, and
   prefaced by Dr. Doddridge, and dedicated by him to the Society at
   Edinburgh. We must be silent; seeing He who hath removed him is holy,
   just, and wise. We must also lay our hands on our mouths, with respect
   to the loss of our great and eminent men, such as Dr. Watts, Dr.
   Colman, Mr. Cowper, and others. But O, it is no loss to be absent from
   the body, to them who are present with the Lord. Great need have we to
   cry to the Lord of the vineyard, to send forth others in their room: it
   is easy for him to do it, from places we little expect. These are
   hopeful and promising accounts, which you have from your correspondents
   in Scotland, mentioned in your letter. May they all hold true, and be
   the forerunners of greater things, and the dawnings of the glory of the
   latter days. I may add to them, the rising of a burning and shining
   light of a church of England minister, in Dr. Doddridge's
   neighbourhood, viz. Mr. Hervey; for he dates his writings from Weston
   Favel, near Northampton. He has lately published two volumes of
   Meditations on all kinds of subjects, in a most orthodox, Calvinistic,
   and evangelical strain, in which he takes all kinds of occasions of
   exalting and commending his glorious Master, Christ, in a most
   rhetorical way, and in a style I think inimitable, and in the most
   moving expressions, so that it is not easy to read him without tears.
   He freely taxes his brethren of that church, for departing from the
   doctrines of grace, and of justification by imputed righteousness, &c.
   which were taught by the Reformers, and their own articles and
   homilies. And notwithstanding this uncommon freedom, which he uses with
   his brethren, great men, &c. never had any books such a run in England,
   as his; for in a year and a half's time, or thereabouts, there are five
   editions of them published at London, and still they are greedily
   bought and read, especially by persons of distinction; the style being
   a little too high and poetical for the vulgar. His name is James
   Hervey, A. B. Some say he is of noble descent, from the Earl of
   Bristol; but I am not sure of this. It is thought he is the man that
   Dr. Doddridge points at, in the life of Col. Gardiner, pages 37, 38. It
   looks well, that so many in England should become fond of sound
   evangelical writings. No doubt the books may have reached Boston by
   this time. Let us therefore still wait and pray in hope. I should be
   glad to do any thing in my power, for promoting the Concert for United
   Prayer, and oh that it were spread both far and near; it would be a
   token of a general revival of religion to be fast approaching. I know
   nothing that hath a greater tendency to promote the aforesaid happy
   Concert, than the book you lately published about it (a copy whereof
   you sent me, for which I humbly thank you.) I wish it were universally
   spread, for I both love and admire the performance upon subjects so
   uncommon. I approve your remarks on Mr. Lowman. His reason for
   beginning the antichrist's reign so late as the year 756, is weak, viz.
   because then King Pepin invested the pope in his temporal dominion over
   that province in Italy, called St. Peter's Patrimony--when it is
   evident that the pope had usurped his tyrannical dominion over Christ's
   church long before, which is the main ground of his being called
   antichrist; yea, the pope's usurped power was greater before King
   Pepin's time, than it is at this day--as for instance, in Pope
   Symmachus' time, anno 501; in Pope Hormisdas' time, anno 516; in Pope
   Boniface 3d's time, anno 606; in Pope Constantine's time, anno 713.
   Yea, Mr. Lowman himself gives a dreadful instance of the pope's tyranny
   and usurpation, both over the church and the emperor, in page 97 of his
   book, which happened anno 726, thirty years before he begins
   antichrist's reign; when Pope Gregory 2d excommunicated the Emperor
   Leo, for ordering images to be removed out of the churches, and forbad
   obedience or paying of taxes to him. Was not antichrist's reign far
   advanced by that time? And we have several instances of the pope's
   tyranny, similar to this, recorded by historians, before that which Mr.
   Lowman mentions; which more directly denominate him antichrist, than
   his temporal doings in Italy. We see how easy it is for the best
   writers to slip into mistakes and wrong schemes. I agree with you, that
   antichrist's fall will be gradual, in the way you explain it.

   I am sorry to hear of Arminianism growing in New England. But I rejoice
   to hear of Gov. Belcher's zeal for religion in New Jersey; may the Lord
   spare him and bless him. As also I am glad to hear of the hopeful
   prospect of the gospel's growing among the Six Nations of Indians; and
   of such a youth as Mr. Spencer being sent among them: may the Lord
   prosper him as he did Mr. Brainerd. I sympathize with you under that
   affliction of your daughter's death; but it is comfortable she was
   helped so to live and die, as to afford such grounds of hope concerning
   her. And though she was the flower of your family, yet the remembering
   of the gracious hand, that painted the flower, will engage your worthy
   spouse and you to a becoming silence, like Aaron. As he will do what he
   will, let us join and say always, Let his will be done. I would fain be
   at this in my own case: may the Lord help me to more of christian
   submission and resignation. I am now entered into the 69th year of my
   age, and fallen under several distresses, whereby I have been shaken
   over the grave these many months past, and am laid aside from
   preaching. May the Lord assist me in my preparation for the dissolution
   of this tabernacle. I find it no easy matter to die, and to die in
   faith, and to die like Simeon with Jesus in his arms. I very much need
   your prayers for me. I am glad to hear, dear brother, that your parents
   are both alive, and that they hold the abilities of both body and mind
   so remarkably at so great an age; and particularly that your father, at
   seventy-nine years of age, and now near eighty, performs the whole of
   his ministerial work so constantly, without feeling it burdensome, and
   was able to travel forty miles to see you: his is indeed a wonder of
   his age, and would be reckoned so in this country, where few ministers
   come near to that age and vigour. May the Lord still spare him, with
   your mother, and make them still flourishing in old age; may they be
   blessed with much of God's precious presence, and with the consolations
   and fruits of the Spirit, in their aged and declining days. I still
   kindly remember your worthy spouse and children remaining, and pray
   they may long be continued for comforts to you, and you continued for a
   blessing to them, to your flock, and to many others, as you already
   have been.

   I remain, Rev. and dear brother,

   Your most affectionate brother, and serv't

   In our Lord,

   j. willison."

   "P.S. The Rev. Mr. Whitefield came to Scotland in September last, and
   preached about two months in and about Edinburgh and Glasgow. But some
   brethren who employed him, being challenged for it in synods and
   presbyteries, and debates arising thereupon, Mr. Whitefield returned to
   London. To give a view of the substance of these debates, and what
   passed thereupon in the synod of Glasgow, I have sent you herewith a
   printed pamphlet containing the same, with two other books, as a small
   acknowledgment of your favours."

   The three following letters went in the same packet to Scotland. The
   religious intelligence, which they communicated, will be found highly
   interesting at the present day. In the first of the three, is the
   earliest allusion, on the part of Mr. Edwards, which I have met with,
   to a most painful subject; the mention of which I have purposely
   forborne, that all which relates to it may be presented together.

   Letter to Mr. Erskine.

   "Northampton, May 20, 1749.

   rev. and dear sir,

   The day before yesterday, I received your letter of February 14th, with
   a pacquet, containing the pamphlets you mention in your letter; for
   which I am greatly obliged to you. I have not yet had opportunity to
   read these books, but promise myself much entertainment by them, from
   the occasions on which they were written, and the subject they are
   upon. The last letter I received from you before this, was dated April
   6, 1748, so that I suppose the two letters you say you wrote to me,
   since those which I acknowledge the receipt of, have miscarried, which
   I much regret, as I much value what comes from your hand.

   In one of your last letters which came to hand, you desire to be
   particularly informed concerning the state of religion, in these parts
   of the world, and particularly concerning the mission to the Indians,
   and the infant college in New Jersey. As to the affair of preaching the
   gospel to the Indians, Mr. Spencer went, the last fall, far into the
   western wilderness; to the Oneidas, one of the tribes of Indians called
   the Six Nations, living on Susquehannah river, towards the head of the
   river; to a place called by the Indians Onohohquauga, about 180 miles
   south-west from Albany on Hudson's river, where he continued through
   the winter; and went through many difficulties and hardships, with
   little or no success, through the failing of his interpreter; who was a
   woman that had formerly been a captive among the Caghnawauga Indians in
   Canady, who speak the same language with those Oneidas, excepting some
   small variation of dialect. She went with her husband, an Englishman,
   and is one of the people we here call Separatists; who showed the
   spirit he was of there in that wilderness, beyond what was known
   before. He differed with and opposed Mr. Spencer in his measures, and
   had an ill influence on his wife; who I fear was very unfaithful,
   refusing to interpret for Mr. Spencer more than one discourse in a
   week, a sermon upon the sabbath; and utterly declined assisting him in
   discoursing and conversing with the Indians in the week time. And her
   interpretations on the sabbath were performed very unfaithfully, as at
   last appeared. So that Mr. Spencer came away in discouragement in the
   spring, and returned to Boston, and gave the corporation there, who
   employed him, an account of his unexpected difficulties and
   disappointments; and became obliged to them to wait three months, to
   see if they could procure a fellow missionary, and another interpreter,
   to go with him to the Indians; which I believe is not much expected. If
   these are not obtained within the limited time, Mr. Spencer is free
   from any further engagements to them. Mr. Spencer is now preaching at
   Elizabeth-town in New Jersey, in the pulpit of the late Mr. Dickinson;
   and I believe is likely to settle there. He is a person of very
   promising qualifications: and will hopefully in some measure make up
   the great loss that people have sustained by the death of their former
   pastor.

   As to the mission in New Jersey, we have from time to time had
   comfortable accounts of it; and Mr. John Brainerd, who has the care of
   the congregation of christian Indians there, was about three weeks ago
   at my house; and informed me of the increase of his congregation, and
   of their being added to from time to time by the coming of Indians from
   distant places, and settling in the Indian town at Cranberry, for the
   sake of hearing the gospel; and of something of a work of awakening
   being all along carried on among the Indians to this day; and of some
   of the new comers being awakened; and of there being instances, from
   time to time, of hopeful conversion among them; and of a general good
   and pious behaviour of the professing Indians. But he gave an account
   also of some trouble the Indians meet with, from some of the white
   people; and particularly from Mr. Maurice, the chief justice of the
   province, a professed deist; who is sueing them for their lands under
   pretext of a will, made by their former king; which was undoubtedly
   forged. However, he is a man of such craft and influence, that it is
   not known how the matter will issue.

   I have heard nothing new that is very remarkable concerning the college
   in New Jersey. It is in its infancy; there has been considerable
   difficulty about settling their charter. Gov. Belcher, who gave the
   charter, is willing to encourage and promote the college to his utmost;
   but differs in his opinion concerning the constitution, which will tend
   most to its prosperity, from some of the principal ministers that have
   been concerned in founding the society. He insists upon it that the
   governor, for the time being, and four of his Majesty's council for the
   province, should always be of the corporation of trustees; and that the
   governor should always be the president of the corporation. The
   ministers are all very willing that the present governor, who is a
   religious man, should be in this standing; but their difficulty is with
   respect to future governors, who they suppose are as likely to be men
   of no religion, and deists, as otherwise. However, so the matter is
   settled, to the great uneasiness of Mr. Gilbert Tennent in particular,
   who it is feared will have no further concern with the college on this
   account. Mr. Burr, the president of the college, is a man of religion
   and singular learning, and I hope the college will flourish under his
   care.

   I have taken a great deal of pains in communicating to others, in
   various parts, the pleasing accounts you and my other correspondents in
   Scotland gave me last year of things of promising aspect on the
   interest of religion, on your side of the ocean: which have been very
   affecting to pious ministers and people in New England, and also in the
   provinces of New York and New Jersey; and hope some considerable good
   has been done by such tidings; particularly in animating many in the
   duty of extraordinary united prayer for a general revival of religion,
   and promoting the Concert for Prayer proposed from Scotland; which
   prevails more and more in these parts of the world; which, together
   with some other things in some places, are cause of thankfulness, and
   bode well to the interests of Zion, (of which I have given a more
   particular account in my letters to Mr. M'Laurin, Mr. Robe, and Mr.
   M'Culloch, sent with this,) though it be in general a very dead time as
   to religion, and a time of the prevailing of all manner of iniquity.

   I shall send orders to Boston, that one of my books on Mr. Brainerd's
   life may be sent to you with this letter; if any of them are ready, as
   I hope they are, or will be very speedily.

   I have nothing very comfortable to inform you of concerning the present
   state of religion in this place. A very great difficulty has arisen
   between my people, relating to qualifications for communion at the
   Lord's table. My honoured grandfather Stoddard, my predecessor in the
   ministry over this church, strenuously maintained the Lord's supper to
   be a converting ordinance; and urged all to come, who were not of
   scandalous life, though they knew themselves to be unconverted. I
   formerly conformed to his practice; but I have had difficulties with
   respect to it, which have been long increasing; till I dared no longer
   to proceed in the former way; which has occasioned great uneasiness
   among my people, and has filled all the country with noise, which has
   obliged me to write something on the subject, which is now in the
   press. I know not but this affair will issue in a separation between me
   and my people. I desire your prayers, that God would guide me in every
   step of this affair. My wife joins with me in respectful salutations to
   you and your consort.

   I am, dear Sir, your obliged and affectionate

   Brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   Letter to Mr. M'Culloch

   "Northampton, May 23, 1749.

   rev. and dear brother,

   The last letter I received from you was dated Feb. 10, 1748, to which I
   wrote an answer the latter end of last summer; which I suppose you
   received, because I perceive by letters sent me this spring, by some
   others of my correspondents, your neighbours, they had received letters
   I sent to them at the same time, and in the same packet. Your letters
   to me have been very acceptable; I should be glad to receive them
   oftener.

   The letter I last received from you, and others that came with it, were
   peculiarly agreeable, on account of the good news they contained
   concerning Messrs. West and Littleton, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
   some in the royal family, the stadtholder, &c. These things I have
   taken a great deal of pains to communicate to others; and they have
   been very entertaining, and I hope profitable to many. I was at the
   pains to extract from all the letters I received at that time, those
   things which appeared with a favourable aspect on the interest of
   religion in the world, and to draw various copies to send to different
   parts, to such as I supposed would be most likely to be entertained and
   improved by them, and to do good with them; and I believe they have
   been of great benefit, particularly to excite and encourage God's
   people, in the great duty of praying for the coming of Christ's
   kingdom, and to promote extraordinary united prayer, in the method
   proposed in the Memorial from Scotland. I read these articles of good
   news to my own congregation, and also to the association of ministers
   to which I belong, when met on one of the quarterly seasons for prayer;
   and read them occasionally to many others; and sent a copy of one of
   the forementioned abstracts to Connecticut, which was carried into
   various parts of that government, and shown to several ministers there.
   I sent one to Mr. Hall of Sutton, a pious minister about the middle of
   this province; who, according to my desire, communicated it to other
   ministers, and I suppose to his people. I sent a copy to Mr. Rogers of
   Kittery, I suppose about seventy miles to the eastward of Boston; who
   in reply wrote to me, and in his letter says as follows: Yours of the
   22d Dec. came not to my hand till the 19th of this; with which I was
   well pleased, and had some sweet sense of the sovereign free grace of
   God in the instances you mentioned, with some going forth of heart
   after further displays of it, in the mighty and noble of our nation,
   and the great ones of our own country; and indeed, that the kingdom of
   our exalted Redeemer might prevail in all the world. And, dear Sir, I
   am full in the belief, that so many of the Lord's people agreeing upon
   a time to unite in prayer for the pouring out of the Holy Spirit, and
   the coming of the Redeemer's kingdom, is from the Lord; and cannot but
   hope the day draws near, when he will pour out water upon the thirsty,
   and floods upon the dry ground; as also, that all his ministers and
   people, who are engaged in so delightful a work, for so noble an end,
   will give him no rest, till he shall make his Jerusalem a quiet
   habitation, a name and a praise in the earth.'

   I sent another copy into New Jersey to Mr. John Brainerd, missionary to
   the Indians there, with a desire that he would communicate it to others
   as he thought would be most serviceable.

   He writes in answer, March 4, 1748, as follows: I received yours of
   Jan. 12, on sabbath morning Feb. 5, and desire to acknowledge your
   kindness with much thankfulness and gratitude. It was a great
   resuscitant, as well as encouragement, to me; and I trust, has been so
   to many others, in these parts, who are concerned for the prosperity of
   Zion. The next Tuesday after, (as perhaps, Sir, you may remember,) was
   the quarterly day appointed for extraordinary prayer; upon which I
   called my people together, and gave them information of the most
   notable things contained in your letter. And since I have endeavoured
   to communicate the same to several of my neighbouring ministers, and
   sundry private Christians, as I had opportunity. I have also thought it
   my duty to send an extract, or rather a copy of it, to Gov. Belcher. I
   have likewise (for want of time to transcribe) sent the original to
   Philadelphia by a careful hand, that the Rev. Mr. Gilbert Tennent might
   have the perusal of it; where a copy was taken, and the original safely
   returned to me again. I cannot but hope that this letter, as it
   contains many things wherein the power and goodness of God do appear in
   a most conspicuous manner, will be greatly serviceable in stirring up
   the people of God in these parts, and encouraging their hearts to seek
   his face and favour, and to cry mightily to him, for the further
   outpouring of a gracious Spirit upon his church in the world. For my
   part, I think the remarkable things which your letter contains, might
   be sufficient to put new life into any one who is not past feeling; and
   as a means to excite a spirit of prayer and praise, in all those who
   are not buried in ignorance, or under the power of a lethargic stupor.
   And it is looked upon, by those whom I have had opportunity to converse
   with, whether ministers or private Christians, that what God has done
   is matter of great thankfulness and praise, and might well encourage
   his people to lift up the hand of prayer, and be instant therein.'

   Mr. Davenport, minister of a church in Elizabeth-town in New Jersey,
   writes thus upon it, in a letter dated April 1, 1749: I thank you for
   sending your letter to our Brainerd open, that I might see it, which I
   took a copy of; and have found it again and again refreshing and
   animating. I read it to the ministers who met at my house for prayer,
   on the first Tuesday of February, and sent it afterwards to Long
   Island: Mr. Rivel took a copy of it, and read it in his congregation on
   the Island.'

   I hope, dear Sir, these things will encourage you to continue your
   correspondence, and to go on to give me information of whatever appears
   in your parts of the world favourable to the interests of the kingdom
   of Christ. It will not only be entertaining to me; but I shall
   endeavour, whenever I receive such tidings, to communicate it for the
   entertainment and profit of God's people, as I have opportunity. I must
   refer you, dear Sir, to my letters to other correspondents in your
   neighbourhood, for other particulars relating to the state of religion
   in these parts of the world. And hope, when you are before the throne
   of grace, you will not forget

   Your very affectionate friend,

   And brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   Letter to Mr. Robe.

   "Northampton, May 23, 1749.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Mr. M'Laurin, in a letter I received from him the last week, dated
   March 10th, 1749, informs me of a letter you had written to me, sent to
   him; which he had taken care of. This letter, by some means or other,
   has failed, and has never reached me. I intend to make inquiry after
   it, to see if it has not been left at Boston, and forgotten to be sent.
   I have reason to hope (though I have not received your letter) that you
   and your family are well, because Mr. M'Laurin and Mr. Erskine (the
   only correspondents from whom I have received letters this time) inform
   me of nothing to the contrary.

   As to the present state of religion in these parts of the world, it is
   in the general very dark and melancholy. But yet there are some things
   which appear comfortable and hopeful; particularly, the Concert for
   extraordinary Prayer for the coming of Christ's kingdom, is spreading
   and prevailing--and we hear of awakenings and revivals of religion in
   some places. We have had accounts, from time to time, of religion's
   being in a flourishing state, in the Indian congregation in New Jersey,
   under the care of Mr. John Brainerd; of the congregation's increasing,
   by the access of Indians from distant parts; of a work of awakening
   carried on among the unconverted, and additions made to the number of
   the hopefully converted, and the christian behaviour of professors
   there. Mr. Brainerd was at my house a little while ago, and represented
   this to be the present state of things in that congregation. I had a
   letter from Mr. Davenport, (who is settled now as a minister over a
   congregation belonging to Elizabeth-town, in New Jersey,) dated April
   1, 1749, wherein he says as follows: Mr. Lewis told me, that there has
   been a remarkable work of conviction prevailing in his place, ever
   since last December. I think he spoke of about forty under soul
   concern, a considerable number of them under strong convictions, and
   some hopefully converted. I heard lately a credible account of a
   remarkable work of conviction and conversion, among whites and negroes,
   at Hanover in Virginia, under the ministry of Mr. Davies, who is lately
   settled there, and has the character of a very ingenious and pious
   young man; whose support, in his preparation for service, Mr. Robinson
   [31] contributed much, if not mostly to; and on his death-bed gave him
   his books, &c.

   Mr. Buell, of East Hampton, on Long Island, was here last week, and
   gave me an account of a very considerable work of awakening at this
   time in his congregation, especially among the young people; and also
   of a yet greater work at Bridgehampton, under the ministry of one Mr.
   Brown, a very pious and prudent young man, lately settled there. These
   congregations are both pretty large. He also gave an account of
   religion's continuing in a very prosperous state at a part of
   Huntington, another town on Long Island, where there was a great and
   general awakening, last year.

   An association of ministers, between this and Boston, seem of late to
   have applied themselves somewhat earnestly, to invent means for
   promoting religion. The following is a copy of something they have
   agreed upon for this end, as it was sent to me, by a minister that
   lives that way.

   "The sum and substance of the answers, given by the association, to
   this question, What things shall be done by us, for preventing the
   awful threatening degeneracy and backsliding in religion, in the
   present day?

   These, we apprehend, may be reduced to the following heads, viz. Those
   that respect ourselves personally; those which concern the association,
   as such; and those which relate to our people, in our respective
   churches and congregations.

   I. As to what respects ourselves personally.

   1. We ought surely to get a deep and affecting sense of this: Whether
   there is not in ourselves defection, and great danger of further
   degeneracy; for otherwise, we shall with little heartiness undertake,
   or earnestness endeavour after, reformation.

   2. We are not to think it amiss, that we ourselves be excited to look,
   with a proper attention and concern, into our own estate, into our own
   experiences in the divine life, and into what little proficiency we
   make, or declension we fall into, ourselves.

   3. We must by all means see to it, that we be sound and clear in the
   great doctrines of the gospel, which are the life of our holy religion;
   (we here intend, those doctrines which are exhibited in our excellent
   Westminster Catechism and Confession of Faith;) and that we all boldly
   and impartially appear in the defence thereof: at the same time we must
   take heed and beware of the dangerous errors which many have run into;
   particularly the Arminian and Neonomian on the one hand, and the
   Antinomian and Enthusiastical on the other.

   4. We must be very faithful in every part of our ministerial works, and
   make conscience to magnify our office. In a particular manner, we must
   take good heed to our preaching; that it be not only sound, but
   instructive, savoury, spiritual, very awakening and searching, well
   adapted to the times and seasons which pass over us; labouring
   earnestly herein. We must therefore dwell much upon the doctrines of
   repentance and conversion, the nature, necessity, and evidence thereof;
   and much urge the duty of self-examination, and open the deceits of the
   heart; bringing the unconverted under the work of the law, that they
   may be prepared to embrace the offer of the gospel. Moral duties must
   be treated of in an evangelical strain; and we must give unto every one
   his portion, and not shrink from it, under the notion of prudence;
   particularly, in the important duty of reproving sinners of all sorts,
   be they who they will. Again, we must not be slighty in our private
   conference with souls, and examining candidates for the communion, or
   other special privileges; and we must carefully and wisely suit our
   endeavours to the several ages and conditions of persons, the elder and
   younger; and in a very particular manner, we must set ourselves to
   promote religion among our young people. And, in a word, we must see
   whether we are animated to all these things by the grace of God in us.

   5. We are impartially to see what evils are to be found among
   ourselves, and remove them. Let us be seriously thoughtful, whether
   (among our defects) we have not been, in some respect or other, the
   blamable means of discouragement to those who have been under religious
   concern; or whether we have not given strength and boldness to the
   ungodly, when we have been testifying against the extravagances and
   disorders of the late times.

   6. We must be conscientiously exemplary in our whole behaviour and
   conversation. It is necessary that we be serious and grave, as what
   highly becomes gospel bishops. And especially, we must be very watchful
   over our frame and conduct on the Lord's day. We must therefore look
   well to our sabbatizing, both at home and abroad, both before our own
   and other people. Our example is of vast consequence, in magnifying our
   office before recommended.

   7. We ought to stir up the gifts which are in us, and to grow more and
   more, according to the sacred injunction, 2 Tim. i. 6.

   8. We should follow all our endeavors with fervent prayer to God;
   especially our labours in preaching and teaching: the seed of the word
   is to be steeped in tears.

   II. As to what concerns the association as such.

   1. We must lay aside disgusts one with another, and study brotherly
   love, that it may revive and continue; we must endeavour to be as near
   as we can of one mind, and go on harmoniously; and then we shall be the
   more strongly united in all, but especially in our present proceedings.
   There must be respectful treatment one of another, of the persons and
   character of one another; and we must be careful of ministerial
   character; which is of greater consequence than at first sight may
   appear. And when we have occasion to dispute, let it be under a very
   strict guard, avoiding all censuring reflections.

   2. That we manifest our approbation of the Westminster Assembly's
   Catechism, as containing an excellent system of divinity; and we
   purpose to preach agreeably to the doctrines of the Bible exhibited
   therein.

   3. As we must be very careful of our conversation in general as above
   said; so especially must we be respecting our conduct while together in
   association.

   4. It is proposed that a course of our association be turned into
   fasts, upon this great account.

   5. We agree to be more especially fervent, in continual prayer for the
   advancement of the kingdom of Christ.

   6. Some special, new, and prudent care must be taken to guard our
   pulpits.

   7. It is proposed, that we agree to endeavour to introduce the public
   reading of the Holy Scriptures. The manner and time to be left to
   discretion.

   III. With regard to what may be done among the people we stand related
   to.

   1. We conceive that whatever public exercises are to be agreed on, or
   whatever concerns the public, the people are to be informed and
   acquainted with our design.

   2. That it be earnestly recommended to the people, to consider the
   worth of their privileges, and the danger of being deprived of them;
   which there is, partly by the spreading of evil doctrines among them,
   and partly by the conduct of too many people towards their ministers.

   3. Let pragmatical, factious spirits, fomenting division, be duly
   frowned upon.

   4. We must guard them against the temptations of their several
   employments, and the special seasons wherein they are most exposed.

   5. We must consider what evils there are to be found among them, which
   do especially need reforming; as the profanation of the Lord's day,
   which is enough to destroy all religion; tavern-haunting,
   company-keeping, chambering, uncleanness, profaneness, &c.; and we
   ought loudly to testify against them. And that what we do may be
   effectual, let us endeavour to convince their consciences of the evil
   of sin, and of these sins.--We are not to fail to warn people solemnly
   against the dreadful guilt of unthankfulness under God's signal
   mercies, and of incorrigibleness under heavy and sore judgments. Could
   we in wisdom do it, we should also warn them against their oppressing
   the Lord's ministers in their maintenance.

   6. Let us endeavour to revive good customs and practices among them;
   particularly, the ancient good practice of catechising, family order,
   worship, and government, religious societies under good regulation,
   godly conference and conversation among Christians; and in brief,
   whatever is laudable and of good tendency.

   7. Church discipline should be revived; brotherly watchfulness, and
   admonition; nor are we to forget to take special care of the children
   and youths of the flock.

   8. We may do well to engage, as far as we are able, all persons of
   distinction and influence to unite with us in this work of reformation;
   e.g. justices, school-masters, candidates for the ministry; and
   especially to assist us by their example.

   9. Solemn renewal of covenant hath been advised to, as very useful upon
   this occasion; (vid. Synod, 1679, for Reformation;) but we leave this
   to each one's discretion.

   Finally, in these things we should think ourselves bound to exert
   ourselves, and use uncommon fervency, to preserve what remains of
   religion, and prevent further decay.

   October, 1748.

   Thus far this association.

   The members of this association, as their names were sent to me, are as
   follows:

   The Rev. Messrs. Loring, of Sudbury; Cushing, of Shrewsbury; Parkman,
   of Westborough; Gardiner, of Stow; Martyn, of Westborough; Stone, of
   Southborough; Seecomb, of Harvard; Morse, of Shrewsbury; Smith, of
   Marlborough; Goss, of Boston; Buckminster, of Rutland; Davis, of
   Holden.

   I must refer you, dear Sir, for other particulars relating to the state
   of religion, in these parts of the world, to my letters to my other
   correspondents in your neighbourhood.

   My wife and family join with me in very affectionate and respectful
   salutations to you and yours. Desiring an interest in your prayers for
   us all, and for this part of the Zion of God,

   I remain, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate brother,

   And obliged friend and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   In the Memoirs of Brainerd, under the date of Sept. 13, 1747, the
   reader will find mention of a Mr. Job Strong, a candidate for the
   ministry, whom Brainerd, immediately before his death, recommended to
   the commissioners in Boston, as a missionary to the Indians; and in the
   4th Reflection on those Memoirs, an interesting letter of his, giving
   an account of the Indian mission at Bethel, in New Jersey, in Jan.
   1748. This young gentleman, having ultimately declined that
   appointment, accepted proposals of settlement in the ministry, the
   following year, from a church in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and invited
   Mr. Edwards to preach the sermon at his ordination, which was appointed
   for the 28th of June. Mary, the fourth daughter of Mr. Edwards, then a
   young lady of fifteen, went before her father to Portsmouth, to visit
   some of the friends of the family in that place. From her I learned the
   following anecdote.--The Rev. Mr. Moody, of York, a gentleman of
   unquestioned talents and piety, but perfectly unique in his manners,
   had agreed, in case of Mr. Edwards's failure, to be his substitute in
   preaching the sermon. On the morning of the appointed day, Mr. Edwards
   not having arrived, the council delayed the ordination as long as they
   well could, and then proceeded to the church; where Mr. Moody had been
   regularly appointed to make the introductory prayer, which is the
   prayer immediately before the sermon. That gentleman, knowing that a
   numerous and highly respectable audience had been drawn together by a
   strong desire to hear Mr. Edwards, rose up to pray under the not very
   pleasant impression, that he must stand in his place; and offered a
   prayer, which was wholly characteristic of himself, and in some degree
   also of the times in which he lived. In that part of it, in which it
   was proper for him to allude to the exercises of the day, he besought
   the Lord, that they might be suitably humbled under the frown of his
   providence, in not being permitted to hear on that occasion, a
   discourse, as they had all fondly expected, from "that eminent servant
   of God, the Rev. Mr. Edwards, of Northampton;" and proceeded to thank
   God, for having raised him up, to be such a burning and shining light,
   for his uncommon piety, for his great excellence as a preacher, for the
   remarkable success which had attended his ministry, in other
   congregations as well as his own, for the superior talents and wisdom
   with which he was endowed as a writer, and for the great amount of good
   which his works had already done, and still promised to do, to the
   church and to the world. He then prayed that God would spare his life,
   and endow him with still higher gifts and graces, and render him still
   more eminent and useful than he had been; and concluded this part of
   his prayer, by supplicating the divine blessing on the daughter of Mr.
   Edwards, (then in the house,) who, though a very worthy and amiable
   young lady, was still, as they had reason to believe, without the grace
   of God, and in an unconverted state; that God would bring her to
   repentance, and forgive her sins, and not suffer the peculiar
   privileges which she enjoyed to be the means of a more aggravated
   condemnation. Mr. Edwards, who travelled on horseback, and had been
   unexpectedly detained on the road, arrived at the church a short time
   after the commencement of the exercises, and entered the door just
   after Mr. Moody began his prayer. Being remarkably still in all his
   movements, and particularly in the house of God, he ascended the
   stairs, and entered the pulpit so silently, that Mr. Moody did not hear
   him; and of course was necessitated, before a very numerous audience,
   to listen to the very high character given of himself by Mr. Moody. As
   soon as the prayer was closed, Mr. Moody turned round, and saw Mr.
   Edwards behind him; and, without leaving his place, gave him his right
   hand, and addressed him as follows: "Brother Edwards, we are all of us
   much rejoiced to see you here to-day, and nobody, probably, as much so
   as myself; but I wish that you might have got in a little sooner, or a
   little later, or else that I might have heard you when you came in, and
   known that you were here. I didn't intend to flatter you to your face;
   but there's one thing I'll tell you: They say that your wife is a going
   to heaven by a shorter road than yourself." Mr. Edwards bowed, and
   after reading the Psalm, went on with the sermon. His text was John
   xiii. 15, 16. and his subject, "Christ the Example of Ministers." It
   was soon after published.

   To his daughter, who prolonged her visit some time after the return of
   her father, he addressed, during her visit at Portsmouth, the following
   letter.

   "To Miss Mary Edwards [32] , at Portsmouth.

   Northampton, July 26, 1749.

   my dear child,

   You may well think it is natural for a parent to be concerned for a
   child at so great a distance, so far out of view, and so far out of the
   reach of communication; where, if you should be taken with any
   dangerous sickness, that should issue in death, you might probably be
   in your grave before we could hear of your danger. But yet, my greatest
   concern is not for your health, or temporal welfare, but for the good
   of your soul. Though you are at so great a distance from us, yet God is
   every where. You are much out of the reach of our care, but you are
   every moment in His hands. We have not the comfort of seeing you, but
   He sees you. His eye is always upon you. And if you may but live
   sensibly near to God, and have his gracious presence, it is no matter
   if you are far distant from us. I had rather you should remain hundreds
   of miles distant from us, and have God near to you by his Spirit, than
   to have you always with us, and live at a distance from God. And if the
   next news we should hear of you, should be of your death, though that
   would be very melancholy; yet, if at the same time we should receive
   such intelligence concerning you, as should give us the best grounds to
   hope, that you had died in the Lord, how much more comfortable would
   this be, though we should have no opportunity to see you, or to take
   our leave of you in your sickness, than if we should be with you during
   all its progress, and have much opportunity to attend upon you, and
   converse and pray with you, and take an affectionate leave of you, and
   after all have reason to apprehend, that you died without the grace and
   favour of God! It is comfortable to have the presence of earthly
   friends, especially in sickness, and on a death-bed; but the great
   thing is to have God our friend, and to be united to Christ, who can
   never die any more, and from whom our own death cannot separate us.

   My desire and daily prayer is, that you may, if it may consist with the
   holy will of God, meet with God where you are, and have much of his
   divine influences on your heart, wherever you may be; and that, in
   God's due time, you may be returned to us again, in all respects under
   the smiles of Heaven, and especially, in prosperous circumstances in
   your soul, and that you may find us all alive and well. But that is
   uncertain; for you know what a dying time it has been with us in this
   town, about this season of the year, in years past. There is not much
   sickness prevailing among us as yet, but we fear whether mortal
   sickness is not now commencing. Yesterday, the only remaining son of
   Mr. C__ died of a fever, and is to be buried to-day. May God fit us all
   for his will!

   I hope that you will maintain a strict and constant watch over
   yourself, against all temptations, that you do not forsake and forget
   God, and particularly, that you do not grow slack in secret religion.
   Retire often from this vain world, from all its bubbles and empty
   shadows, and vain amusements, and converse with God alone; and seek
   effectually for that divine grace and comfort, the least drop of which
   is worth more than all the riches, gaiety, pleasures, and
   entertainments of the whole world.

   If Mrs. S----, of Boston, or any of that family, should send to you, to
   invite you to come and remain there, on your return from Portsmouth,
   until there is opportunity for you to come home, I would have you
   accept the invitation. I think it probable they will invite you. But if
   otherwise, I would have you go to Mr. Bromfield's. He and Mrs. B. both
   told me you should be welcome. After you are come to Boston, I would
   have you send us word of it by the first opportunity, that we may send
   for you without delay.

   We are all, through the Divine goodness, in a tolerable state of
   health. The ferment in the town runs very high, concerning my opinion
   about the sacrament; but I am no more able to foretell the issue, than
   when I last saw you. But the whole family has indeed much to put us in
   mind, and make us sensible, of our dependence on the care and kindness
   of God, and of the vanity of all human dependences; and we are very
   loudly called upon to seek his face, to trust in him, and walk closely
   with him. Commending you to the care and special favour of our heavenly
   Father, I am

   Your very affectionate father,

   jonathan edwards.

   Your mother and all the family give their love to you."

   The following letter of Mr. Edwards to Mr. Gillespie, is in reply to
   the second letter of that gentleman, written in the autumn of 1748.
   [33]

   "Northampton, April 2, 1750.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I received your favour of September 19, 1748, the last summer, and
   would now heartily thank you for it. I suppose it may have come in the
   same ship with letters I had from my other correspondents in Scotland,
   which I answered the last summer; but it did not come to hand till a
   long time after most of the others, and after I had finished and sent
   away my answers to them, and that opportunity for answering was past. I
   have had no leisure or opportunity to write any letters to Scotland,
   from that time till now, by reason of my peculiar and very
   extraordinary circumstances, on account of the controversy which has
   arisen between me and my people, concerning the profession which ought
   to be made by persons who come to christian sacraments; which is likely
   speedily to issue in a separation between me and my congregation. This
   controversy, in the progress of it, has proved not only a controversy
   between me and my people, but between me and a great part of New
   England; there being many far and near who are warmly engaged in it.
   This affair has unavoidably engaged my mind, and filled up my time, and
   taken me off from other things. I need the prayers of my friends, that
   God would be with me, and direct and assist me in such a time of trial,
   and mercifully order the issue.

   As to the epistolary controversy, dear Sir, between you and me, about
   faith and doubting, I am sorry it should seem to be greater than it is,
   through misunderstanding of one another's meaning, and that the real
   difference between us is so great as it is, in some part of the
   controversy.

   As to the dispute about believing without spiritual light or sight, I
   thought I expressed my meaning in my last letter very plainly; but I
   kept no copy, and it might perhaps be owing to my dulness that I
   thought so. However, I perceive I was not understood. I cannot find out
   by any thing you say to me on this head, that we really differ in
   sentiments, but only in words. I acknowledge with you that all are
   bound to believe the divine testimony, and trust in Christ; and that
   want of spiritual light or sight does not loose from the obligation one
   is laid under by the divine command, to believe instantly on Christ,
   and at all seasons, nor excuse him, in any degree, for not believing.
   Even when one wants the influence and grace of the Spirit, still he is
   bound to believe.' I think the obligation to believe, lies on a person
   who is remaining without spiritual light or sight, or even in darkness.
   No darkness, no blindness, no carnality or stupidity, excuses him a
   moment for not having as strong and lively a faith and love, as ever
   was exercised by the apostle Paul, or rather renders it not sinful in
   him, that he is at that same moment without such a faith and love;--and
   yet I believe it is absurd, and of a very hurtful consequence, to urge
   persons to believe in the dark, in the manner, and in the sense, in
   which many hundreds have done in America, who plainly intend, a
   believing with such a sort of strong faith or confidence, as is
   consistent with continuing still, even in the time of these strong acts
   of faith, without spiritual light, carnal, stupid, careless, and
   senseless. Their doctrine evidently comes to this, both in sense and
   effect, that it is a man's duty strongly to believe with a lightless
   and sightless faith; or to have a confident, although a blind, dark,
   and stupid faith. Such a faith has indeed been promoted exceedingly by
   their doctrine, and has prevailed with its dreadful effects, answerable
   to the nature of the cause. We have had, and have to this day,
   multitudes of such firm believers whose bold, presumptuous confidence,
   attended with a very wicked behaviour, has given the greatest wound to
   the cause of truth and vital religion, which it has ever suffered in
   America.

   As to what follows in your letter, that a person's believing himself to
   be in a good estate is properly of the nature of faith; in this there
   seems to be some real difference between us. But perhaps there would be
   none, if distinctness were well observed in the use of words. If by a
   man's believing that he is in a good estate, be meant no more than his
   believing that he does believe in Christ, does love God, &c. I think
   there is nothing of the nature of faith in it; because knowing it or
   believing it, depends on our own immediate sensation or consciousness,
   and not on divine testimony. True believers, in the hope they entertain
   of salvation, make use of the following syllogism: Whosoever believes
   shall be saved: I believe: Therefore, I shall be saved. Assenting to
   the major proposition,--Whosoever believes shall be saved,--is properly
   of the nature of faith; because the ground of my assent to that, is
   divine testimony; but my assent to the minor proposition,--I
   believe,--is, as I humbly conceive, not of the nature of faith, because
   that is not grounded on the divine testimony, but on my own
   consciousness. The testimony, which is the proper ground of faith, is
   in the word of God, Romans x. 17. Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing
   by the word of God.' There is a testimony given us in the word of God,
   that 'he that believeth shall be saved.' But there is no testimony in
   the word of God, that a given individual, in such a town in Scotland,
   or New England, believes. There is such a proposition in the
   Scriptures, as that Christ loves those that love him; and this,
   therefore, every one is bound to believe and affirm: and believing
   this, on the divine testimony, is properly of the nature of faith,
   while for any one to doubt it, is properly the heinous sin of unbelief.
   But there is no such proposition in the Scriptures, nor is it any part
   of the gospel of Christ, that such an individual person in Northampton
   loves Christ. If I know that I have complacency in Christ, I know it
   the same way that I know I have complacency in my wife and children,
   viz. by the testimony of my own heart, or my inward consciousness.
   Evangelical faith has the gospel of Christ for its foundation; but the
   proposition, that I love Christ, is a proposition not contained in the
   gospel of Christ.

   Hence, that we may not dispute in the dark, it is necessary, that we
   should explain what we mean by a person's believing that he is in a
   good estate. If thereby we mean only believing the minor of the
   foregoing syllogism, or similar syllogisms,--I believe; or, I love
   God;--it is not of the nature of faith. But if by a man's believing
   himself to be in a good estate, be understood his believing not only
   the minor but the consequence, therefore I shall be saved, or,
   therefore God will never leave me nor forsake me; then a man's
   believing his good estate, partakes of the nature of faith; for these
   consequences depend on divine testimony in the word of God and the
   gospel of Jesus Christ. Yea, I would observe further, that a man's
   judging of the faith or love which he actually finds in himself,
   whether it is that sort of faith or love which he finds to be saving,
   may depend on his reliance on scripture rules and marks, which are
   divine testimonies, on which he may be tempted not to rely, from the
   consideration of his great unworthiness. But his judging that he has
   those individual inward acts of understanding, and exercises of heart,
   depends on inward sensations, and not on any testimony of the word of
   God. The knowing of his present acts depends on immediate
   consciousness, and the knowing of his past acts depends on memory.
   Hence the fulness of my satisfaction, that I now have such an inward
   act or exercise of mind, depends on the strength of the sensation; and
   my satisfaction, that I have had them heretofore, depends on the
   clearness of my memory, and not on the strength of my reliance on any
   divine testimony. So likewise, my doubting whether I have, or have had,
   such individual inward acts, is not of itself of the nature of
   unbelief, though it may arise from unbelief indirectly; because, if I
   had had more faith, the actings of it would have been more sensible,
   and the memory of them more clear, and so I should have been better
   satisfied that I had them.

   God appears to have given Abraham's servant a revelation, that the
   damsel in whom he found certain marks,-- her coming to draw water with
   a pitcher to that well, and her readiness to give him and his camels
   drink,--should be Isaac's wife; and therefore his assenting to this,
   was of the nature of faith, having divine testimony for its foundation.
   But his believing that Rebekah was the damsel who had these individual
   marks, his knowing that she came to draw water, and that she let down
   her pitcher, was not of the nature of faith. His knowing this was not
   from divine testimony, but from the testimony of his own senses. (Vide
   Gen. xxiv.)

   You speak of a saint's doubting of his good estate, as a part of
   unbelief, and the opposite of faith, considered in its full compass and
   latitude, as one branch of unbelief, one ingredient in unbelief; and of
   assurance of a man's good estate, as one thing that belongs to the
   exercise of faith.' I do not know whether I take your meaning in these
   expressions. If you mean, that a person's believing himself to be in a
   good estate, is one thing which appertains to the essence of saving
   faith, or that saving faith, in all that belongs to its essence, yea
   its perfection, cannot be without implying it, I must humbly ask leave
   to differ from you. That my believing that I am in a good estate, is no
   part or ingredient in the essence of saving faith, is evident from
   this, that the essence of saving faith must be complete in me, before
   it can be true that I am in a good estate. If I have not as yet acted
   faith, yea if there be any thing wanting in me to make up the essence
   of saving faith, then I am not as yet in a state of salvation, and
   therefore can have no ground to believe that I am so. Any thing that
   belongs to the essence of saving faith is prior, in the order of
   nature, to a man's being in a state of salvation, because it is saving
   faith which brings him into such a state. And therefore believing that
   he is in such a state, cannot be one thing which is essential or
   necessary, in order to his being in such a state; for that would imply
   a contradiction. It would be to suppose a man's believing that he is in
   a good estate, to be prior, in the order of nature, to his being in a
   good estate. But a thing cannot be both prior and posterior, antecedent
   and consequent, with respect to the very same thing. The real truth of
   a proposition is in the order of nature first, before its being
   believed to be true. But, till a man has already all that belongs to
   the essence of saving faith, that proposition, that he is in a good
   estate, is not as yet true. All the propositions contained in the
   gospel, all divine testimonies that we have in God's word, are true
   already, are already laid for a foundation for faith, and were laid
   long ago. But that proposition, I am in a good estate, not being one of
   them, is not true till I have first believed; and therefore this
   proposition, as it is not true, cannot be believed to be true, till
   saving faith be first complete. Therefore the completeness of the act
   of saving faith will not make it take in a belief of this proposition,
   nor will the strength or perfection of the act cause it to imply this.
   If a man, in his first act of faith, has ever so full a conviction of
   God's sufficiency and faithfulness, and ever so strong and perfect a
   reliance on the divine testimony; all will have no tendency to make him
   believe that this proposition, I am in a good estate, is true, until it
   is true; which is not the fact, till the first act of faith is
   complete, and has made it true. A belief of divine testimony, in the
   first act of faith, may be to an assignable degree of strength and
   perfection, without believing the proposition, for there is no such
   divine testimony then extant, nor is there any such truth extant, but
   in consequence of the first act of faith. Therefore, (as I said,)
   saving faith may exist, with all that belongs to its essence, and that
   in the highest perfection, without implying a belief of my own good
   estate. I do not say that it can exist without having this immediate
   effect. But it is rather the effect of faith, than a part, branch, or
   ingredient of faith. So I do not dispute whether a man's doubting of
   his good estate, may be a consequence of unbelief, and I doubt not but
   it is in those who are in a good estate; because, if men had the
   exercise of faith in such a degree as they ought to have, it could not
   but be very sensible and plain that they had it. But yet I think this
   doubting of one's good estate, is entirely a different thing from the
   sin of unbelief itself, and has nothing of the nature of unbelief in
   it, i.e. if we take doubting one's good estate in the sense in which I
   have before explained it, viz. doubting whether I have such individual
   principles and acts in my soul. Take it in a complex sense, and it may
   have the sin of unbelief in it; e.g. If, although I doubt not that I
   have such and such qualifications, I yet doubt of those consequences.
   for which I have divine testimony or promise; as when a person doubts
   not that he loves Christ, yet doubts whether he shall receive a crown
   of life. The doubting of this consequence is properly the sin of
   unbelief.

   You say, dear Sir, the Holy Ghost requires us to believe the reality of
   its works in us in all its parts just as it is;' and a little before,
   the believer's doubting whether or not he has faith, is sinful; because
   it is belying the Holy Ghost, denying his work in him, so there is no
   sin to which that doubting can so properly be reduced as unbelief.'

   Here I would ask leave thus to express my thoughts, in a diversity from
   yours. I think, if it be allowed to be sinful for a believer to doubt
   whether he has faith, that this doubting is not the sin of unbelief on
   any such account as you mention, viz. as belying or denying any
   testimony of the Holy Ghost. There is a difference between doubting of
   the being of some work of the Holy Ghost, and denying the testimony of
   the Holy Ghost; as there is a difference between doubting concerning
   some other works of God, and denying the testimony of God. It is the
   work of God to give a man great natural abilities; and if we suppose
   that God requires a man thus endowed to believe the reality of his work
   in all its parts just as it is, and therefore, that it is sinful for
   him at all to doubt of his natural abilities being just as good as they
   are; yet this is no belying any testimony of God, though it be doubting
   of a work of God, and so is diverse from the sin of unbelief. So, if we
   suppose that a very eminent Christian is to blame, in doubting whether
   he has so much holiness as he really has; he indeed does not believe
   the reality of God's work in him, in all its parts just as it is, yet
   he is not therein guilty of the sin of unbelief, against any testimony
   of God, any more than the other.

   I acknowledge, that for a true saint, in a carnal and careless frame,
   to doubt of his good state, is sinful, more indirectly, as the cause of
   it is sinful, viz. the lowness and insensibility of the actings of
   grace in him, and the prevalence of carnality and stupidity. Tis sinful
   to be without assurance, or, (as we say,) it is his own fault; he
   sinfully deprives himself of it, or foregoes it; as a servant's being
   without his tools is his sin, when he has carelessly lost them, or as
   it is his sin to be without strength of body, or without the sight of
   his eyes, when he has deprived himself of these by intemperance. Not
   that weakness or blindness of body, in their own nature, are sin, for
   they are qualities of the body, and not of mind, the subject in which
   sin is inherent. It is indirectly the duty of a true saint always to
   rejoice in the light of God's countenance, because sin is the cause of
   his being without this joy at any time; and therefore it was indirectly
   David's sin that he was not rejoicing in the light of God's
   countenance, at that very time when he was committing the great
   iniquities of adultery and murder. But yet it is not directly a
   believer's duty to rejoice in the light of God's countenance, when God
   hides his face. But it rather then becomes him to be troubled and to
   mourn. So there are, perhaps, many other privileges of saints that are
   their duty indirectly, and the want of them is sinful, not simply, but
   complexly considered. Of this kind I take the want of assurance of my
   good estate to be.

   I think no words of mine, either in my book or letter, implied that a
   person's deliverance from a bad frame, does not begin with renewed acts
   of faith or trusting in God. If they did, they implied what I never
   intended. Doubtless if a saint comes out of an ill frame, wherein grace
   is asleep and inactive, it must be by renewed actings of grace. It is
   very plainly impossible, that grace should begin to cease to be
   inactive, in any other way than by its beginning to be active. It must
   begin with the renewed actings of some grace or other; and I know
   nothing that I have said to the contrary, but that the grace which
   shall first begin sensibly to revive shall be faith, and that this
   shall lead the way to the renewed acting of all other graces, and to
   the further acting of faith itself. But a person's coming out of a
   carnal, careless, dead frame, by, or in the reviving of, grace in his
   soul, is quite another thing from a saint's having a strong exercise of
   faith, or strong hope, or strong exercise of any grace, while yet
   remaining in a carnal, careless, dead frame; or, in other words, in a
   frame wherein grace is so far from being in strong exercise, that it is
   asleep, and in a great measure without exercise.

   There is a holy hope, a truly christian hope, of which the Scriptures
   speak, that is reckoned among the graces of the Spirit. And I think I
   should never desire or seek any other hope but such an one; for I
   believe no other hope, has any holy or good tendency. Therefore this
   hope, this grace of hope alone, can properly be called a duty. But it
   is just as absurd to talk of the exercises of this holy hope, the
   strong exercise of this grace of the Spirit, in a carnal, stupid,
   careless frame, such a frame yet remaining, as it would be to talk of
   the strong exercises of love to God, or heavenly-mindedness, or any
   other grace, while remaining in such a frame. It is doubtless proper,
   earnestly to exhort those who are in such a frame to come out of it, in
   and by the strong exercise of every grace; but I should not think it
   proper to press a man earnestly to maintain strong hope,
   notwithstanding the prevailing and continuance of great carnality and
   stupidity, which is plainly the case of the people I opposed. For this
   is plainly to press people to an unholy hope, to a strong hope which is
   no christian grace, but strong and wicked presumption; and the
   promoting of this has most evidently been the effect of such a method
   of dealing with souls in innumerable multitudes of awful instances.

   You seem, Sir, to suppose, that God's manner of dealing with his
   people, while in a secure and careless frame, is first to give
   assurance of their good state while they remain in such a frame, and to
   make use of that assurance as a mean to bring them out of such a frame.
   Here, again, I must beg leave to differ from you, and to think, that
   none of the instances or texts you adduce from Scripture, do at all
   prove the point. I think it is his manner, first to awaken their
   consciences, to bring them to reflect upon themselves, to feel their
   own calamity which they have brought upon themselves by so departing
   from God, by which an end is put to their carelessness and security,
   and again earnestly and carefully to seek God's face before they find
   him, and before God restores the comfortable and joyful sense of his
   favour; and I think this is abundantly evident both from Scripture and
   experience. You much insist on the case of Jonah as a clear instance of
   the thing you lay down. You observe that he says, chap. ii. I said I am
   cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again towards thy holy temple.'
   Ver. 5, 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and
   my prayer came in unto thee, even into thine holy temple.' You speak of
   these words as expressing an assurance of his good state and of God's
   favour; (I will not now dispute whether they do or not;) and you speak
   of this exercise of assurance, as his practice in an evil frame and in
   a careless frame; for he slept securely in the sides of the ship,
   manifesting dismal security, awful carelessness in a carnal frame. That
   Jonah was in a careless secure frame when he was asleep in the sides of
   the ship, I do not deny. But, my dear Sir, does that prove that he
   remained still in a careless secure frame, when in his heart he said
   these things in the belly of the fish; does it prove that he remained
   careless after he was awakened, and saw the furious storm, and owned it
   was the fruit of God's anger towards him for his sins; and does it
   prove, that he still remained careless after the whale had swallowed
   him, when he seemed to himself to be in the belly of hell, when the
   water compassed him about, even to the soul, and, as he says, all God's
   waters and billows passed over him, and he was ready to despair when he
   went down to the bottoms of the mountains, was ready to think God had
   cast him out of his sight, and confined him in a prison, that he could
   never escape, when the earth with her bars was about him for ever, and
   his soul fainted within him? He was brought into this condition after
   his sleeping securely in the sides of the ship, before he said, I will
   look again towards thine holy temple,' &c. He was evidently first
   awakened out of carelessness and security, and brought into distress,
   before he was comforted.

   The other place you also must insist on, concerning the people of
   Israel, is very similar. Before God comforted them with the testimonies
   of his favour after their backslidings, he first, by severe
   chastisements, together with the awakening influences of his Spirit,
   brought them out of their carelessness and carnal security. It appears
   by many passages of Scripture, that this was God's way of dealing with
   that people. In Hos. chap. ii.. we are told that God first hedged up
   her ways with thorns, and made a wall that she could not find her
   paths. And took away her corn and wine, and wool and flax, destroyed
   her vines and fig-trees, and caused her mirth to cease.' By this means,
   he roused her from her security, carelessness, and deep sleep, and
   brought her to herself, very much as the prodigal son was brought to
   himself: thus God brought her first into the wilderness, before he
   spake comfortably to her, and opened to her a door of hope.' By her
   distress he first led her to say, I will go and return to my first
   husband;' and then when God spake comfortably to her, she called him
   'Ishi, my husband;' and God did as it were renewedly betroth her unto
   him. This passage is parallel with Jer. iii.. They illustrate and
   explain each other, and show that it was God's way of dealing with his
   people Israel, after their apostacy, first to awaken them, and under a
   sense of their sense and misery, to bring them solicitously to seek his
   face, before he gave them sensible evidence of his favour; and not
   first to manifest his favour to them, in order to awaken them out of
   their security [34] .

   In Jer. iii. the prophecy is not concerning the recovery of backsliding
   saints, or the mystical church, which, though she had corrupted
   herself, still continued to be figuratively God's wife. It is
   concerning apostate Israel, who had forsaken and renounced her husband,
   and gone after other lovers, and whom God had renounced, put away, and
   given her a bill of divorce; (verse 8.) so that her recovery could not
   be, by giving her assurance of her good estate as still remaining his
   wife, and that God was already married unto her, for that was not true,
   and is not consistent with the context. And whereas it is said, verse
   14. Jer. iii. 14. Return, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I
   am married unto you, and I will take you one of a city;' I am married,
   in the Hebrew, is in the preterperfect tense; but you know, Sir, that
   in the language of prophecy, the preter tense is very commonly put for
   the future. And whereas it is said, verse 19. How shall I put thee
   among the children? And I said, Thou shalt call me My father;' I
   acknowledge this expression here, My Father, and in Rom. viii. 15. is
   the language of faith. It is so two ways: 1st. It is such a language of
   the soul, as is the immediate effect of a lively faith. I acknowledge
   that the lively exercises of faith do naturally produce satisfaction of
   a good state, as their immediate effect. 2d. It is a language which, in
   another sense, does properly and naturally express the very act of
   faith itself, yea, the first act of faith in a sinner, before which he
   never was in a good state. As thus, supposing a man in distress,
   pursued by his enemies that sought his life, should have the gates of
   several fortresses set open before him, and should be called to from
   each of them to fly thither for refuge; and viewing them all, and one
   appearing strong and safe, but the rest insufficient, he should accept
   the invitation to that one, and fly thither with this language, This is
   my fortress, this is my refuge. In vain is salvation looked for from
   others. Behold I come to thee; this is my sure defence.' Not that he
   means that he is already within the fortress, and so in a good estate.
   But, this is my chosen fortress, in the strength of which I trust, and
   to which I betake myself for safety. So if a woman were solicited by
   many lovers, to give herself to them in marriage, and beholding the
   superiority of one to all the rest, should betake herself to him, with
   this language, This is my husband, behold I come unto thee, thou art my
   spouse;' not that she means that she is already married to him, but
   that he is her chosen husband, &c. Thus God offers himself to sinners
   as their Saviour, their God and Father; and the language of the heart
   of him who accepts the offer by faith, is, Thou art my Saviour; in vain
   is salvation hoped for from others: thou art my God and Father.' Not
   that he is already his child, but he chooses him, and comes to him,
   that he may be one of his children; as in Jer. iii. 19. Israel calls
   God his Father, as the way to be put among the children, and to be one
   of them, and not as being one already; and in verses 21, 22, 23. she is
   not brought out of a careless and secure state, by knowing that the
   Lord is her God, but she is first brought to consideration and sense of
   her sin and misery, weeping and supplications for mercy, and conviction
   of the vanity of other saviours and refuges, not only before she has
   the assurance of her good estate, but before she is brought to fly to
   God for refuge, that she may be in a good estate.

   As to the instance of Job, I would only observe, that while in his
   state of sore affliction, though he had some painful exercises of
   infirmity and impatience under his extreme trials, yet he was very far
   from being in such a frame as I intended, when I spoke of a secure,
   careless, carnal frame. I doubt not, nor did I ever question it, that
   the saints' hope and knowledge of their good estate, is in many cases
   of great use to help them against temptation, and the exercises of
   corruption.

   With regard to the case of extraordinary temptations and buffetings of
   Satan, which you mention, I do not very well know what to say further.
   I have often found my own insufficiency as a counsellor in cases where
   melancholy and bodily distemper have so much influence, and give Satan
   so great advantage, as appears to me in the case you mention. If the
   Lord do not help, whence should we help? If some christian friends of
   such afflicted and (as it were) possessed persons, would, from time to
   time, pray and fast for them, it might be a proper exercise of
   christian charity, and the likeliest way I know for relief. I kept no
   copy of my former letter to you, and so do not remember fully what I
   have already said concerning this case. But this I have often found
   with such melancholy people, that the greatest difficulty does not lie
   in giving them good advice, but in persuading them to take it. One
   thing I think of great importance, which is, that such persons should
   go on in a steady course of performance of all duties, both of their
   general and particular calling, without suffering themselves to be
   diverted from it by any violence of Satan, or specious pretence of his
   whatsoever, properly ordering, proportioning, and timing, all sorts of
   duties, duties to God, public, private, and secret, and duties to man,
   relative duties of business and conversation, family duties, duties of
   friendship and good neighbourhood, duly proportioning labour and rest,
   intentness and relaxation, without suffering one duty to crowd out or
   intrench upon another. If such persons could be persuaded to this, I
   think in this way they would be best guarded against the devil, and he
   would soonest be discouraged, and a good state of body would be most
   likely to be gained, and persons would act most as if they trusted and
   rested in God, and would be most in the way of his help and blessing.

   With regard to what you write concerning immediate revelations, I have
   thought of it, and I find I cannot say any thing to purpose, without
   drawing out this letter to a very extraordinary length, and I am
   already got to such length, that I had need to ask your excuse. I have
   written enough to tire your patience.

   It has indeed been with great difficulty that I have found time to
   write much. If you knew my extraordinary circumstances, I doubt not you
   would excuse my not writing any more. I acknowledge the subject you
   mention is very important. Probably if God spares my life, and gives me
   opportunity, I may write largely upon it. I know not how Providence
   will dispose of me; I am going to be cast on the wide world, with my
   large family of ten children.--I humbly request your prayers for me
   under my difficulties and trials.

   As to the state of religion in this place and this land, it is at
   present very sorrowful and dark. But I must, for a more particular
   account of things, refer you to my letter to Mr. M'Laurin of Glasgow,
   and Mr. Robe. So, asking a remembrance in your prayers, I must conclude
   by subscribing myself, with much esteem and respect,

   Your obliged brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards*."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [28] Kaunaumeek was an Indian settlement, about five miles N. W. from
   New Lebanon, on the main road from that village to Albany. The place is
   now called Brainerd's Bridge, and is a village of a few houses, on the
   Kayaderosseras creek, where that road crosses it. It was thus named,
   not after the missionary, but after a relative of his of the name of
   Brainerd, who some years since planted himself in this spot, and built
   the bridge across the creek, now a toll bridge. The mountain, about a
   mile N. W. of the bridge, still bears the name of Kaunaumeek. The creek
   winds beautifully in the valley beneath, and forms a delightful meadow.
   In 1823, I found an aged negro on the spot, about one hundred years of
   age, who had passed his life in the vicinity. He was about twenty-one
   years old when Brainerd resided at Kaunaumeek, but never saw him. He
   told me that the house which Brainerd built here stood on the first
   little knowl, or hillock on the left of the road, and on the W. or N.
   W. side of the creek immediately after passing the bridge; and that the
   Indian settlement was down in the meadow, at some distance below the
   bridge. On following the stream, I discovered an old Indian orchard,
   the trees of an Indian burying ground, and the ruins of several
   buildings of long standing. He also informed me, that the Indians had
   often told him, that Mr. Brainerd was "a very holy man," and that he
   resided at Kaunaumeek but a short time.

   [29] This, and several other Scotticisms, I do not feel at liberty to
   alter.

   [30] He was 66 years old the 8th day of January last.

   [31] This Mr. Robinson was a young minister of eminent gifts and
   graces: I think, belonging to Pennsylvania, but had some time preached,
   with great success, in Virginia, in various parts; but died a few years
   ago in his youth.

   [32] Afterwards Mrs. Dwight, of Northampton.

   [33] See page cxxxvii

   [34] This is evident by many passages of Scripture: as, Lev. xxvi.
   40-42. Deut. xxxii. 36-39. 1 King viii. 21, 22; i. 4-8. .Ezek. xx. 35,
   36, 37. Hos. v. 15; vi. 1-3. xii. 9, 10; xiv..throughout.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XVI.

   COMMENCEMENT OF DIFFICULTIES AT NORTHAMPTON.

   That this world is not a place of rest even to the most excellent of
   men, is a fact proved by the history of all past ages. How few who have
   been in prominent situations of usefulness but have experienced a
   variety of bitter disappointments; which though mysterious in
   themselves, disgraceful to those who have been the occasions of them,
   and most distressing to those who have felt their weight, yet have
   presented to the reflecting mind no unimportant lessons, and have
   tended to results little anticipated by any party connected with them.
   Nor should it seem strange to us that neither the world, nor the church
   of God itself, in its present imperfect state, can be considered as
   affording a resting-place. All the instruments employed by God in the
   promotion of his work, have been greatly tried; their labours have been
   mingled with their tears; and they have not only suffered from their
   own personal share of human imperfection, but have found in the
   ignorance, the perverse dispositions, and the unholy practices of
   others, their sharpest sorrows. They have been grieved by foes, but
   more injured and vexed by pretended friends. Divine grace has however
   enabled them honourably to stand amidst these perilous conflicts, and
   though the storm has fiercely raged around them, they have at length
   found a calm which can never be endangered; and they place before those
   who succeed them this grand lesson, that the faithful pursuit of the
   path of duty, whatever may be its difficulties and trials, will end
   well; and that this is the only course which can be reviewed with any
   satisfaction amidst the solemnities of a dying scene.

   If any individual might have expected freedom from painful opposition,
   Mr. Edwards was that person; if unblemished holinesss of character, if
   fervent desires of usefulness in all its varied and delightful forms,
   and if constant devotedness to every object connected with man's
   present and eternal good, could have insured uninterrupted satisfaction
   here, how large was the measure of enjoyment which would have fallen to
   the lot of this excellent man! All that he was, and all he had, he was
   disposed to sacrifice upon the altar of God, and to dedicate to the
   service of his fellow-creatures. No disposition to spare himself, to
   exalt himself, or place burdens upon others which he was unwilling to
   share, could be discovered in him; yet afflictions of no common extent
   attended him; but still he could say, "None of these things move me,
   neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my
   course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
   Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God."

   Mr. Edwards was for many years unusually happy in the esteem and love
   of his people; and there was during that period the greatest prospect
   of his living and dying in the same state of harmony. So admirably was
   he qualified for the discharge of his official duties, and so faithful
   in the actual discharge of them, that he was probably the last minister
   in New England, who would have been thought likely to be opposed and
   rejected by the people of his charge. His uniform kindness, and that of
   Mrs. Edwards, had won their affection, and the exemplary piety of both,
   had secured their confidence; his very able and original exhibitions of
   truth on the sabbath, had enlightened their understandings and their
   consciences; his published works had gained him a reputation for
   powerful talents, both in Europe and America, which left him without a
   competitor, either in the colonies or the mother country; his labours
   had been remarkably blessed, he had been the means of gathering one of
   the largest churches on earth; and of such of the members as had any
   real evidence of their own piety, the great body ascribed their
   conversion to his instrumentality. But the event teaches us the
   instability of all earthly things, and proves how incompetent we are to
   calculate those consequences, which depend on a cause so uncertain and
   changeable as the will of man.

   In the year 1744, about six years before the final separation, Mr.
   Edwards was informed, that some young persons in the town, who were
   members of the church, had licentious books in their possession which
   they employed to promote obscene conversation among the young people at
   home. Upon further inquiry, a number of persons testified that they had
   heard one and another of them, from lime to time, talk obscenely; as
   what they were led to, by reading books of this gross character which
   they had in circulation among them. On the evidence thus presented to
   him, Mr. Edwards thought, that the brethren of the church ought to look
   into the matter; and in order to introduce it to their attention, he
   preached a sermon from Heb. xii. 15,10. "Looking diligently, lest any
   man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up
   trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: lest there be any fornicator,
   or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
   birthright." After sermon, he desired the brethren of the church to
   stop, told them what information he had received, and put the question
   to them in form, whether the church, on the evidence before them,
   thought proper to take any measures to examine into the matter? The
   members of the church, with one consent and with much zeal: manifested
   it to be there opinion that it ought to be inquired into; and proceeded
   to choose a number of individuals as a committee of inquiry, to assist
   their pastor in examining into the affair. After this Mr. Edwards
   appointed the time for the committee of the church to meet at his
   house; and then read to the church a catalogue of the names of the
   young persons, whom he desired to come to his house at the same time.
   Some of those whose names were thus read, were the persons accused, and
   some were witnesses; but through mere forgetfulness or inadvertence on
   his part, he did not state to the church, in which of these two classes
   any particular individual was included; or in what character he was
   requested to meet the committee, whether as one of the accused, or a
   witness.

   When the names were thus published, it appeared that there were but few
   of the considerable families in the town, to which some of the persons
   named, either did not belong, or were not nearly related. Many of the
   church, however, having heard the names read, condemned what they had
   done, before they got home to their own houses; and whether this
   disclosure of the names, accompanied with the apprehension, that some
   of their own connexions were included in the list of offenders, was the
   occasion of the alteration or not, it is certain that, before the day
   appointed for the meeting of the committee arrived, a great number of
   heads of families altered their minds, and declared they did not think
   proper to proceed as they had begun, and that their children should not
   be called to an account in such a way for such conduct; and the town
   was suddenly all in a blaze. This strengthened the hands of the accused
   : some refused to appear; others who did appear, behaved with a great
   degree of insolence, and contempt of the authority of the church; and
   little or nothing could be done further in the affair.

   This was the occasion of weakening Mr. Edwards's hands in the work of
   the ministry, especially among the young people, with whom, by this
   means, he greatly lost his influence. It seemed in a great measure to
   put an end to his usefulness at Northampton, and doubtless laid a
   foundation for his removal, and will help to account for the surprising
   events which we are about to relate. He certainly had no great visible
   success after this; the influences of the Holy Spirit were chiefly
   withheld, and stupidity and worldly-mindedness were greatly increased
   among them. That great and singular degree of good order, sound morals,
   and visible religion, which had for years prevailed at Northampton,
   soon began gradually to decay, and the young people obviously became
   from that time more dissolute. [35]

   There was another difficulty of a far more serious nature. The church
   of Northampton, like the other early churches of New England, was
   formed on the plan of strict communion: in other words, none were
   admitted to the Lord's supper, but those who, after due examination,
   were regarded as regenerate persons. Such was the uniform practice of
   the church from its formation during the ministry of Mr. Mather, and
   for a considerable period after the settlement of Mr. Stoddard, the
   predecessor of Mr. Edwards. Mr. Stoddard publicly avowed a change in
   his opinions in 1704, when he had been in the ministry at Northampton
   thirty-two years, and endeavoured at that time to introduce a
   corresponding change in the practice of the church. He then declared
   himself, in the language of Dr. Hopkins, to be "of the opinion, that
   unconverted persons, considered as such, had a right in the sight of
   God, or by his appointment, to the sacrament of the Lord's supper; that
   thereby it was their duty to come to that ordinance, though they knew
   they had no true goodness or evangelical holiness. He maintained that
   visible Christianity does not consist in a profession, or appearance of
   that wherein true holiness, or real Christianity, consists; that
   therefore the profession, which persons make, in order to be received
   as visible members of Christ's church, ought not to be such as to
   express or imply a real compliance with, or consent to, the terms of
   this covenant of grace, or a hearty embracing of the gospel: so that
   they who really reject Jesus Christ, and dislike the gospel way of
   salvation in their hearts, and know that this is true of themselves,
   may make the profession without lying and hypocrisy," [on the principle
   that they regard the sacrament as a converting ordinance, and partake
   of it with the hope of obtaining conversion.] "He formed a short
   profession for persons to make, in order to be admitted into the
   church, and to the sacrament, on these terms. Mr. Stoddard's principle
   at first made a great noise in the country; and he was opposed, as
   introducing something contrary to the principles and the practice of
   almost all the churches in New England, and the matter was publicly
   controverted between him and Dr. Increase Mather of Northampton.
   However, through Mr. Stoddard's great influence over the people of
   Northampton, it was introduced there, though not without opposition: by
   degrees it spread very much among ministers and people in that county,
   and in other parts of New England."

   At the settlement of Mr. Edwards, in 1727, this alteration in the
   qualifications required for admission into the church had been in
   operation about twenty-two or three years; a period during which the
   great body of the members of any church will be changed. This lax plan
   of admission has no where been adopted by a church, for any
   considerable length of time, without introducing a large proportion of
   members who are destitute of piety; and although Mr. Stoddard was in
   other respects so faithful a minister, and so truly desirous of the
   conversion and salvation of his people, there can be no doubt that such
   must have been the result during so long a period in the church at
   Northampton.

   "Mr. Edwards," observes Dr. Hopkins, "had some hesitation about this
   matter when he first settled at Northampton, but did not receive such a
   degree of conviction, as to prevent his adopting it with a good
   conscience, for some years. But at length his doubts increased; which
   put him upon examining it thoroughly, by searching the Scriptures, and
   reading such books as were written on the subject. The result was, a
   full conviction that it was wrong, and that he could not retain the
   practice with a good conscience. He was fully convinced that to be a
   visible Christian, was to put on the visibility or appearance of a real
   Christian; that a profession of Christianity was a profession of that
   wherein real Christianity consists; and therefore that no person, who
   rejected Christ in his heart, could make such a profession consistently
   with truth. And as the ordinance of the Lord's supper was instituted
   for none but visible professing Christians, that none but those who are
   real Christians have a right, in the sight of God, to come to that
   ordinance: and, consequently, that none ought to be admitted thereto,
   who do not make a profession of real Christianity, and so can be
   received, in a judgment of charity, as true friends to Jesus Christ.

   "When Mr. Edwards's sentiments were generally known in the spring of
   the year 1749, it gave great offence, and the town was put into a great
   ferment; and before he was heard in his own defence, or it was known by
   many what his principles were, the general cry was to have him
   dismissed, as what would alone satisfy them. This was evident from the
   whole tenor of their conduct, as they neglected and opposed the most
   proper means of calmly considering, and so of thoroughly understanding,
   the matter in dispute, and persisted in a refusal to attend to what Mr.
   Edwards had to say, in defence of his principles. From the beginning to
   the end, they opposed the measures, which had the best tendency to
   compromise and heal the difficulty; and with much zeal pursued those,
   which were calculated to make a separation certain and speedy. He
   thought of preaching on the subject, that they might know what were his
   sentiments and the grounds of them, (of both which he was sensible that
   most of them were quite ignorant,) before they took any steps for a
   separation. But that he might do nothing to increase the tumult, he
   first proposed the thing to the standing committee of the church;
   supposing, that if he entered on the subject publicly with their
   consent, it would prevent the ill consequences, which otherwise he
   feared would follow. But the most of them strenuously opposed it. Upon
   which he gave it over for the present, as what, in such circumstances,
   would rather blow up the fire to a greater height, than answer the good
   ends proposed."

   Mr. Edwards was sensible that his principles were not understood, but
   misrepresented through the country; and finding that his people were
   too warm, calmly to attend to the matter in controversy, he proposed to
   print what he had to say on the point, as this seemed the only way left
   him to have a fair hearing. Accordingly his people consented to put off
   calling a council, till what he should write was published. With this
   view he began immediately to prepare a statement and defence of his own
   sentiments, and in the latter part of April, about two months from the
   time of its commencement, sent it to the press--an instance of rapidity
   of composition almost unexampled in an individual, who was at once
   occupied by the duties of an extensive parish, and involved in the
   embarrassments of a most perplexing controversy. Notwithstanding the
   efforts of Mr. Edwards, the printing of the work was not completed
   until August. It was entitled, "An Humble Inquiry into the Rules of the
   Word of God, concerning the Qualifications requisite to a Complete
   Standing and Full Communion in the Visible Christian Church;" and
   contains a discussion of the question agitated between himself and his
   people, "Whether any persons ought to be admitted to full communion in
   the christian church, but such as, in the eye of a reasonable judgment,
   are truly Christians?"--a discussion so thorough and conclusive, that
   it has been the standard work with evangelical divines from that time
   to the present.

   It was a very painful consideration to Mr. Edwards, that, while the
   circumstances in which he was placed, constrained him to declare his
   sentiments from the press, the "Appeal to the Learned," the production
   of a man so much loved and venerated at Northampton, and so much
   respected throughout New England, his own colleague too, and his own
   grandfather, was the work, and the only work of any respectability, on
   the opposite side of the question, which he should be obliged publicly
   to examine and refute. But his feelings on this subject he has himself
   explained. "It is far from a pleasing circumstance of this publication,
   that it is against what my honoured grandfather strenuously maintained,
   both from the pulpit and the press. I can truly say, on account of this
   and some other considerations, it is what I engage in with the greatest
   reluctance that ever I undertook any public service in my life. But the
   state of things with me is so ordered by the sovereign disposal of the
   great Governor of the world, that my doing this appears to me very
   necessary, and altogether unavoidable. I am conscious that not only is
   the interest of religion concerned in this affair, but my own
   reputation, future usefulness, and my very subsistence, all seem to
   depend on my freely opening and defending myself as to my principles,
   and agreeable conduct in my pastoral charge, and on my doing it from
   the press: in which way alone am I able to state, and justify my
   opinion to any purpose, before the country, (which is full of noise,
   misrepresentations, and many censures concerning this affair,) or even
   before my own people, as all would be fully sensible, if they knew the
   exact state of the case.--I have been brought to this necessity in
   Divine Providence, by such a situation of affairs, and coincidence of
   circumstances and events, as I choose at present to be silent about;
   and which it is not needful, nor perhaps expedient, for me to publish
   to the world."

   The people of Northampton manifested great uneasiness in waiting for
   this publication, before it came out of the press; and when it was
   published, some of the leading men, afraid of its ultimate effect on
   the minds of the people, did their utmost to prevent its extensive
   perusal, and it was read by comparatively a small number. Some of those
   who read it, of a more cool and dispassionate temper, were led to doubt
   whether they had not been mistaken.

   Mr. Edwards, as Dr. Hopkins observes, being sensible that his treatise
   had been read but by very few of the people, renewed his proposal to
   preach upon the subject, and at a meeting of the brethren of the church
   asked their consent in the following terms: "I desire that the brethren
   would manifest their consent, that I should declare the reasons of my
   opinion, relating to full communion in the church, in lectures
   appointed for that end: not as an act of authority, or as putting the
   power of declaring the whole counsel of God out of my hands; but for
   peace sake and to prevent occasion for strife." This was answered in
   the negative.--He then proposed that it should be left to a few of the
   neighbouring ministers, whether it was not, all things considered,
   reasonable, that he should be heard in this matter from the pulpit,
   before the affair should be brought to an issue. But this also passed
   in the negative.

   However, having had the advice of the ministers and messengers of the
   neighbouring churches who met at Northampton, to advise them under
   their difficulties, he proceeded to appoint a lecture, in order to
   preach on the subject, proposing to do so weekly till he had finished
   what he had to say. On Monday there was a society meeting, in which a
   vote was passed to choose a committee to go to Mr. Edwards, and desire
   him not to preach lectures on the subject in controversy, according to
   his declaration and appointment: in consequence of which a committee of
   three men, chosen for that purpose, waited upon him. However, Mr.
   Edwards thought proper to proceed according to his proposal, and
   accordingly preached a number of sermons, till he had finished what he
   had to say on the subject. These lectures were very thinly attended by
   his own people; but great numbers of strangers from the neighbouring
   towns attended them, so many as to make above half the congregation.
   This was in February and March, 1750.

   The calling of a decisive council, to determine the matter of
   difference, was now more particularly attended to on both sides. Mr.
   Edwards had before this insisted, from time to time, that they were by
   no means ripe for such a procedure; as they had not yet given him a
   fair hearing, whereby perhaps the need of such a council would be
   superseded. He observed, "That it was exceedingly unbecoming to manage
   religious affairs of the greatest importance in a ferment and tumult,
   which ought to be managed with great solemnity, deep humiliation,
   submission to the awful frowns of Heaven, humble dependence on God,
   with fervent prayer and supplication to him: that therefore for them to
   go about such an affair as they did, would be greatly to the dishonour
   of God and religion; a way in which a people cannot expect a blessing."
   Thus having used all means to bring them to a calm and charitable
   temper without effect, he consented that a decisive council should be
   called without any further delay.

   But a difficulty attended the choice of a council, which was for some
   time insuperable. It was agreed, that the council should be mutually
   chosen, one half by the pastor, and the other half by the church, but
   the people insisted upon it, that he should be confined to the county
   for his choice. Mr. Edwards thought this an unreasonable restraint upon
   him, as it was known that the ministers and churches in that county
   were almost universally against him in the controversy. He indeed did
   not suppose that the business of the proposed council would be to
   determine whether his opinion was right or not; but whether any
   possible way could be devised for an accommodation between pastor and
   people, and to use their wisdom and endeavour in order to effect it.
   And if they found this impracticable, they must determine, whether what
   ought in justice to be done had already actually been attempted, so
   that there was nothing further to be demanded by either of the parties
   concerned, before a separation should take place. And if he was
   dismissed by them, it would be their business to set forth to the world
   in what manner, and for what cause, he was dismissed: all which were
   matters of great importance to him, and required upright and impartial
   judges. Now considering the great influence a difference in religious
   opinions has to prejudice men one against another, and the close
   connexion of the point, in which most of the ministers and churches in
   the county differed from him, with the matter to be judged of, he did
   not think they could be reasonably looked upon so impartial judges, as
   that the matter ought to be left wholly to them. Besides, he thought
   that the case, being so new and extraordinary, required the ablest
   judges in the land. For these, and some other reasons which he offered,
   he insisted upon liberty to go out of the county, for those members of
   the proposed council in which he was to have a choice. In this the
   people strenuously and obstinately opposed him. At length they agreed
   to leave the matter to a council consisting of the ministers and
   messengers of the five neighbouring churches; who after they had met
   twice upon it, and had the case largely debated before them, were
   equally divided, and therefore left the matter undetermined.

   However, they were all agreed, that Mr. Edwards ought to have liberty
   to go out of the county for some of the council. And at the next church
   meeting, which was on the 26th of March, Mr. Edwards offered to join
   with them in calling a council, if they would consent that he should
   choose two of the churches out of the county, in ease the council
   consisted of but ten churches. The church however refused to comply
   with this, at one meeting after another repeatedly; and proceeded to
   warn a church meeting and choose a moderator, in order to act without
   their pastor. But to pass by many particulars, at length, at a meeting
   of the church, warned by their pastor, May 3rd, they voted their
   consent to his proposal of going out of the county for two of the
   churches that should be applied to. And they then proceeded to make
   choice of the ten ministers and churches of which the council should
   consist.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [35] What an awful warning to all professors, and especially to young
   people! Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth! Little do
   the giddy and the gay think how their levitics operate, and what seeds
   of distress and sorrow they are sowing for themselves and others. Woe
   unto you that thus laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep! How
   desirable it should be penitentially here, and not despairingly
   hereafter.?Dr. Williams.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XVII

   ACCOUNT OF DIFFICULTIES AT NORTHAMPTON CONTINUED.

   On Friday afternoon, June 22nd, 1750, the result of the council, and
   the protest of the minority, were publicly read to the people assembled
   in the church. On the next sabbath but one, July 1st, Mr. Edwards
   delivered to them his Farewell Sermon, which was soon afterwards
   published, at the request of some of the hearers. This sermon has been
   extensively and deservedly styled, "the best farewell sermon that was
   ever written;" and has been the source from which subsequent
   discourses, on occasions and in circumstances generally similar, have,
   to a great extent, been substantially derived. Had it been written in
   the case of an indifferent person, instead of his own, it could not
   have discovered less of passion or of irritation, or have breathed a
   more calm and excellent spirit. Instead of indicating anger under a
   sense of multiplied injuries, it appears in every sentence to have been
   dictated by meekness and forgiveness. At the same time, it presents an
   exhibition of the scenes of the last judgment, singularly solemn and
   awful. Few, indeed, are the compositions which furnish so many or so
   unequivocal marks of uncommon excellence in their author; and very few
   are so well adapted to be practically useful to churches and
   congregations.

   The following postscript to the letter to Mr. Gillespie, [36] of April
   2, 1750, and the letters of Mr. Erskine and Mr. M'Culloch, all written
   immediately after the separation of Mr. Edwards from his people,
   exhibit also, in a very striking manner, the calm and tranquil state of
   his mind at the time when they were written.

   "P. S. July 3, 1750. Having had no leisure to finish the preparation of
   my letters to Scotland, before this time, by reason of the
   extraordinary troubles, hurries, and confusions of my unusual
   circumstances, I can now inform you, that the controversy between me
   and my people, which I mentioned in the beginning of my letter, has
   issued in a separation. An ecclesiastical council was called on the
   affair, who sat here the week before last, and by a majority of one
   voice determined an immediate separation to be necessary; and
   accordingly my pastoral relation to my people was dissolved, on June
   22nd. If I can procure the printed accounts from Boston of the
   proceedings of the council, I will give orders to my friend there, to
   enclose them with this letter, and direct them to you--I desire your
   prayers, that I may take a suitable notice of the frowns of Heaven on
   me and this people, between whom there once existed so great a union,
   in bringing to pass such a separation between us; that these troubles
   may be sanctified to me; that God would overrule the event for his own
   glory (in which doubtless many adversaries will rejoice and triumph);
   that he would open a door for my future usefulness, provide for me and
   my numerous family, and take a fatherly care of us in our present
   unsettled, uncertain circumstances, being cast on the wide world.

   J.E."

   "To the Rev. Mr. Erskine.

   Northampton, July 5, 1750.

   rev. and dear brother,

   I now acknowledge the receipt of three letters from you since I last
   wrote to you; one of Sept. 12, another of Sept. 20, another of Dec. 22;
   all of the year 1749. The two first I received in the winter, with Mr.
   Glass's Notes on Scripture Texts, Ridgeley on Original Sin, Wheatley's
   Schools of the Prophets, Davidson's Sermon occasioned by the death of
   Mr. Harrison, and Mr. M'Raile's Sermon. Your letter written in
   December, I received a little while ago. I have greatly regretted the
   want of opportunity to answer you till now; but such have been my
   extraordinary circumstances, the multitude of distracting troubles and
   hurries that I have been involved in, (which I cannot easily represent
   to you,) that I have had no leisure. I have been very uneasy in
   neglecting to write to my correspondents in Scotland; and about two
   months ago I set myself to the business, but was soon broken off; and
   have not been able to return to it again till now. And now, my dear
   Sir, I thank you for your letters and presents. The books you sent me
   were entertaining to me, and some of them will be of advantage to me,
   if God should give me opportunity to prosecute the studies I had begun
   on the Arminian controversy. There were various things pleasing to me
   in Glass's Notes, tending to give some new light into the sense of
   Scripture. He seems to be a man of ability; though I cannot fall in
   with all his singularities.

   The account you say Mr. Davidson gave of the absurdities of the
   Moravians, are not very surprising to me. I have seen here in America
   so much of the tendency and issue of such kind of notions, and such
   sort of religion, as are in vogue among them, and among others in many
   respects like them, that I expect no other than that sin, folly,
   absurdity, and things to the last degree reproachful to Christianity,
   will for ever be the consequence of such things. It seems to me, that
   enough and enough of this kind has lately appeared, greatly to awaken
   the attention of christian divines, and make them suspect that the
   devil's devices in the various counterfeits of vital, experimental
   religion, have not been sufficiently attended to, and the exact
   distinctions between the saving operations of the Spirit of God and its
   false appearances not sufficiently observed. There is something now in
   the press at Boston, largely handling the subject. I have had
   opportunity to read the manuscript, and, in my humble opinion, it has a
   tendency to give as much light in this matter, as any thing that ever I
   saw. It was written by Mr. Bellamy, minister of Bethlehem, in
   Connecticut; the minister whom Mr. Brainerd sometimes speaks of as his
   peculiarly dear and intimate friend (as possibly you may have observed
   in reading his life). He was of about Mr. Brainerd's age, and it might
   have been well, if he had had more years over his head. But as he is
   one of the most intimate friends that I have in the world, and one that
   I have much acquaintance with, I can say this of him, that he is one of
   very great experience in religion, as to what has passed between God
   and his own soul; one of very good natural abilities, of closeness of
   thought, of extraordinary diligence in his studies, and earnest care
   exactly to know the truth in these matters. He has long applied his
   mind to the subject be has wrote upon, and used all possible helps of
   conversation and reading. And though his style is not such as is like
   to please the polite world, yet if his youth, and the obscurity of his
   original, and the place that he lives in, &c. do not prevent his being
   much taken notice of, I am persuaded his book might serve to give the
   church of God considerable light as to the nature of true religion, and
   many important doctrines of Christianity. From the knowledge I have of
   him, I am fully satisfied that his aim in this publication is not his
   own fame and reputation in the world; but the glory of God, and the
   advancement of the kingdom of his Redeemer.

   I suspect the follies of some of the Seceders, which you mention in
   both your letters of Sept. 20, and Dec. 22, arise, in considerable
   measure, from the same cause with the follies of the Moravians, and the
   followers of the Wesleys, and many extravagant people in America, viz.
   false religion, counterfeit conversions, and the want of a genuine
   renovation of the spirit of their minds. I say, as to many of them, not
   to condemn all in the gross. The spirit seems to be exactly the same
   with what appears in many, who apparently, by their own account, have
   had a false conversion. I am a great enemy to censoriousness, and have
   opposed it very much in my preaching and writings. But yet I think we
   should avoid that bastard, mischievous charity, by which Satan keeps
   men asleep, and hides their eyes from those snares and crafty works of
   his, which it is of the utmost consequence to the church of God to
   discern and be aware of; and by which, for want of their being
   discovered, the devil has often had his greatest advantages against the
   interest of religion.

   The Scriptures often lead us to judge of true religion, and the
   gracious sincerity of professors, by the genius, the temper, and spirit
   of their religion: Jam. iii. 17., Eph. v. 9., Gal. v. 19, 25., 1 Cor.
   xiii. 4,. &c. Rom. viii. 9., I John iv. 16., John xiii. 35., 1 John ii.
   10., 1 John iii.14, 18, 19, 23, 24., 1 John iv. 7 ., 1 John v. 12, 13
   .and very many other places. I have been greatly grieved at a spirit of
   censoriousness; but yet I heartily wish that some sorts of charity were
   utterly abolished.

   The accounts you give of Archbishop Herring, of the moderate, generous,
   truly catholic and christian principles appearing in him, and some
   other of the dignified clergy, and other persons of distinction in the
   church of England, are very agreeable. It is to be hoped that these
   things are forerunners of something good and great to be brought to
   pass for the church of God.

   I have seen some accounts in our public prints, published here in
   America, of those conversions and baptisms in the Russian empire, which
   you mention in your last letter; and should be glad of further
   information about that matter. We have had published here, an extract
   of a letter, written by Dr. Doddridge to Mr. Pearsall of Taunton, in
   Somersetshire, and transmitted by him to Boston, in a letter to Mr.
   Prince; giving a surprising account of a very wonderful person, a
   German by nation, a preacher of the gospel to the Jews, lately in
   London; whom he (Dr. Doddridge) saw and conversed with, and heard
   preach (or rather repeat) a sermon there; who had had great success in
   preaching to those miserable people in Germany, Poland, Holland,
   Lithuania, Hungary, and other parts; God having so blessed his labours
   that, in the various parts through which he had travelled, he had been
   the instrument of the conversion of about six hundred Jews; many of
   whom are expressing their great concern to bring others of their
   brethren to the knowledge of the great and blessed Redeemer, and
   beseeching him to instruct their children, that they may preach Christ
   also. I should be glad if you hear any thing further of the affair, to
   be informed of it by you. I think such things may well be improved to
   animate and encourage those who have engaged in the Concert for Prayer
   for the reviving of Religion. I rejoice to hear what you write of some
   appearances of awakening in Mr. Gillies's church in Glasgow, and if it
   continues should be glad to be informed.

   I am very glad to hear of what Mr. M'Laurin informs me of the
   encouragements likely to be given from Scotland to New Jersey college;
   a very hopeful society; and I believe what is done for that seminary is
   doing good in an eminent manner. Mr. M'Laurin tells me of some prospect
   of your being removed to a congregation in Edinburgh, which I am
   pleased with, because I hope there you will act in a larger sphere, and
   will have more opportunity to exert the disposition that appears in
   you, to promote good public designs for Zion's prosperity.

   I thank you for the concern you manifest for me under my difficulties
   and troubles, by reason of the controversy between me and my people,
   about the terms of christian communion.

   This controversy has now had that issue which I expected; it has ended
   in a separation between me and my people. Many things have appeared,
   that have been exceedingly unhappy and uncomfortable in the course of
   this controversy. The great power of prejudices from education,
   established custom, and the traditions of ancestors and certain admired
   teachers, and the exceeding unhappy influence of bigotry, has
   remarkably appeared in the management of this affair. The spirit, that
   has actuated and engaged my people in this affair, is evidently the
   same that has appeared in your own people in their opposition to winter
   communions, but only risen to a much higher degree; and some of the
   arguments, that have been greatly insisted on here, have been very much
   of the same sort with some of those urged by your people in your
   affair. There have been many things said and done, during our
   controversy, that I shall not now declare. But would only say in the
   general, that there has been that prejudice, and spirit of jealousy,
   and increasing engagedness of spirit and fixedness of resolution, to
   gain the point in view, viz. my dismission from my pastoral office over
   them, upheld and cherished by a persuasion that herein they only stood
   for the truth, and did their duty, that it has been an exceedingly
   difficult thing for me to say or do any thing at all in order to their
   being enlightened, or brought to a more calm and sedate consideration
   of things, without its being misinterpreted, and turned to an occasion
   of increasing jealousy and prejudice; even those things wherein I have
   yielded most, and done most to gratify the people, and assuage their
   spirits and win their charity. I have often declared to the people, and
   gave it to them under my hand, that if, after all proper means used,
   and regular steps taken, they continued averse to remaining under my
   ministry, I had no inclination to do any thing, as attempting to oblige
   them to it. But I looked on myself bound in conscience, before I left
   them, (as I was afraid they were in the way to ruin,) to do my
   endeavour, that proper means should be used to bring them to a suitable
   temper, and so to a capacity of proceeding considerately, and with
   their eyes open; properly, and calmly, and prayerfully examining the
   point in controversy, and also weighing the consequences of things. To
   this end I have insisted much on an impartial council, in which should
   be some of the elderly ministers of the land, to look fully into our
   state, and to view it with all its circumstances, with full liberty to
   give both me and them such advice as they should think requisite and
   proper. And therefore I insisted, that the council should not wholly
   consist of ministers and churches that were professedly against me in
   the point in controversy; and that it should not consist wholly of
   ministers and churches of this neighbourhood, who were almost
   altogether in opposition to me; but that some should be brought from
   abroad. This I also insisted on, as I thought it most likely an
   impartial council would do me justice, in the public representation
   they would make of our affairs, in their result. The people insisted
   that the council should be wholly of the neighbourhood; undoubtedly
   because they supposed themselves most sure, that their judgment and
   advice would be favourable and agreeable to them. I stood the more
   against it, because in this country we have no such thing as appeals
   from one council to another, from a lesser to a larger; and also,
   because the neighbouring ministers were all youngerly men. These things
   were long the subject matter of uncomfortable troubles and contests.
   Many were the proposals I made. At last they complied with this
   proposal, (after great and long-continued opposition to it,) viz. That
   I should nominate two churches to be of the council, who were not
   within the bounds of this county. And so it was agreed that a council
   of ten churches should be called, mutually chosen; and that two of my
   half should be called from abroad. I might have observed before, that
   there was a great and long dispute about the business of the council,
   or what should be left to them; and particularly, whether it should be
   left to them, or they should have liberty, to give us what advice they
   pleased for a remedy from our calamities. This I insisted on, not that
   I desired that we should bind ourselves beforehand to stand to their
   advice, let it be what it would; but I thought it absurd to tie up and
   limit the council, that they should not exercise their own judgment,
   and give us their advice, according to their own mind. The people were
   willing the council should make proposals for an accommodation; but
   that, if they did not like them, the council should be obliged
   immediately to separate us, and would not have them have any liberty to
   advise to wait longer, or use any further means for light, or to take
   any further or other course for a remedy from our calamities. At last a
   vow was passed in these words,--That a council should be called to give
   us their last advice, for a remedy from the calamities arising from the
   present unsettled, broken state of the church, by reason of the
   controversy here subsisting, concerning the qualifications for full
   communion in the church: and if upon the whole of what they see and
   find in our circumstances, they judge it best that pastor and people be
   immediately separated, that they proceed to dissolve the relation
   between them.' Accordingly a council was agreed upon, to meet here on
   this business, on June 19th. I nominated two out of this county; of
   which Mr. Foxcroft's church in Boston was one. But others were
   nominated provisionally, in case these should fall. Those that came,
   were Mr. Hall's church of Sutton, and Mr. Hobby's church in Reading.
   One of the churches that I nominated within the county, refused to send
   a delegate, viz. Mr. Billing's church of Cold Spring. However, Mr.
   Billing himself (though with some difficulty) was admitted into the
   council. The people, in managing this affair on their side, have made
   chief use of a young gentleman of liberal education and notable
   abilities, and a fluent speaker, of about seven or eight and twenty
   years of age, my grandfather Stoddard's grandson, being my mother's
   sister's son; a man of lax principles in religion, falling in, in some
   essential things, with Arminians, and is very open and bold in it. He
   was improved as one of the agents for the church, and was their chief
   spokesman before the council. He very strenuously urged before the
   council the necessity of an immediate separation; and I knowing the
   church, the most of them, to be inflexibly bent on this event, informed
   the council that I should not enter into the dispute, but should refer
   the matter wholly to the council's judgment; I signified, that I had no
   desire to leave my people, on any other consideration, any other than
   their aversion to my being their minister any longer; but, they
   continuing so averse, had no inclination or desire that they should be
   compelled, but yet should refer myself to their advice. When the church
   was convened, in order to the council's knowing their minds with
   respect to my continuance, about twenty-three appeared for it, others
   staid away, choosing not to act either way; but the generality of the
   church, which consists of about 230 male members, voted for my
   dismission. My dismission was carried in the council by a majority of
   one voice. The ministers were equally divided, but of the delegates one
   more was for it than against it, and it so happened that all those of
   the council, who came from the churches of the people's choosing, voted
   for my dismission; but all those who came from the churches that I
   chose, were against it, and there happening to be one fewer of these
   than of the other, by the church of Cold Spring not sending a delegate,
   (which was through that people's prejudice against my opinion,) the
   vote was carried that way by the voice of one delegate. However, on the
   22d of the last month, the relation between me and this people was
   dissolved. I suppose that the Result of the Council, and the
   Protestation of some of the members, are printed in Boston by this
   time. I shall endeavour to procure one of the printed accounts, to be
   sent with this letter to you, together with one of my books on the
   point that has been in controversy between me and my people. Two of the
   members of the council, who dissented from the Result, yet did not sign
   the Protestation, viz. Mr. Reynolds and his delegate, which I suppose
   was owing to Mr. Reynolds's extraordinarily cautious and timorous
   temper. The last sabbath I preached my farewell sermon. Many in the
   congregation seemed to be much affected, and some are exceedingly
   grieved. Some few, I believe, have some relentings of heart, that voted
   me away. But there is no great probability that the leading part of the
   church will ever change. Beside their own fixedness of resolution,
   there are many in the neighbouring towns to support their resolution,
   both in the ministry and civil magistracy; without whose influence I
   believe the people never would have been so violent as they have been.

   I desire that such a time of awful changes, dark clouds, and great
   frowns of Heaven on me and my people, may be a time of serious
   consideration, thorough self-reflection and examination, and deep
   humiliation with me. I desire your fervent prayers for me, and for
   those who have heretofore been my people. I know not what will become
   of them. There seems to be the utmost danger, that the younger
   generation will be carried away with Arminianism as with a flood. The
   young gentleman I spoke of, is high in their esteem, and is become the
   most leading man in the town; and is very bold in declaiming and
   disputing for his opinions; and we have none able to confront and
   withstand him in dispute; and some of the young people already show a
   disposition to fall in with his notions. And it is not likely that the
   people will obtain any young gentleman of Calvinistic sentiments, to
   settle with them in the ministry, who will have courage and ability to
   make head against him. And as to the older people, there never appeared
   so great an indifference among them, about things of this nature. They
   will at present be much more likely to be thorough in their care to
   settle a minister of principles contrary to mine, as to terms of
   communion, than to settle one that is sound in the doctrines of grace.
   The great concern of the leading part of the town, at present, will
   probably be, to come off with flying colours, in the issue of the
   controversy they have had with me, and of what they have done in it;
   for which they know many condemn them.

   An end is put for the present, by these troubles, to the studies I was
   before engaged in, and my design of writing against Arminianism. I had
   made considerable preparation, and was deeply engaged in the
   prosecution of this design, before I was rent off from it by these
   difficulties, and if ever God should give me opportunity, I would again
   resume that affair. But I am now, as it were, thrown upon the wide
   ocean of the world, and know not what will become of me, and my
   numerous and chargeable family. Nor have I any particular door in view
   that I depend upon to be opened for my future serviceableness. Most
   places in New England that want a minister, would not be forward to
   invite one with so chargeable a family, nor one so far advanced in
   years--being 46 the 5th day of last October. I am fitted for no other
   business but study. I should make a poor hand at getting a living by
   any secular employment. We are in the hands of God, and I bless him, I
   am not anxious concerning his disposal of us. I hope I shall not
   distrust him, nor be unwilling to submit to his will. And I have cause
   of thankfulness, that there seems also to be such a disposition in my
   family. You are pleased, dear Sir, very kindly to ask me, whether I
   could sign the Westminster Confession of Faith, and submit to the
   presbyterian form of church government; and to offer to use your
   influence to procure a call for me, to some congregation in Scotland. I
   should be very ungrateful, if I were not thankful for such kindness and
   friendship. As to my subscribing to the substance of the Westminster
   Confession, there would be no difficulty; and as to the presbyterian
   government, I have long been perfectly out of conceit of our unsettled,
   independent, confused way of church government in this land; and the
   presbyterian way has ever appeared to me most agreeable to the word of
   God, and the reason and nature of things; though I cannot say that I
   think, that the presbyterian government of the church of Scotland is so
   perfect, that it cannot, in some respects, be mended. But as to my
   removing, with my numerous family, over the Atlantic, it is, I
   acknowledge, attended with many difficulties that I shrink at. Among
   other things, this is very considerable, that it would be on
   uncertainties, whether my gifts and administrations would suit my
   congregation, that should send for me without trial; and so great a
   thing as such a removal, had need to be on some certainty as to that
   matter. If the expectations of a congregation were so great, and they
   were so confident of my qualifications, as to call me at a venture,
   having never seen nor heard me; their disappointment might possibly be
   so much the greater, and they the more uneasy after acquaintance and
   trial. My own country is not so dear to me, but that, if there were an
   evident prospect of being more serviceable to Zion's interests
   elsewhere, I could forsake it. And I think my wife is fully of this
   disposition.

   I forgot to mention, that, in this evil time in Northampton, there are
   some of the young people under awakenings; and I hope two or three have
   lately been converted: two very lately, besides two or three hopefully
   brought home the last year. My wife and family join with me in most
   respectful and cordial salutations to you, and your consort; and we
   desire the prayers of you both for us, under our present circumstances.
   My youngest child but one has long been in a very infirm, afflicted,
   and decaying state with the rickets, and some other disorders. I desire
   your prayers for it.

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your most affectionate and obliged

   Friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   "P. S. For accounts of the state of religion in America, and some
   reasons of my conduct in this controversy with my people, I must refer
   you to my letters to Mr. Robe and Mr. M'Laurin."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [36] For the letter itself see page cli.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XVIII.

   LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--TO MR. ERSKINE--AN ACCOUNT OF THE TROUBLES AT
   NORTHAMPTON CONCLUDED.

   the correspondence of Mr. Edwards with some eminent ministers in
   Scotland, already introduced, has probably been found among the most
   interesting parts of this Memoir; equally creditable to Mr. Edwards,
   and to the excellent men, whose enlightened minds at once discerned his
   uncommon worth. The admirers of Mr. Edwards are under the deepest
   obligations to Mr. (afterwards Dr.) Erskine, whose name so frequently
   has occurred, as the individual through whose exertions the various
   works which principally form these volumes were first introduced in
   this kingdom.--The letters which are found in this chapter will not
   diminish the interest already felt by the pious and intelligent reader.

   "To the Rev. Mr. M'Culloch.

   Northampton, July 6, 1750.

   rev. and dear sir,

   It is now long since I have received a letter from you: the last was
   dated March 10, 1749. However, you having heretofore manifested that
   our correspondence was not unacceptable to you, I would not omit to do
   my part towards the continuance of it. Perhaps one reason of your
   neglecting to write, may be the failing of such agreeable matter for
   correspondence, as we had some years ago, when religion was flourishing
   in Scotland and America, and we had joyful information to give each
   other, of things pertaining to the city of our God. It is indeed now a
   sorrowful time on this side of the ocean. Iniquity abounds, and the
   love of many waxes cold. Multitudes of fair and high professors, in one
   place and another, have sadly backslidden; sinners are desperately
   hardened; experimental religion is more than ever out of credit, with
   the far greater part, and the doctrines of grace, and those principles
   in religion that do chiefly concern the power of godliness, are far
   more than ever discarded. Arminianism and Pelagianism have made a
   strange progress within a few years. The church of England, in New
   England, is I suppose treble of what it was seven years ago. Many
   professors are gone off to great lengths in the enthusiasms and
   extravagance, in their notions and practices. Great contentions,
   separations, and confusions, in our religious state, prevail in many
   parts of the land. Some of our main pillars are broken; one of which
   was Mr. Webb of Boston, who died in the latter part of last April. Much
   of the glory of the town of Boston is gone with him; and if the
   bereavements of that town should be added to, by the death of two or
   three more of their remaining elder ministers, that place would be in a
   very sorrowful state indeed, like a city whose walls are broken down,
   and like a large flock without a shepherd, encompassed with wolves, and
   many in the midst of it.

   These are the dark things that appear. But on the other hand, there are
   some things that have a different aspect. There have in some places
   appeared revivals of religion. Some little revivings have been in some
   places towards Boston. There has been some reformation, not long since,
   in one of our colleges; and by what I hear there has been much more of
   this nature in some other parts of the province of New York, near
   Bedford river; something in several parts of New Jersey, particularly
   through the labours of Mr. Greenman, a young gentleman educated by the
   charitable expenses of the pious and eminent Mr. David Brainerd,
   mentioned in his Life, which I think I sent to you the last summer. And
   since I last wrote to Scotland, I have had accounts of the prevailing
   of a religious concern in some parts of Virginia.

   And I must not forget to inform you, that, although I think it has of
   late been the darkest time in Northampton, that ever was since the town
   stood, yet there have been some overturnings on the minds of some of
   the young people here, and two or three instances of hopeful conversion
   the last summer, and as many very lately.

   When I speak of its being a dark time here, I have a special reference
   to the great controversy that has subsisted here, for about a year and
   a half, between me and my people, about the forms of communion in the
   visible church; which has even at length issued in a separation between
   me and my people; for a more particular account of which, I must refer
   you to my letters to Mr. Robe and Mr. Erskine.--Besides, I shall
   endeavour to procure the printed copies of the Result of the Council,
   that sat here the week before last, with the Protestation of some of
   the members, that these may be sent to you with this letter, together
   with one of my books, published on the point in debate between me and
   my people; of which I crave your acceptance.

   I am now separated from the people between whom and me there was once
   the greatest union. Remarkable is the providence of God in this matter.
   In this event we have a striking instance of the instability and
   uncertainty of all things here below. The dispensation is indeed awful
   in many respects, calling for serious reflection and deep humiliation
   in me and my people. The enemy, far and near, will now triumph; but God
   can overrule all for his own glory. I have now nothing visible to
   depend upon for my future usefulness, or the subsistence of my numerous
   family. But I hope we have an all-sufficient, faithful, covenant God,
   to depend upon. I desire that I may ever submit to him, walk humbly
   before him, and put my trust wholly in him. I desire, dear Sir, your
   prayers for us, under our present circumstances.

   I am, Sir, your respectful

   and affectionate friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   "P. S. My wife and family join with me in cordial salutations to you
   and yours."

   After Mr. Edwards was dismissed from his people, several months elapsed
   before he received any proposals of settlement. During this interval,
   the committee of the church found it very difficult to procure a
   regular supply of the pulpit. When no other preacher could be procured.
   Mr. Edwards was for a time applied to by the committee, o preach for
   them ; but always with apparent reluctance, and only for the given
   sabbath. He alludes to these circumstances in the following letter; in
   which the reader will find, that he was a decided advocate for the
   celebration of the Lord's supper every Lord's day.

   Letter to Mr. Erskine.

   "Northampton, Nov. 15, 1750.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Some time in July last I wrote to you, and ordered one of my books on
   the Qualifications for Communion in the Church, to be sent to you from
   Boston, with the letter. In my letter I informed you of what had come
   to pass, in the issue of the late controversy between me and my people,
   in the dissolution of my pastoral relation to them; and ordered the
   printed Result of the Ecclesiastical Council, that sat upon our
   affairs, and the Protest against the said Result, to be put up with the
   letter; and also, at the same time, sent letters to my other
   correspondents in Scotland, with the books, &c. I have as yet had no
   call to any stated business elsewhere in the ministry; there has been
   some prospect of my having invitations to one or two places. The people
   of Northampton are hitherto destitute of a minister. They have exerted
   themselves very much, to obtain some candidate to come and preach to
   them on probation, and have sent to many different places; but have
   hitherto been disappointed, and seem to be very much nonplussed. But
   the major part of them seem to continue without any relenting or
   misgiving of heart, concerning what has been done; at least the major
   part of the leading men in the congregation. But there is a number
   whose hearts are broken at what has come to pass; and I believe are
   more deeply affected than ever they were at any temporal bereavement.
   It is thus with one of the principal men in the parish, viz. Col.
   Dwight; and another of our principal men, viz. Dr. Mather, adheres very
   much to me; and there are more women of this sort, than men; and I
   doubt not but there is a number, who in their hearts are with me, who
   durst not appear, by reason of the great resolution, and high hand,
   with which things are carried in the opposition, by the prevailing
   part. Such is the state of things among us, that a person cannot appear
   on my side, without greatly exposing himself to the resentments of his
   friends and neighbours, and being the object of much odium. The
   committee, that have the care of supplying the pulpit, have asked me to
   preach, the greater part of the time since my dismission, when I have
   been at home; but it has seemed to be with much reluctance that they
   have come to me, and only because they could not get the pulpit
   supplied otherwise; and they have asked me only from sabbath to
   sabbath. In the mean time, they have taken much pains to get somebody
   else to preach to them.

   Since I wrote to you in July last, I received your letter, dated the
   30th of April last, with your generous and acceptable presents of
   Fraser's Treatise of Justifying Faith, Mr. Crawford's Manual against
   Infidelity, Mr. Randal's Letters on Frequent Communicating, Mr. Blair's
   Sermon before the Society for propagating Christian Knowledge, with an
   account of the Society, and the Bishop of London's Letters to the
   Cities of London and Westminster. The view the last mentioned gives of
   the wickedness of those cities, is very affecting; and the patience of
   God towards such cities, so full of wickedness, so heinous and horrid
   in its kinds, and attended with such aggravations, is very astonishing.
   That those cities and the nation, and indeed Christendom in general,
   are come to such a pass as they are, seems to me to argue that some
   very remarkable dispensation of Divine Providence is nigh, either of
   mercy or of judgment, or perhaps both; of mercy to an elect number, and
   great wrath and vengeance towards others; and that those very things
   you take notice of in Isa. lix. are approaching, appear to me very
   probable. However, I cannot but think, that, at such a day, all such as
   truly love Zion, and lament the wickedness that prevails in the earth,
   are very loudly called upon to united and earnest prayer to God, to
   arise and plead his own cause, that he would make bare his arm, that
   that may bring salvation; that now when the enemy comes in as a flood,
   the Spirit of the Lord may lift up a standard against him. When the
   church of Christ is like the ship, wherein Christ and his disciples
   were, when it was tossed with a dreadful tempest, and even covered with
   waves, and Christ was asleep; certainly it becomes Christians (though
   not with doubting and unbelief) to call on their Redeemer, that he
   would awake out of sleep, and rebuke the winds and waves. There are
   some things that afford a degree of comfort and hope, in this dark day,
   respecting the state of Zion. I cannot but rejoice at some things which
   I have seen, that have been lately published in England, and the
   reception they have met with in so corrupt a time and nation. Some
   things of Dr. Doddridge's, (who seems to have his heart truly engaged
   for the interests of religion,) particularly his Rise and Progress, and
   Col. Gardiner's Life, and also Mr. Hervey's Meditations. And I confess
   it is a thing that gives me much hope, that there are so many on this
   side the ocean united in the Concert for Prayer, proposed from
   Scotland; of which I may give a more particular account in a letter to
   Mr. M'Laurin, which I intend shall be sent with this. I had lately a
   letter from Governor Belcher, and in the postscript he sent me the
   following extract of a letter he had lately received from Dr.
   Doddridge. Nor did I ever know a finer class of young preachers, for
   its number, than that which God has given me this year, to send out
   into the churches. Yet are not all the supplies, here as elsewhere,
   adequate to their necessities; but I hope God will prosper the schemes
   we are forming for their assistance. I bless God, that in these middle
   parts of our island, peace and truth prevail in sweet harmony; and I
   think God is reviving our cause, or rather his own, sensibly, though in
   a gentle and almost unobserved manner.'

   This which the Doctor speaks of, I hope is a revival of religion;
   though many things, in many places, have been boasted of as glorious
   revivals, which have been but counterparts of religion; so it has been
   with many things that were intermingled with and followed our late
   happy revival. There have been in New England, within these eight years
   past, many hundreds, if not thousands, of instances very much like that
   of the boy at Tiptry Heath, mentioned by Mr. Davidson, as you give
   account in your letter. We ought not only to praise God for every thing
   that appears favourable to the interests of religion, and to pray
   earnestly for a general revival, but also to use means that are proper
   in order to it; and one proper means must be allowed to be, a due
   administration of Christ's ordinances: one instance of which is that,
   which you and Mr. Randal have been striving for; viz. a restoring the
   primitive practice of frequent communicating. I should much wonder (had
   it not been for what I have myself lately seen of the force of bigotry
   and prejudice, arising from education and custom) how such arguments
   and persuasions, as Mr. Randal uses, could be withstood; but however
   they may be resisted for the present, yet I hope those who have begun
   will continue to plead the cause of Christ's institutions; and whatever
   opposition is made, I should think it would be best for them to plead
   nothing at all short of Christ's institutions, viz. the administration
   of the Lord's supper every Lord's day:--it must come to that at last;
   and why should Christ's ministers and people, by resting in a partial
   reformation, lay a foundation for a new struggle, an uncomfortable
   labour and conflict, in some future generation, in order to a full
   restoration of the primitive practice.

   I should be greatly gratified, dear Sir, by the continuance of your
   correspondence, and by being informed by you of the state of things,
   relating to the interests of religion in Europe, and especially in
   Great Britain; and particularly whether the affair of a comprehension
   is like to go on, or whether the test act is like to be taken off, or
   if there be any thing else done, or published, in England or Scotland,
   that remarkably affects the interests of religion.

   I have, with this letter, sent Mr. Bellamy's True Religion Delineated,
   with a Sermon of mine at Mr. Strong's ordination; of which I ask your
   acceptance, as a small testimony of gratitude for your numerous favours
   to me. I ask a constant remembrance in your prayers, that I may have
   the presence of God under my unusual trials, and that I may make a good
   improvement of all God's dealings with me. My wife joins with me in
   most cordial salutations to you and Mrs. Erskine.

   I am, dear Sir,

   your affectionate and obliged

   friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   "mr. erskine."

   "At length," observes Dr. Hopkins, "a great uneasiness was manifested,
   by many of the people of Northampton, that Mr. Edwards should preach
   there at all. Upon which the committee for supplying the pulpit called
   the town together, to know their minds with respect to that matter,
   when they voted, That it was not agreeable to their minds that he
   should preach among them. Accordingly, while Mr. Edwards was in the
   town, and they had no other minister to preach to them, they carried on
   public worship among themselves, and without any preaching, rather than
   invite him. [37]

   "Every one must be sensible," remarks Dr. Hopkins, who was himself an
   occasional eye-witness of these scenes, "that this was a great trial to
   Mr. Edwards. He had been nearly twenty-four years among that people;
   and his labours had been, to all appearance, from time to time greatly
   blessed among them: and a great number looked on him as their spiritual
   father, who had been the happy instrument of turning them from darkness
   to light, and plucking them as brands out of the burning. And they had
   from time to time professed that they looked upon it as one of their
   greatest privileges to have such a minister, and manifested their great
   love and esteem of him, to such a degree, that, (as saint Paul says of
   the Galatians,) "if it had been possible, they would have plucked out
   their own eyes, and given them to him." And they had a great interest
   in his affection: he had borne them on his heart, and carried them in
   his bosom for many years; exercising a tender concern and love for
   them: for their good he was always writing, contriving, labouring; for
   them he had poured out ten thousand fervent prayers; in their good he
   had rejoiced as one that findeth great spoil; and they were dear to him
   above any other people under heaven.--Now to have this people turn
   against him, and thrust him out from among them, stopping their ears,
   and running upon him with furious zeal, not allowing him to defend
   himself by giving him a fair hearing; and even refusing so much as to
   hear him preach; many of them surmising and publicly speaking many ill
   things as to his ends and designs! Surely this must come very near to
   him, and try his spirit. The words of the psalmist seem applicable to
   this case: "It was not an enemy that reproached me, that did magnify
   himself against me, then I would have hid myself from him. But it was
   thou--my guide and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together,
   and walked unto the house of God in company." Let us therefore now
   behold the man!--The calm sedateness of his mind; his meekness and
   humility in great and violent opposition, and injurious treatment: his
   resolution and steady conduct through all this dark and terrible storm;
   were truly wonderful, and cannot be set in so beautiful and affecting a
   light by any description, as they appeared in to his friends, who were
   eye-witnesses.

   "Mr. Edwards had a numerous and chargeable family, and little or no
   income, exclusive of his salary; and considering how far he was
   advanced in years; the general disposition of people, who want a
   minister, to prefer a young man, who has never been settled, to one who
   has been dismissed from his people; and what misrepresentations were
   made of his principles through the country; it looked to him not at all
   probable, that he should ever have opportunity to be settled again in
   the work of the ministry, if he was dismissed from Northampton: and he
   was not inclined, or able, to take any other course, or go into any
   other business to get a living: so that beggary as well as disgrace
   stared him full in the face, if he persisted in his principles. When he
   was fixed in his principles, and before they were publicly known, he
   told some of his friends, that if he discovered and persisted in them,
   it would most likely issue in his dismission and disgrace; and the ruin
   of himself and family, as to their temporal interests. He therefore
   first sat down and counted the cost, and deliberately took up the
   cross, when it was set before him in its full weight and magnitude; and
   in direct opposition to all worldly views and motives. And therefore
   his conduct, in these circumstances, was a remarkable exercise and
   discovery of his conscientiousness; and of his readiness to deny
   himself, and to forsake all that he had, to follow Christ.--A man must
   have a considerable degree of the spirit of a martyr, to go on with the
   steadfastness and resolution with which he did. He ventured wherever
   truth and duty appeared to lead him, unmoved at the threatening dangers
   on every side.

   "However, God did not forsake him. As he gave him those inward
   supports, by which he was able in patience to possess his soul, and
   courageously row on in the storm, in the face of boisterous winds
   beating hard upon him, and in the midst of gaping waves threatening to
   swallow him up; so he soon appeared for him in his providence, even
   beyond all his expectations. His correspondents, and other friends in
   Scotland, hearing of his dismission, and fearing it might be the means
   of bringing him into worldly straits, generously contributed a
   considerable sum, and sent it over to him.

   "And God did not leave him without tender and valuable friends at
   Northampton. For a small number of his people, who opposed his
   dismission from the beginning, and some, who acted on neither side, but
   after his dismission adhered to him, under the influence of their great
   esteem and love of Mr. Edwards, were willing, and thought themselves
   able, to maintain him: and insisted upon it, that it was his duty to
   stay among them, as a distinct and separate congregation from the body
   of the town who had rejected him.

   "Mr. Edwards could not see it to be his duty to remain among them, as
   this would probably be a means of perpetuating an unhappy division in
   the town; and there was to him no prospect of doing the good there,
   which would counterbalance the evil. However, that he might do all he
   could to satisfy his tender and afflicted friends, he consented to ask
   the advice of an ecclesiastical council. Accordingly a council was
   called, and met at Northampton on the 15th of May, 1751.--The town on
   this occasion was put into a great tumult. They, who were active in the
   dismission of Mr. Edwards, supposed, though without any good ground,
   that he was contriving with his friends again to introduce himself at
   Northampton." A meeting of the church was summoned, and a committee of
   the church appointed; who, in the name of the church, drew up a
   remonstrance against the proceedings of the council, and laid it before
   that body. The character of this instrument may be learned, from the
   subsequent confession of one of the committee of the church that signed
   it, who was principally concerned in drawing it up, and very active in
   bringing the church to accept of it, and to vote that it should be
   presented to the council. To use his own language, it was "every where
   interlarded with unchristian bitterness, and sarcastical and unmannerly
   insinuations. It contained divers direct, grievous, and criminal
   charges and allegations against Mr. Edwards, which, I have since good
   reason to suppose, were all founded on jealous and uncharitable
   mistakes, and so were really gross slanders; also many heavy and
   reproachful charges upon divers of Mr. Edwards's adherents, and some
   severe censures of them all indiscriminately; all of which, if not
   wholly false and groundless, yet were altogether unnecessary, and
   therefore highly criminal. Indeed I am fully convinced that the whole
   of that composure, excepting the small part of it relating to the
   expediency of Mr. Edwards's resettlement at Northampton, was totally
   unchristian,--a scandalous, abusive, injurious libel against Mr.
   Edwards and his particular friends, especially the former, and highly
   provoking and detestable in the sight of God; for which I am heartily
   sorry and ashamed; and pray I may remember it, with deep abasement and
   penitence, all my days." After this remonstrance of the church had been
   read before the council, they immediately invited the committee, by
   whom it was signed, to come forward, and prove the numerous allegations
   and insinuations which it contained; but they refused to appear and
   support any of their charges, or so much as to give the gentlemen of
   the council any opportunity to confer with them, about the affair
   depending, though it was diligently sought; and though, by presenting
   the remonstrance, they had virtually given the council jurisdiction, as
   to the charges it contained, yet they utterly refused to acknowledge
   them to be an ecclesiastical council. The council then invited the
   church, as a body, to a friendly conference, to see if some measures
   could not be devised for the removal of the difficulties, in which the
   ecclesiastical affairs of the town were involved; but although this was
   earnestly and repeatedly moved for, on the part of the council, it was
   repeatedly and finally denied on the part of the church.

   The council having heard what Mr. Edwards, and those who adhered to
   him, had to say, advised, agreeably to the judgment of Mr. Edwards,
   that he should leave Northampton, and accept of the invitations which
   he had received, to take charge of the Indian mission, as well as of
   the church and congregation, at Stockbridge; of which a more particular
   account will be given.

   As a proper close to this melancholy story, and to confirm and
   illustrate what has been related, the following letter from Joseph
   Hawley, Esq. to the Rev. Mr. Hall, of Sutton, published in a weekly
   newspaper in Boston, May 9, 1760, is here inserted. This gentleman was
   a near kinsman of Mr. Edwards, [38] though his active opponent; he was
   a lawyer of distinguished talents and eloquence.

   "To the Rev. Mr. Hall, of Sutton.

   Northampton, May 9, 1760.

   rev. sir,

   I have often wished that every member of the two ecclesiastical
   councils, that formerly sat in Northampton, upon the unhappy
   differences, between our former most worthy and reverend pastor, Mr.
   Jonathan Edwards, and the church here, whereof you were a member; I
   say, Sir, I have often wished every one of them truly knew my real
   sense of my own conduct in the affair, that the one and the other of
   the said councils are privy to. As I have long apprehended it to be my
   duty, not only to humble myself before God, for what was unchristian
   and sinful in my conduct before the said councils, but also to confess
   my faults to them, and take shame to myself before them; so I have
   often studied with myself, in what manner it was practicable for me to
   do it. When I understood that you, Sir, and Mr. Eaton, were to be at
   Cold-Spring at the time of the late council, I resolved to improve the
   opportunity, fully to open my mind there to you and him thereon; and
   thought that probably some method might be then thought of, in which my
   reflections on myself, touching the matters above hinted at, might be
   communicated to most, if not all, the gentlemen aforesaid, who did not
   reside in this county. But you know, Sir, how difficult it was for us
   to converse together by ourselves, when at Cold-Spring, without giving
   umbrage to that people; I therefore proposed writing to you upon the
   matters, winch I had then opportunity only most summarily to suggest;
   which you, Sir, signified would be agreeable to you. I therefore now
   undertake what I then proposed, in which I humbly ask the divine aid;
   and that I may be made most freely willing, fully to confess my sin and
   guilt to you and the world, in those instances, which I have reason to
   suppose fell under your notice, as they were public and notorious
   transactions, and on account whereof, therefore, you, Sir, and all
   others who had knowledge thereof, had just cause to be offended at me.

   And in the first place, Sir, I apprehend that, with the church and
   people of Northampton, I sinned and erred exceedingly, in consenting
   and labouring, that there should be so early a dismission of Mr.
   Edwards from his pastoral relation to us, even upon the supposition
   that he was really in a mistake in the disputed point; not only because
   the dispute was upon matters so very disputable in themselves, and at
   the greatest remove from fundamental, but because Mr. Edwards so long
   had approved himself a most faithful and painful pastor to the said
   church. He also changed his sentiments, in that point, wholly from a
   tender regard to what appeared to him to be truth; and had made known
   his sentiments with great moderation, and upon great deliberation,
   against all worldly motives, from mere fidelity to his great Master,
   and a tender regard to the souls of his flock, as he had the highest
   reason to judge. These considerations now seem to me sufficient; and
   would (if we had been of a right spirit) have greatly endeared him to
   his people, and made us to the last degree reluctant to part with him,
   and disposed us to the exercise of the greatest candour, gentleness,
   and moderation. How much of the reverse whereof appeared in us I need
   not tell you, Sir, who were an eye-witness of our temper and conduct.

   And, although it does not become me to pronounce decisively, on a point
   so disputable, as was then in dispute; yet I beg leave to say, that I
   really apprehend, that it is of the highest moment to the body of this
   church, and to me in particular, most solicitously to inquire, whether,
   like the Pharisees and lawyers in John Baptist's time, we did not
   reject the counsel of God against ourselves, in rejecting Mr. Edwards
   and his doctrine, which was the ground of his dismission. And I humbly
   conceive, that it highly imports us all of this church, most seriously
   and impartially to examine what that most worthy and able divine
   published, about that time, in support of the same, whereby he being
   dead yet speaketh. But there were three things, Sir, especially, in my
   own particular conduct before the first council, which have been justly
   matter of great grief and much trouble to me, almost ever since; vis.

   In the first place, I confess, Sir, that I acted very immodestly and
   abusively to you, as well as injuriously to the church and myself, when
   with much zeal and unbecoming assurance, I moved the council that they
   would interpose to silence and stop you, in an address you were making
   one morning to the people, wherein you were, if I do not forget,
   briefly exhorting them to a tender remembrance of the former affection
   and harmony, that had long subsisted between them and their reverend
   pastor, and the great comfort and profit which they apprehended that
   they had received from his ministry; for which, Sir, I heartily ask
   your forgiveness; and I think, that we ought, instead of opposing an
   exhortation of that nature, to have received it with all thankfulness.

   Another particular of my conduct before that council, which I now
   apprehend was criminal, and was owing to the want of that tender
   affection, and reverend respect and esteem for Mr. Edwards, which be
   had highly merited of me, was my strenuously opposing the adjournment
   of the matters submitted to that council for about two months; for
   which I declare myself unfeignedly sorry; and I with shame remember,
   that I did it in a peremptory, decisive, vehement, and very immodest
   manner.

   But, Sir, the most criminal part of my conduct at that time, that I am
   conscious of, was my exhibiting to that council a set of arguments in
   writing, the drift whereof was to prove the reasonableness and
   necessity of Mr. Edwards's dismission, in case no accommodation was
   then effected with mutual consent; which writing, by clear implication,
   contained some severe, uncharitable, and, if I remember right,
   groundless and slanderous imputations on Mr. Edwards, expressed in
   bitter language. And although the original draft thereof was not done
   by me, yet I foolishly and sinfully consented to copy it; and, as agent
   for the church, to read it, and deliver it to the council; which I
   could never have done, if I had not had a wicked relish for perverse
   things: which conduct of mine I confess was very sinful, and highly
   provoking to God; for which I am ashamed, confounded, and have nothing
   to answer.

   As to the church's remonstrance, as it was called, which their
   committee preferred to the last of the said councils; (to all which I
   was consenting, and in the composing whereof I was very active, as also
   in bringing the church to their vote upon it;) I would, in the first
   place, only observe, that I do not remember any thing, in that small
   part of it, which was plainly discursive of the expediency of Mr.
   Edwards's re-settlement here, as pastor to a part of the church, which
   was very exceptionable. But as to all the residue, which was much the
   greatest part thereof, (and I am not certain that any part was wholly
   free,) it was every where interlarded with unchristian bitterness,
   sarcastical and unmannerly insinuations. It contained divers direct,
   grievous, and criminal charges and allegations against Mr. Edwards,
   which, I have since good reason to suppose, were all founded on jealous
   and uncharitable mistakes, and so were really gross slanders; also many
   heavy and reproachful charges upon divers of Mr. Edwards's adherents,
   and some severe censures of them all indiscriminately; all of which, if
   not wholly false and groundless, were altogether unnecessary, and
   therefore highly criminal. Indeed, I am fully convinced, that the whole
   of that composure, excepting the small part thereof above mentioned,
   was totally unchristian--a scandalous, abusive, injurious libel,
   against Mr. Edwards and his particular friends, especially the former,
   and highly provoking and detestable in the sight of God; for which I am
   heartily sorry and ashamed; and pray that I may remember it with deep
   abasement and penitence all my days. Nor do I now think, that the
   church's conduct in refusing to appear, and attend before that council,
   to support the charges and allegations in the said remonstrance against
   Mr. Edwards and the said brethren, which they demanded, was ever
   vindicated, by all the subtle answers that were given to the said
   demand; nor do I think that our conduct in that instance was capable of
   a defense. For it appears to me, that, by making such charges against
   them before the said council, we necessarily so far gave that council
   jurisdiction; and I own with sorrow and regret, that I zealously
   endeavoured, that the church should perseveringly refuse to appear
   before the said council, for the purpose aforesaid; which I humbly pray
   God to forgive.

   Another part of my conduct, Sir, of which I have long repented, and for
   which I hereby declare my hearty sorrow, was my obstinate opposition to
   the last council's having any conference with the church; which the
   said council earnestly and repeatedly moved for, and which the church,
   as you know, finally denied. I think it discovered a great deal of
   pride and vain sufficiency in the church, and showed them to be very
   opinionative, especially the chief sticklers, one of whom I was; and
   think it was running a most presumptuous risk, and acting the part of
   proud scorners, for us to refuse hearing, and candidly and seriously
   considering, what that council could say or oppose to us; among whom,
   there were divers justly in great reputation for grace and wisdom.

   In these instances, Sir, of my conduct, and in others, (to which you
   were not privy,) in the course of that most melancholy contention with
   Mr. Edwards, I now see that I was very much influenced by vast pride,
   self-sufficiency, ambition, and vanity. I appear to myself vile, and
   doubtless much more so to others, who are more impartial; and do, in
   the review thereof, abhor myself, and repent sorely: and if my own
   heart condemns me, it behoves me solemnly to remember, that God is
   greater and knoweth all things. I hereby own, Sir, that such treatment
   of Mr. Edwards, wherein I was so deeply concerned and active, was
   particularly and very aggravatedly sinful and ungrateful in me, because
   I was not only under the common obligations of each individual of the
   society to him, as a most able, diligent, and faithful pastor; but I
   had also received many instances of his tenderness, goodness, and
   generosity to me as a young kinsman, whom he was disposed to treat in a
   most friendly manner.

   Indeed, Sir, I must own, that, by my conduct in consulting and acting
   against Mr. Edwards, within the time of our most unhappy disputes with
   him, and especially in and about that abominable remonstrance,' I have
   so far symbolized with Balaam, Ahitophel, and Judas, that I am
   confounded and filled with terror, oftentimes, when I attend to the
   most painful similitude. And I freely confess, that, on account of my
   conduct above mentioned, I have the greatest reason to tremble at those
   most solemn and awful words of our Saviour, Matt. xviii. 6.. Whoso
   shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it were
   better for him that a mill-stone were hanged about his neck, and that
   he were drowned in the depth of the sea;' and those in Luke x. 16.. He
   that despiseth you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth
   him that sent me;' and I am most sorely sensible that nothing but that
   infinite grace and mercy, which saved some of the betrayers and
   murderers of our blessed Lord, and the persecutors of his martyrs, can
   pardon me; in which alone I hope for pardon, for the sake of Christ,
   whose blood, blessed be God, cleanseth from all sin. On the whole, Sir,
   I am convinced, that I have the greatest reason to say as David, Have
   mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness, according to
   the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions; wash
   me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: for I
   acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Hide thy
   face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities; create in me a
   clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me; cast me not
   away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me; restore
   unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.
   (Ps. li. 1-3, 9-12.)

   And I humbly apprehend, that it greatly concerns the church of
   Northampton most seriously to examine, whether the many hard speeches,
   spoken by many particular members against their former pastor, some of
   which the church really countenanced, (and especially those spoken by
   the church as a body, in that most vile remonstrance,') are not so
   odious and ungodly, as to be utterly incapable of defense; whether the
   said church were not guilty of a great sin, in being so willing and
   disposed, for so slight a cause, to part with so faithful and godly a
   minister as Mr. Edwards was; and whether ever God will hold us
   guiltless, till we cry to him for Christ's sake to pardon and save us
   from that judgment, which such ungodly deeds deserve. And I most
   heartily wish and pray, that the town and church of Northampton would
   seriously and carefully examinee, Whether they have not abundant cause
   to judge, that they are now lying under great guilt in the sight of
   God; and whether those of us, who were concerned in that most awful
   contention with Mr. Edwards, can ever more reasonably expect God's
   favour and blessing, till our eyes are opened, and we become thoroughly
   convinced that we have greatly provoked the Most High, and have been
   injurious to one of the best of men; and until we shall be thoroughly
   convinced, that we have dreadfully persecuted Christ, by persecuting
   and vexing that just man, and servant of Christ; until we shall be
   humble as in the dust on account of it, and till we openly, in full
   terms, and without baulking the matter, confess the same before the
   world, and most humbly and earnestly seek forgiveness of God, and do
   what we can to honour the memory of Mr. Edwards, and clear it of all
   the aspersions which we unjustly cast upon him; since God has been
   pleased to put it beyond our power to ask his forgiveness. Such terms,
   I am persuaded, the great and righteous God will hold us to, and that
   it will be vain for us to hope to escape with impunity in any other
   way. This I am convinced of with regard to myself, and this way I most
   solemnly propose to take myself (if God in his mercy shall give me
   opportunity); that so, by making free confession to God and man of my
   sin and guilt, and publicly taking shame to myself, I may give glory to
   the God of Israel, and do what in me lies to clear the memory of that
   venerable man from the wrongs and injuries I was so active in bringing
   on his reputation and character; and I thank God, that he has been
   pleased to spare my life to this time, and am sorry that I have delayed
   the affair so long. Although I made the substance of almost all the
   foregoing reflections in writing, but not exactly in the same manner,
   to Mr. Edwards and the brethren who adhered to him, in Mr. Edwards's
   life, and before he removed from Stockbridge, and I have reason to
   believe that he, from his great candour and charity, heartily forgave
   me and prayed for me; yet, because that was not generally known, I look
   on myself obliged to take further steps; for while I kept silence my
   bones waxed old, &c. For all these my great sins, therefore, in the
   first place, I humbly and most earnestly ask forgiveness of God; in the
   next place, of the relatives and near friends of Mr. Edwards. I also
   ask the forgiveness of all those, who were called Mr. Edwards's
   adherents; and of all the members of the ecclesiastical councils above
   mentioned; and lastly, of all christian people, who have had any
   knowledge of these matters.

   I have no desire, Sir, that you should make any secret of this letter;
   but that you would communicate the same to whom you shall judge proper:
   and I purpose, if God shall give me opportunity, to procure it to be
   published in some one of the public newspapers; for I cannot devise any
   other way of making known my sentiments of the foregoing matters to all
   who ought to be acquainted therewith, and therefore I think I ought to
   do it, whatever remarks I may foresee will be made thereon. Probably,
   when it comes out, some of my acquaintance will pronounce me quite
   overrun with vapours; others will be furnished with matter for mirth
   and pleasantry; others will cursorily pass it over, as relating to
   matters quite stale; but some, I am persuaded, will rejoice to see me
   brought to a sense of my sin and duty; and I myself shall be conscious,
   that I have done something of what the nature of the case admits,
   towards undoing what is, and long has been, to my greatest remorse and
   trouble, that it was ever done.

   Sir, I desire that none would entertain a thought, from my having
   spoken respectfully of Mr. Edwards, that I am disaffected to our
   present pastor; for the very reverse is true; and I have a reverend
   esteem, real value, and hearty affection for him; and bless God, that
   he has, notwithstanding all our former unworthiness, given us one to
   succeed Mr. Edwards, who, as I have reason to hope, is truly faithful.

   I conclude this long letter, by heartily desiring your prayers, that my
   repentance of my sins above mentioned may be unfeigned and genuine, and
   such as God in infinite mercy, for Christ's sake, will accept; and I
   beg leave to subscribe myself,

   Sir, your real, though very unworthy friend,

   and obedient servant,

   joseph hawley."

   On the whole it is evident, that while the dismission of Mr. Edwards
   was, in itself considered, an event greatly to be regretted, it was at
   the same time, in every part of it, most honourable to himself, and
   proved in its ultimate consequences an essential blessing to the church
   of God. Probably no one event, of apparently malignant aspect, ever did
   so much towards reforming the churches of New England. Many difficult
   subjects of theology, also, needed at that time to be thoroughly
   examined and illustrated; and to this end, some individual of expanded
   views and profound penetration, as well as of correct faith and
   elevated piety, was to be found, who could give the strength of his
   talents and his time to these investigations. The providence of God had
   selected Mr. Edwards for this important office; but so numerous and
   engrossing were the duties of the ministry at Northampton, that, had he
   remained there, he could not have fulfilled it but in part. To give him
   abundant opportunity and advantage for the work assigned him, he was
   taken from that busy field at the best time of life, when his powers
   had gained their greatest energy, when the field of thought and inquiry
   had been already extensively surveyed, and when the labours of the
   pulpit were fully provided for and anticipated; and was transferred to
   the retirement and leisure of a remote frontier village. There he
   prepared, within a little period, four of the ablest and most valuable
   works which the church of Christ has in its possession.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [37] This vote appears to have been passed in the latter part of
   November, a few weeks only before Mr. Edwards received proposals of
   settlement, which he ultimately accepted.

   [38] The father of Mr. Hawley married Rebekah, the fifth daughter of
   the Rev. Mr. Stoddard, the sister of Mr. Edwards's mother.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XIX.

   PROPOSALS FROM STOCKBRIDGE, AND FROM THE COMMISSIONERS--VISIT TO
   STOCKBRIDGE--INDIAN MISSION--HOUSATONNUCKS--MOHAWKS--DISSENSIONS OF
   ENGLISH INHABITANTS--MR. HOLLIS'S MUNIFICENCE.

   Early in December, 1750, Mr. Edwards received proposals from the church
   and congregation at Stockbridge, to become their minister; and about
   the same time, similar proposals from the commissioners, at Boston, of
   the "Society in London, for Propagating the Gospel in New England, and
   the Parts adjacent," to become the missionary of the Housatonnucks, or
   River Indians, a tribe at that time located in Stockbridge and its
   immediate vicinity. Before deciding on these proposals, he went to
   Stockbridge, in the beginning of January, 1751, and continued there
   during the remainder of the winter, and the early part of the spring,
   preaching both to the English inhabitants, and, by the aid of an
   interpreter, to the Indians. Soon after his return, he accepted of the
   invitation both of the commissioners and of the people of Stockbridge.

   The Indian mission at Stockbridge commenced in 1735; when the Rev. John
   Sergeant was ordained their missionary. He continued to reside there
   until his death, July 27th, 1749. His Indian congregation, originally
   about fifty in number, gradually increased, by accessions from the
   neighbouring settlements on the Housatonnuck river, to the number of
   two hundred and fifty--the actual number in 1751 Mr. Sergeant devoted
   much of his time to the study of their language; (the Moheekanneew;
   [39] ) yet, at the close of his life, he had not made such progress,
   that he could preach in it, or even pray in it, except by a form. He
   ultimately regretted the time and labour thus lost, and expressed the
   conviction, that it would be far better for his successor not to learn
   the language, but to preach by an interpreter, and to teach the
   children of the Indians the English language, by the aid of
   schoolmasters. Very little success appears to have attended his
   labours, either among the Indians or the English congregation.

   A school was established, for the instruction of the Indian children,
   at the commencement of the mission, and placed under the care of
   Timothy Woodbridge, Esq. one of the original settlers of Stockbridge,
   and characterized by Mr. Edwards, as "a man of very good abilities, of
   a manly, honest, and generous disposition, and as having, by his
   upright conduct and agreeable manners, secured the affections and
   confidence of the Indians." He was supported by the government of the
   province, and devoted himself faithfully to the business of instructing
   the Indian children; yet for a long period, like Mr. Sergeant, he had
   to lament that so little success attended his labours. This was owing
   to various causes. The Indians lived in a village by themselves, at a
   small distance from the English settlement. Their children lived at
   home with their parents, and not in a boarding-school, and of course
   made little or no progress in the English language; and they had no
   books in their own. The English traders sold large quantities of ardent
   spirits to the Indians, and in this way constantly counteracted the
   efforts made to do them good. There were also unfortunate dissensions
   among the people of Stockbridge. The settlement of the town was begun,
   with a direct reference to the intellectual and moral improvement of
   the Indians, in the immediate vicinity. The lands of the Indians,
   comprising a very extensive tract, were secured to them; and important
   privileges were granted to the families of the original settlers, by
   the provincial legislature, with reference to this very object.
   Unfortunately, one of the most wealthy of those settlers appears to
   have removed to Stockbridge, with the design of amassing a still larger
   fortune by his intercourse wit the Indian settlement. With this view,
   he formed a large trading establishment in the neighbourhood. From his
   wealth and his locality, affairs of some moment, relating to the
   Indians at Stockbridge, were on various occasions intrusted to his
   management; in one of which Mr. Woodbridge regarded him as doing so
   great and palpable an injury, both to the Indians and the province,
   that, taking it in connexion with the general tenor of his conduct, he
   felt himself bound to prevent, as far as lay in his power, all
   intercourse between him and the Indian settlement, as well as all
   influence which he might attempt to exert over the affairs of the
   Indians. In return, he endeavored, in the first instance, to prevent
   the Indians from sending their children to the school, and to render
   those parents who actually sent them dissatisfied with Mr. Woodbridge;
   and at length to procure the dismission of that gentleman from his
   appointment. This controversy was of long continuance, and affected the
   whole settlement. The result was, that although he amassed considerable
   wealth, he entirely lost the confidence of the Indians; and so
   completely alienated the minds of the English inhabitants, that every
   family in the place, his own excepted, sided with his antagonist. This
   controversy, for a long time, had a most inauspicious effect on the
   school of Mr. Woodbridge and on the mission of Mr. Sergeant.

   In 1739, Mr. Sergeant, despairing of any considerable success under the
   existing plan of instruction, attempted the establishment of an Indian
   boarding-school, to be kept at the expense of the English. He proposed,
   that the children should live in the family of their instructor, and
   learn the English language; and that their time should be divided
   between work and study, under different masters. For some time, he made
   but little progress in raising funds for this purpose, but at length
   was aided in his design, by the benevolence of the Rev. Isaac Hollis, a
   clergyman near London, who most generously offered to defray the
   expense of the board, clothing, and instruction of twelve Indian
   children. At this time no boarding-house was built; and for a long
   period, Mr. Serjeant found it impossible to procure a person duly
   qualified to take charge of the school. To begin the work, however, Mr.
   Serjeant hired as a temporary teacher, until a competent one could be
   procured, a Capt. Martin Kellogg, an illiterate man, originally a
   farmer, and subsequently a soldier, about sixty years of age, very
   lame, and wholly unaccustomed to the business of instruction. His
   sister, Mrs. Ashley, the wife of a Capt. Ashley, of Suffield, who had
   been taken prisoner, when a child, by the Iroquois, and perfectly
   understood their language, was the interpreter of the English at
   Stockbridge; and her brother having come to reside there, in
   consequence of having no regular business, was employed temporarily by
   Mr. Sergeant, for the want of a better instructor, because he was on
   the spot. A school had just been commenced under his auspices, (not
   however as a boarding-school, as no house could be procured for the
   purpose,) when the French war of 1744 broke it up; and Capt. Kellogg,
   that he might continue to receive the money of Mr. Hollis, carried
   several of the Indian boys to Newington, in Connecticut, where he had
   previously resided.

   After the close of the war, in 1748, Mr. Sergeant began the erection of
   a house for a boarding-school. He also wrote a letter to the nation of
   the Mohawks, then residing on the Mohawk river, about forty miles west
   of Albany, inviting them to bring their children to Stockbridge for
   instruction. But he did not live to see either of these designs
   accomplished. At his death, in 1749, several Indian boys were left in
   the hands of Capt. Kellogg, who in the autumn of 1750, not having heard
   from Mr. Hollis for a considerable period, and supposing him to be
   dead, dismissed them for a time, and gave up his attempt to form a
   school.

   In consequence of the letter of Mr. Sergeant to the Mohawk tribe, which
   had been accompanied by a very kind invitation from the Housatonnuck
   Indians, offering them a portion of their lands for a place of
   settlement, if they would come and reside in Stockbridge, about twenty
   of them, old and young, came to that place in 1750, a short time before
   the removal of Mr. Edwards and his family. The provincial legislature,
   learning this fact, made provision for the support and maintenance of
   the children, and Capt. Kellogg, unfortunately, was employed as the
   instructor. He never established a regular school, however, but taught
   the boys occasionally, and incidentally, and employed them chiefly in
   cultivating his own lands. He was then 65 years of age.

   Near the close of Mr. Serjeant's life, the school for the Housatonnuck
   children, under Mr. Woodbridge, became much more flourishing. His
   salary was increased, the number of his pupils augmented, and himself
   left to act with less restraint. The Indians also became less inclined
   to intemperance. The influence of the ----family was likewise extinct;
   the English inhabitants having to a man taken the opposite side in the
   controversy; and the Indians regarding Mr. Woodbridge as their best
   friend, and his opponent as their worst enemy. Mr. Woodbridge was also,
   at this period, able to avail himself of the assistance of a young
   Housatonnuck, educated by himself, of the name of John
   Wonwanonpequunnonnt, a man of uncommon talents and attainments, as well
   as of sincere piety; who appears to have been raised up by Providence,
   that he might become the interpreter of Mr. Edwards, in preaching to
   his countrymen.

   Mr. Hollis, having heard of the arrival of the Mohawks at Stockbridge,
   and supposing that a regular boarding-school was established under the
   care of Capt. Kellogg, wrote to him to increase the number of the
   children to twenty-four, who were to be maintained and instructed at
   his expense. During the winter of 1750-51, the number of Mohawks, who
   came to reside at Stockbridge, was increased to about ninety; among
   whom were Hendrick, and Nicholas, and seven others of their chiefs.

   Such was the state of things at Stockbridge, and such the state of the
   Indian mission, and of the Indian schools, when Mr. Edwards was invited
   to remove to that place. The ----family at first exerted their whole
   influence, to prevent his receiving an invitation from the people at
   Stockbridge; but, finding that the church and parish (themselves
   excepted) were unanimous in giving the invitation, and very anxious
   that he should accept it, that there was no chance of producing a
   change in the minds of the commissioners in Boston, and that continued
   opposition must terminate in their own utter discomfiture, they changed
   their course, and professed to be highly gratified that he was coming
   among them.

   After his return to Northampton, in the spring of 1751, Mr. Edwards,
   before coming to a final decision, paid a visit to his Excellency Sir
   William Pepperell, at Kittery, to learn the actual views of the
   government, with regard to the Indian establishment at Stockbridge; and
   having received satisfactory assurances on this subject, he soon after
   announced to the people of Stockbridge, and to the commissioners in
   Boston, his acceptance of their respective invitations. In the third
   week of June, he went again to Stockbridge, and remained there during
   the greater part of the ensuing month.

   While at Stockbridge, he addressed the following letter to the Rev. Mr.
   Erskine.

   "Stockbridge, June 28, 1751.

   rev. and dear brother,

   I have lately received the Treatise on the Restoration of the Jews,'
   and a pamphlet entitled, A Serious Address to the Church of Scotland,'
   and a Sermon on the Qualifications of the Teachers of Christianity,'
   preached by you before the Synod, with Glass's Notes on Scripture
   Texts, No. 5. These pamphlets were enclosed in a wrapper, superscribed
   by your hand There was also in the packet, a brief advertisement
   concerning one of the pamphlets, written in your hand, though without
   any date or name, or any letter in the packet. But yet, I conclude
   these pamphlets were sent by you, and accordingly I now thank you for
   them. Your discourse on the Qualifications of Teachers of Christianity,
   is a very acceptable present. Glass's Notes on Scripture Texts contain
   some things that are very curious, and discover close study, and a
   critical genius. The Treatise on the Restoration of the Jews, if
   written by a christian divine, is a strange and unaccountable thing; by
   reason of there being nothing at all said, or hinted, about the Jews'
   conversion to the Christian faith, or so much as one mention of Jesus
   Christ; and his supporting that the prophecies of Ezekiel are to be
   literally fulfilled, in the building of such a temple and city as is
   there described, and the springing of such a river from the threshold
   of the temple, and its running into the east sea, and the Jews offering
   sacrifices, and observing other rites spoken of in Ezekiel; and that
   the Messiah is yet to come, and to reign in Jerusalem as a temporal
   prince, &c. And I am wholly at a loss, as to the author's real design,
   whether it was, to promote Judaism, or deism, or only to amuse his
   readers. Since I received these pamphlets, I have received letters from
   all my other correspondents in Scotland; but none from you. Mr.
   M'Laurin speaks of your writing, or designing to write; but suggests
   that possibly your letter would not arrive so soon as the rest; so that
   I hope I shall yet, ere long, receive a letter from you. The letters I
   have received from my other correspondents, make mention of a great
   revival of religion in Guelderland, and Mr. M'Laurin has sent me
   printed accounts of it, published, as I understand, by Mr. Gillies, his
   son-in-law, being extracts of letters from Holland. I had some notice
   of it before, in a letter from Mr. Davenport, who, for the most part,
   resides in New Jersey. The account he wrote, was brought over from
   Holland by a young Dutch minister, whose name is John Frielinghausen,
   born in New Jersey, second son to an eminent Dutch minister there. His
   elder brother is settled at Albany, and by all accounts, is an able and
   faithful minister. This second son has been in Holland two years, I
   suppose to perfect his education in one of their universities, where
   his brother at Albany had his education. He came over into America the
   last summer, having just been married and ordained in Holland, in order
   to take the pastoral charge of some of the places that had been under
   his father's care.

   The accounts Mr. Davenport gives from him, are not so particular, as
   those that are published by Mr. Gillies. But there is one material and
   important circumstance, which he mentions, not taken notice of in the
   accounts from Scotland, viz. that the stadtholder was much pleased with
   the work.

   At the same time, that we rejoice in that glorious work, and praise God
   for it, it concerns us carefully to pray, that God's ministers and
   people there may be directed in such a state of things, wherein wisdom
   and great discretion are so exceedingly needed, and great care and
   skill, to distinguish between true and false religion; between those
   inward experiences, which are from the saving influence of the Spirit
   of God, and those that are from Satan, transforming himself into an
   angel of light. Without this, it may be expected, that the great
   deceiver will gradually insinuate himself; acting under disguise, he
   will pretend to be a zealous assistant in building the temple, yea, the
   chief architect, when his real design will be, to bring all to the
   ground, and to build Babel, instead of the temple of God, finally to
   the great reproach and grief of all true friends of religion, and the
   haughty triumph of its adversaries. If I may be allowed my conjecture
   in this affair, there lies the greatest danger of the people in
   Guelderland, who are concerned in this work. I wish they had all the
   benefit of the late experience of this part of the church of God, here
   in America. Mr. M'Laurin informs me, dear Sir, that you have a
   correspondence in the Netherlands; and, as you know something of the
   calamities we have suffered from this quarter, I wish you would give
   them some kind admonitions. They will need all the warnings that can be
   given them. For the temptation to religious people, in such a state of
   things, to countenance the glaring, shining counterparts of religion,
   without distinguishing them from the reality, what is true and genuine,
   is so strong, that they are very hardly indeed restrained from it. They
   will at last find the consequences not to be good, of an abundant
   declaring and proclaiming their experience, on all occasions, and
   before all companies, if they get into that way, as they will be very
   likely to do, without special caution in their guides. I am not so much
   concerned about any danger, the interest of the revival of religion in
   Guelderland may be in, from violent open opposition, as from the
   secret, subtle, undiscerned guile of the old serpent. I perceive, pious
   ministers in the Netherlands are concerned to obtain attestations to
   the good abiding effect of the awakenings in Scotland and America. I
   think it is fit they should know the very truth of the case, and that
   things should be represented neither better nor worse than they are. If
   they should be represented worse, that would give encouragement to
   unreasonable opposers; if better, that might prevent a most necessary
   caution, of the true friends of the awakening. There are, undoubtedly,
   very many instances in New England, in the whole, of the perseverance
   of such, as were thought to have received the saving benefits of the
   late revival of religion; and of their continuing to walk in newness of
   life, and as becomes saints; instances, which are incontestable, and
   which men must be most obstinately blind not to see; but I believe the
   proportion here is not so great as in Scotland. I cannot say, that the
   greater part of supposed converts give reason, by their conversation,
   to suppose that they are true converts. The proportion may, perhaps, be
   more truly represented, by the proportion of the blossoms on a tree
   which abide and come to mature fruit, to the whole number of blossoms
   in the spring.

   In the forementioned letter, which I lately received from Mr.
   Davenport, he mentions some degrees of awakening in some places of New
   Jersey. The following are extracts from his letter. I returned last
   month from Cape May, where I had been labouring some time, with little
   or no success, as to the unregenerate; except somewhat encouraging, the
   last day of my preaching among them. Yet, blessed be God, I hear of the
   success of several ministers in the Jerseys, and the revival of
   religion in some places; though it is very dull times in most. Mr. Reed
   of Boundbrook, has, I hear, some encouragement, by reason of a few in
   that place being under conviction. Mr. Kennedy, who is likely to settle
   at Baskingridge, I hear, has still more encouragement; and Mr. John
   Frielinghausen more yet, among the Dutch. He is the second son of the
   Mr. Frielinghausen, mentioned in your narrative, who died a few years
   ago. This second son came over from Holland, where he had been two
   years, and was ordained a little before he came over, the last summer.
   Pious ministers among the Dutch, this way, I think increase faster of
   late, than among other people. I was at the house of such an one, Mr.
   Varbryk, as I came along in this journey; who was ordained last fall,
   about five miles beyond Dobbs's Ferry, in New York government. Mr.
   William Tennent told me, that Mr. John Light, a pious young Dutch
   minister in New Jersey, was translating the accounts from Holland into
   English. Mr. Brainerd has had some special success lately, through
   mercy; so that nine or ten Indians appear to be under conviction, as he
   tells me; and about twelve of the white people near them, that used to
   be stupid like the very heathen; and many others more thoughtful and
   serious. Mr. Sacket has lately been favoured with peculiar success, in
   reducing a number drawn away and infected by the separatists; and some
   endeavours I have used since that, and with him, have, I trust, not
   been altogether in vain. The good Lord grant, that false religion may
   cease, and true religion prevail through the earth!' This letter of Mr.
   Davenport was dated April 26, 1751.

   The Dutch people in the provinces of New York and New Jersey, have been
   famed for being generally exceedingly ignorant, stupid, and profane,
   little better than the savages of our American deserts. But it is
   remarkable, that things should now begin to appear more hopeful among
   them, about the same time that religion is reviving among the Dutch in
   their mother country; and certainly the revivals of religion which have
   very lately appeared, especially among the Dutch in Europe, do verify
   God's holy word, which not only gives such great encouragement to those
   who have engaged in the Concert for United Prayer, begun in Scotland,
   to go forward, but binds it strongly upon them so to do; and shows that
   it will be an aggravated fault, if, after God does such glorious things
   so soon after we have begun in an extraordinary manner to ask them, we
   should grow cold and slack, and begin to faint. And I think what God
   has now done, may well cause those, who seemed at first, with some
   zeal, to engage in the affair, but have grown careless about it, and
   have left off, to reflect on themselves with blushing and confusion.
   What if you, dear Sir, and other ministers in Scotland, who have been
   engaged in this affair, should now take occasion to inform ministers in
   the Netherlands of it, and move them to come into it, and join with us,
   in our united and extraordinary prayers, for an universal revival of
   religion?

   As to my present circumstances, I came the last week to this place,
   having undertaken the business of a missionary to the Indians here;
   having been chosen the pastor of this church, and chosen missionary by
   the commissioners for Indian affairs in Boston. My instalment is
   appointed to be on the second Thursday in the next month. [40] I don't
   expect to get ready to remove my family till winter. But I must refer
   you, dear Sir, to my letters to Mr. M'Laurin and Mr. Robe, for a more
   full account of my circumstances, and of the things which have passed
   relating to them. I have, with this, sent you the Gazette, containing
   the Result of the late Council at Northampton, and intend to order one
   of my Farewell Sermons to be put up for you. My family were in their
   usual state of health when I left them, excepting my youngest child,
   who had something like an intermitting fever.

   Please to present my cordial respects, and christian love, to your dear
   consort, and remember me in your prayers, with regard to the trials and
   changes I am called to pass through, and the new important business I
   have undertaken.

   I am, dear Sir, your most

   united and obliged friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   From Mr. Gillespie he received, about this period, a letter most
   grateful to his own feelings, expressing a lively and affectionate
   sympathy in his afflictions, as well as surprise and astonishment at
   the conduct of the people of Northampton. Mr. Edwards, in his reply,
   communicates a series of facts respecting them, which not only were
   adapted at the time to remove these impressions of his friend; but will
   be found, also, to contain a most important and salutary lesson of
   instruction, to every minister and every church. The solemn caution of
   the apostle, in 1 Cor. iii. 10-15., to every minister, to take care how
   he builds up the temple of God, of which Jesus Christ is the
   foundation--a caution, which refers not only to the nature of the
   doctrines which he teaches, but also, and even more especially, (as
   will be obvious from verses 16 and 17.) to the character of the members
   whom he adds to the church of Christ, which is the temple of God;--is
   here enforced most solemnly, by arguments derived from experience.

   "To the Rev. Thomas Gillespie, Carnock.

   Stockbridge, July 1, 1751.

   rev. and very dear sir,

   I am very greatly obliged to you for your most kind, affectionate,
   comfortable, and profitable letter of Feb. 2, 1751. I thank you, dear
   Sir, for your sympathy with me, under my troubles, so amply testified,
   and the many suitable and proper considerations you suggest me, for my
   comfort and improvement. May God enable me to make a right improvement
   of them.

   It is not to be wondered at, dear Sir, that you are shocked and
   surprised at what has happened between me and the people of
   Northampton. It is surprising to all impartial and considerate persons
   that live near, and have the greatest advantage to know the
   circumstances of the affair, and the things that preceded the event,
   and made way for it. But no wonder if it be much more so to strangers
   at a distance. I doubt not, but that God intends his own glory, and the
   safety and prosperity of Zion, and the advancement of the interests of
   religion, in the issue of this event.

   But it is best, that the true state of the case should be known, and
   that it should be viewed as it is, in order to receiving that
   instruction which Divine Providence holds forth in it, and in order to
   proper reflections and right improvement.

   As there is a difference among particular persons, as to their natural
   temper, so there is some difference of this kind to be observed in
   different countries, and also in different cities and towns. The people
   of Northampton have, ever since I can remember, been famed for a
   high-spirited people, and of a difficult and turbulent temper. However,
   though in some respects they have been a stiff-necked people, yet God
   has been pleased, in times past, to bestow many distinguishing favours
   upon them. The town has stood now near one hundred years. Their first
   minister, Mr. Eleazar Mather, brother to Dr. Increase Mather of Boston,
   and Mr. Samuel Mather of Dublin, Ireland; was a very eminent man of
   God. After him came Mr. Stoddard, my grandfather, a very great man, of
   strong powers of mind, of great grace and great authority, of a
   masterly countenance, speech, and behaviour. He had much success in his
   ministry; there being many seasons in his day, of general awakening
   among his people. He continued in the ministry, at Northampton, about
   sixty years. But God was pleased, in some respects, especially, to
   manifest his power in the weakness of his successor; there having been
   a more remarkable awakening, since his death, than ever had been till
   then, in that town: although since that, also, a greater declension,
   and more awful departures from God, in some respects, than ever before;
   and so the last minister has had more to humble him, than either of his
   predecessors. May the effect be answerable to God's just expectations.

   The people have, from the beginning, been well instructed; having had a
   name, for a long time, for a very knowing people; and many have
   appeared among them, persons of good abilities; and many, born in the
   town, have been promoted to places of public trust: they have been a
   people distinguished on this account. These things have been manifestly
   abused to nourish the pride of their natural temper, which had made
   them more difficult and unmanageable. There were some mighty contests
   and controversies among them, in Mr. Stoddard's day; which were managed
   with great heat and violence: some great quarrels in the church,
   wherein Mr. Stoddard, great as his authority was, knew not what to do
   with them. In one ecclesiastical controversy in Mr. Stoddard's day,
   wherein the church was divided into two parties, the heat of spirit was
   raised to such a degree, that it came to hard blows. A member of one
   party met the head of the opposite party, and assaulted him, and beat
   him unmercifully. In latter times, the people have had more to feed
   their pride. They have grown a much greater and more wealthy people
   than formerly, and are become more extensively famous in the world, as
   a people that have excelled in gifts and grace, and had God
   extraordinarily among them; which has insensibly engendered and
   nourished spiritual pride, that grand inlet of the devil in the hearts
   of men, and avenue of all manner of mischief among a professing people.
   Spiritual pride is a most monstrous thing. If it be not discerned, and
   vigorously opposed, in the beginning, it very often soon raises persons
   above their teachers, and supposed spiritual fathers, and sets them out
   of the reach of all rule and instruction, as I have seen in innumerable
   instances. And there is this inconvenience, attending the publishing of
   narratives of a work of God among a people, (such is the corruption
   that is in the hearts of men, and even of good men,) that there is
   great danger of their making it an occasion of spiritual pride. There
   is great reason to think that the Northampton people have provoked God
   greatly against them, by trusting in their privileges and attainments.
   And the consequences may well be a warning to all God's people, far and
   near, that hear of them.

   Another thing, which probably has contributed in some measure to the
   unhappiness of the people's manners, was, that Mr. Stoddard, though an
   eminently holy man, was naturally of a dogmatical temper; and the
   people being brought up under him, and with a high veneration for him,
   were naturally led to imitate him. Especially their officers and
   leading men, seemed to think it an excellency, to be like him in this
   respect.

   It has been a very great wound to the church of Northampton, that there
   has been for forty or fifty years, a sort of settled division of the
   people into two parties, somewhat like the Court and Country party, in
   England (if I may compare small things with great). There have been
   some of the chief men in the town, of chief authority and wealth, that
   have been great proprietors of their lands, who have had one party with
   them. And the other party, which has commonly been the greatest, have
   been of those, who have been jealous of them, apt to envy them, and
   afraid of their having too much power and influence in town and church.
   This has been a foundation of innumerable contentions among the people,
   from time to time, which have been exceedingly grievous to me, and by
   which doubtless God has been dreadfully provoked, and his Spirit
   grieved and quenched, and much confusion and many evil works have been
   introduced.

   Another thing, that evidently has contributed to our calamities, is,
   that the people had got so established in certain wrong notions and
   ways in religion, which I found them in, and could never beat them out
   of. Particularly; it was too much their method to lay almost all the
   stress of their hopes in religion, on the particular shape and method
   of their first work; i.e. the first work of the Spirit of God on their
   hearts, in their conviction and conversion; and to look but little at
   the abiding sense and temper of their hearts, and the course of their
   exercises, and trials of grace, for evidences of their good estate. Nor
   had they learned, and many of them never could be made to learn, to
   distinguish between impressions on the imagination, and lively
   spiritual experience; and when I came among them, I found it to be too
   much a custom among them without discretion, or distinction of
   occasions, places, or companies, to declare and publish their own
   experiences; and oftentimes to do it in a light manner, without any air
   of solemnity. This custom has not a little contributed to spiritual
   pride and many other evils. When I first settled among the people,
   being young and of little experience, I was not thoroughly aware of the
   ill consequences of such a custom, and so allowed or at least did not
   testify against it, as I ought to have done.

   And here I desire it may be observed, that I would be far from so
   laying all the blame of the sorrowful things, that have come to pass,
   to the people, as to suppose that I have no cause of self-reflection
   and humiliation before God, on this occasion. I am sensible that it
   becomes me to look on what has lately happened, as an awful frown of
   heaven on me, as well as on the people. God knows the sinfulness of my
   heart, and the great and sinful deficiencies and offences; which I have
   been guilty of, in the course of my ministry at Northampton. I desire
   that God would discover them to me more and more, and that now he would
   effectually humble me, and mortify my pride and self-confidence, and
   empty me entirely of myself, and make me to know how that I deserve to
   be cast away, as an abominable branch, and as a vessel wherein is no
   pleasure; and, if it may consist with his holy will, that he would
   sanctify me, and make me a vessel more meet for my Master's use; and
   yet improve me as an instrument of his glory, and the good of the souls
   of mankind.

   One thing, that has contributed to bring things to such a pass at
   Northampton, was my youth, and want of more judgment and experience, in
   the time of that extraordinary awakening, about sixteen years ago. [41]
   Instead of a youth, there was want of a giant, in judgment and
   discretion, among a people in such an extraordinary state of things. In
   some respects, doubtless, my confidence in myself was a great injury to
   me; but in other respects my diffidence of myself injured me. It was
   such, that I durst not act my own judgment, and had no strength to
   oppose received notions, and established customs, and to testify boldly
   against some glaring false appearances, and counterfeits of religion,
   till it was too late. And by this means, as well as others, many things
   got footing, which have proved a dreadful source of spiritual pride,
   and other things that are exceedingly contrary to true Christianity. If
   I had had more experience, and ripeness of judgment and courage, I
   should have guided my people in a better manner, and should have
   guarded them better from Satan's devices, and prevented the spiritual
   calamity of many souls, and perhaps the eternal ruin of some of them;
   and have done what would have tended to lengthen out the tranquillity
   of the town.

   However, doubtless at that time, there was a very glorious work of God
   wrought in Northampton, and there were numerous instances of saving
   conversion; though undoubtedly many were deceived, and deceived others;
   and the number of true converts was not so great as was then imagined.
   Many may be ready, from things that are lately come to pass, to
   determine, that all Northampton religion is come to nothing; and that
   all the famed awakenings, and revivals of religion in that place, prove
   to be nothing but strange tides of a melancholy and whimsical humour.
   But they would draw no such conclusion, if they exactly knew the true
   state of the case, and would judge of it with full calmness and
   impartiality of mind.

   There are many things to be considered in the case of Northampton:

   1. That many of those, who have been most violently engaged, and have
   chiefly led and excited others in it, though they have been leading men
   in the town, and have been esteemed considerable for their knowledge,
   estate, and age, and have been professors of religion, yet have not
   been the most famed for piety.

   2. The leading men, who have been the most engaged in this matter, who
   have taken vast pains to stir up others that are inferior, have had
   this great advantage in their hands, that the controversy was a
   religious controversy; that that, which I opposed, was what they always
   had supposed to be a part of divine truth, a precious and important
   doctrine of the word of God; and, that the cause of my opposers was the
   cause of God. This has led the more ignorant and less considerate
   people to look on their zeal against me as virtue, and to christen even
   their passions and bitterness in such a cause with sanctified names,
   and to let them loose, and prosecute the views of their bitterness and
   violence without a check of conscience.

   3. They have also had the great advantage of the vast veneration the
   people had for Mr. Stoddard's memory; which was such, that many looked
   on him almost as a sort of deity. They were all, (i.e. except the young
   people,) born and brought up under his ministry, and had been used from
   their infancy to esteem his sayings all as oracles. And he, they knew,
   maintained that doctrine which I oppose, with great positiveness and
   zeal, and opposed the contrary, which I maintain, as an exceedingly
   pernicious doctrine. Under these circumstances, I naturally appear as a
   dangerous opposer of the cause of God, and my teaching and insisting on
   the doctrine, which Mr. Stoddard opposed, appears to them a sort of
   horrid profaneness.

   4. Crafty designing men have abundantly filled the ears of the more
   ignorant with suggestions, that my opinion tends to overthrow all
   religion, and to ruin the present and future generations, and to make
   all heathens, shutting them out of the church of Christ.

   5. Not only many of the leading men of Northampton have used their
   utmost endeavours, to engage the minds of the common people in this
   controversy, but they have also been put forward, by the neighbouring
   ministers all round. My opposers have also been assisted and edged on
   by some at a great distance, persons of note; and some great men in
   civil authority have had a great hand in it.

   6. It is to be considered, that the contrary opinion to mine, had not
   only long been established in Northampton without so much as one
   opposer to it; but it had also been fully and quietly established, for
   a long time, in all the neighbouring churches and congregations, and in
   all the country round, even to a great distance; so that my opinion
   when first broached, appeared to the people exceedingly singular. Their
   views being very narrow, it appeared to them, that all the world,
   almost, was against me. And my most crafty opposers improved this
   advantage, and abundantly represented me as all alone in my opinion.

   7. Many of the people, who at length came to have their spirits much
   raised, and were brought to join in violent measures, yet came slowly
   into it, after being long practised with, and indefatigable endeavours
   used, to engage and influence them.

   8. There are about twenty heads of families, besides others, women and
   young people, who ever appeared openly against the proceedings of the
   town, and many others have appeared friendly to me. And there is not a
   little reason to think, that there are many more, especially women and
   youths, that would appear so, if they dare. For a person, by appearing
   my friend at Northampton, even so much so as openly to discountenance
   my being turned out of the pulpit, exposes himself to the immediate
   persecution of his neighbours, and perhaps of his nearest friends. I
   mean, he falls under their great resentment, loses all their
   friendship, and is every where the object of reproach.

   9. It is to be considered, that these things have happened when God is
   greatly withdrawn, and religion was very low, not only at Northampton,
   but all over New England.

   10. I believe the devil is greatly alarmed, by the opposition made to
   the lax doctrine of admission to the christian church, and to the
   corresponding practice, which had been so long established at
   Northampton, and so extensively in the country; in which he found his
   account, and hoped for more important consequences, and more agreeable
   to him. And God, for wise ends, has suffered him to exert himself, in
   an extraordinary manner, in opposition; as God ordinarily does, when
   truth is in the birth.

   But I am drawn out to an unexpected length in my observations on these
   things, and have not left myself room, nor time, for some other things,
   that I would willingly write, and must therefore refer you to my
   letters to my other correspondents in Scotland; particularly, Mr.
   M'Laurin, Mr. Robe, Mr. M'Culloch, and Mr. Erskine. To some of them, I
   have sent a particular account of my present circumstances, and of
   things which have lately passed, relating to them. I would only say in
   general, that I have had a call to settle in Stockbridge, a place in
   the western borders of New England, next to the province of New York,
   about thirty-six miles from Albany, and about forty miles from
   Northampton, the place where Mr. Sergeant was minister and missionary
   to the Indians. I am both called by the church here, constituted partly
   of Indians and partly of English, and am appointed missionary to the
   Indians, by the commissioners of Indian affairs, in Boston; agreeably
   to what you suggest in your letter, as though you had been able to
   foresee future events, when you say,--"Perhaps you are to be employed
   where the gospel has been little understood or attended to." I suppose
   this place will, for the future, be the place of my ordinary abode,
   though it will be some months before I can remove my family. I have no
   leisure, at present, to write on the subject you speak of, viz.
   Impressions, and supposed immediate revelations, though I own the vast
   importance of the subject. I had begun to write something against the
   Arminians, before the late controversy; and now lately, Mr. Williams
   has written a book, in answer to mine on that subject; which I think
   myself obliged to answer, if God give me opportunity.

   I have much to teach me to behave like a pilgrim and stranger in the
   earth. But in the midst of troubles and difficulties, I receive many
   mercies. Particularly, I have great reason, with abundant thankfulness,
   to take notice of the great kindness of my friends in Scotland. Blessed
   be God, who never forsakes those that trust in him; and never wants
   instruments, for the conveyance of his goodness and liberality to those
   who suffer in his cause!

   I shall take care, that there be conveyed, with this letter, to you,
   one of my Farewell Sermons, and the Result of the Council that sat at
   Northampton the last May. Remember me, dear Sir, at the throne of
   grace, with regard to all my trials; and with regard to my new
   circumstances, and the important service I have undertaken in this
   place;--and please, in your next, to inform me, what family you have,
   and of their state.

   I am, dear Sir, your most

   affectionate friend and brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   The following letter of Mr. Edwards to the Rev. Isaac Hollis, the
   patron of one of the Indian schools at Stockbridge, will explain some
   of the difficulties to which they were subjected.

   "To Mr. Hollis.

   Stockbridge, July 2, 1751.

   rev. and honoured sir,

   Having seen your late letter to Mr. Prince of Boston, and another to
   Capt. Kellogg, received this summer, and having lately been appointed
   missionary to the Indians in this place, I thought myself obliged to
   take the first opportunity to write to you, who have exerted yourself,
   in so extraordinary a manner, to promote our interests here, to serve
   which I am now devoted; partly to offer you my thanks for what you have
   done, and have lately offered to do, with so fervent and enlarged a
   heart, and bountiful a hand, for the advancement and enlargement of
   Christ's kingdom of grace among this poor people, and the eternal
   welfare of their souls; which may well excite the joy and admiration of
   all good Christians, the thanks of all who make the interests of Zion
   their own, and especially of him who has the souls of the Indians
   committed to his own more immediate care.

   I write, also, partly to inform you of what I have had opportunity to
   observe, of the state of things here, relating to the affair of the
   instruction of the Indians, which you have a right to know; it being an
   affair in which you have been pleased so greatly to interest yourself,
   and which depends so much on the effects of your most generous
   christian beneficence. I have had considerable opportunity to observe
   the state of things; for though it is but about a month since I came
   here, after I had undertaken the work of the ministry here, as the
   stated missionary, yet I had been here before, two months in the
   winter, and then spent much time with the Indians, particularly with
   the Mohawks under the care of Capt. Kellogg.

   There are here two schools for the instruction of Indian children: one
   under the care of Mr. Timothy Woodbridge, which began soon after Mr.
   Sergeant began to preach to these Indians,--this school consists wholly
   of the proper Housatonnuck Indians; the other, under the care of Capt.
   Kellogg, which he began with the Housatonnucks, on the plan which Mr.
   Sergeant projected; but, in the changeable unsettled state, in which
   things have been since Mr. Sergeant's death, it has been altered from
   that form, and the Housatonnuck boys have left it, and it now consists
   wholly of Mohawk children, which have been brought down hither by their
   parents, from their own proper country, about eighty miles, to this
   end, that they might be taught to read, and write, and be instructed in
   the christian religion.

   There are some things, which give a hopeful prospect with regard to
   these Mohawk Indians; particularly the forward inclination of the
   children and their aptness to learn. But that, which has evidently been
   the greatest defect from the beginning in the method of instruction
   here, is, that no more proper and effectual measures have been taken,
   to bring the children that are here to the knowledge of the English
   tongue. For want of this, all the labour and cost, which have been
   expended in schools here, for about fourteen years, have been
   consequently to but little effect or benefit. When the children are
   taught to read, many of them, for want of the English language, know
   nothing of what they read; their books being all in English. They
   merely learn to make such and such sounds, on the sight of such and
   such marks, but know not the meaning of the words, and so have neither
   profit nor pleasure in reading, and will therefore be apt soon to lose
   even what they have learned, having no benefit or entertainment in the
   use of it.

   It is on many other accounts of great importance, that they should be
   brought to know the English language. This would greatly tend to
   forward their instruction; their own barbarous languages being
   exceedingly barren, and very unfit to express moral and divine things.
   It would likewise open their minds, and, by means of their acquaintance
   and conversation with the English, would tend to advance them in
   knowledge and civilization. Some pains has been taken to teach the
   children the English tongue, but nothing very considerable has been
   accomplished. And I can think of but two ways in which it can be
   effected:--either by introducing a number of English children into the
   schools, to learn with them, and be their mates; or by distributing the
   Indian children into English families, to live there a year or two,
   where they must be allowed to speak the English and nothing else, and
   then return into the Indian schools, to perfect them in reading and
   writing, and the knowledge of the principles of religion, and all other
   useful knowledge. The latter, if their parents can be persuaded to
   consent to it, as probably they may, will be much the most effectual.

   I would therefore, Sir, humbly propose, that some such method should be
   taken with regard to the children, who have the benefit of your
   liberality; and that part of your benefaction should be expended in
   this way, under the care of prudent and faithful trustees; for, in
   order to the business being managed thoroughly in future, a great deal
   of care and activity will be necessary, vastly more than the
   schoolmaster can have leisure for. There are many things pertaining to
   the regulation of the affairs of the instruction of the Indian
   children, which seem greatly to require the care of a number of
   persons, who shall be intrusted to dispose things according to the best
   of their discretion; sending from time to time a particular and exact
   account of the manner in which they have laid out your money.

   I thought myself obliged to give you these intimations; you being at a
   great distance, and not capable of knowing the exact state of things,
   any otherwise, than by the information of those who are on the spot;
   and it being fit that you should know those circumstances, which are of
   so much importance to the affair, that, without a proper regard to
   them, the great expense which you incur, is liable to be in a great
   measure in vain.

   I humbly request your prayers to the Fountain of all light and grace,
   for his guidance and assistance in this important service, which I have
   lately undertaken in this place.

   I am, Honoured Sir,

   Your most humble servant,

   And affectionate brother in the gospel ministry,

   jonathan edwards."

   A conference was appointed to be held at Albany, the last week in June,
   1751, between the commissioners of the governments of Massachusetts,
   Connecticut, and New York, and the chiefs of the Iroquois, or Six
   Nations, for the purpose of making a treaty. The commissioners of
   Massachusetts were directed to pass through Stockbridge, on their way
   to Albany, for the purpose of conferring with the Mohawks already
   there, about their settlement in New England. On their arrival they
   found that Hendrick, and almost all the heads of families, on account
   of their disgust at the neglect of their children, on the part of Capt.
   Kellogg, had returned to their own country. In consequence of this,
   they requested Mr. Edwards to go to Albany, and be present at the
   conference; whither he accordingly went the first week in July. In an
   interview with Hendrick and Nicholas, he endeavoured to persuade them
   to influence as many of the Mohawk chiefs, as possible, to go to
   Stockbridge, and there treat of their removal to New England. This
   being urged upon them afterwards, by the commissioners of
   Massachusetts, was agreed to by them and the other chiefs; and a
   conference appointed to be held at Stockbridge in August. Mr. Edwards
   then returned to Stockbridge, and in the latter part of July, to his
   family in Northampton.

   The first week in August, he removed his family and effects from
   Northampton to Stockbridge; and on Thursday, Aug. 8th, was regularly
   installed as the minister of the congregation in that place, and
   inducted into the office of missionary to the Indians residing in its
   vicinity. His salary was derived from three sources: from the parish of
   Stockbridge; from the Society in London, for Propagating the Gospel in
   New England, and the Parts adjacent, whose missionary he was, through
   their commissioners at Boston; and from the legislature of the colony,
   as a part of the annual fund devoted to the civilization of the
   Indians. This latter sum was paid, of course, to the individual, who
   held the office of minister and missionary at Stockbridge, although the
   government had no voice in his appointment.

   On Tuesday, Aug. 13th, the chiefs of the Mohawks came from their two
   principal settlements to Stockbridge, and met the commissioners of the
   province. The chiefs expressed a very strong desire that their children
   might be instructed; but objected to the removal to Stockbridge, on the
   ground that the affairs of the Mohawks there were left in the utmost
   confusion, that no regular school was established, and no thorough
   means taken for the education of their children. After reminding the
   commissioners how often the English had failed to fulfil their
   promises, and disappointed the hopes which they had encouraged them to
   entertain, they requested them to promise nothing, but what the
   government would certainly perform. The commissioners agreed among
   themselves, that in consequence of the utter incompetency of Capt.
   Kellogg, another instructor, a man of learning and skill, must be
   procured for the Mohawk school; and promised the chiefs that a regular
   school should be established for their children, and a competent
   instructor speedily procured. After this, the chiefs declared their
   acceptance of the proposals made to them, of sending their children to
   Stockbridge for instruction, and of coming, a number of them, to reside
   there; and tendered a belt of wampum to the commissioners, in
   confirmation of the agreement, which was accepted. On Thursday, Aug.
   22, the council was dissolved, and the chiefs went home.

   The Mohawks at this time discovered a very strong desire to promote the
   education of their children, and an unusual willingness to receive
   religious instruction; as did also a part of the tribe of the
   Oneiyutas, or Oneidas, residing at Onohohquauga, or Onohquauga, a
   settlement on the Susquehannah. The French having been apprized of the
   efforts making by the English, in behalf of the Mohawks, were busily
   occupied in seducing them, and the other tribes of the Iroquois, to
   emigrate into Canada; and were actually erecting a chain of forts
   extending from Canada through New York, Pennsylvania, and the
   wilderness beyond to the Mississippi. Mr. Edwards, believing that if
   the utmost good faith was not kept with the Mohawks the whole plan of
   instructing them would be defeated, and regarding the period as a most
   critical one for the welfare of the British colonies, addressed a
   letter on the subject of the Indians, to the Hon. Thomas Hubbard,
   Speaker of the House of Assembly. In this letter he gave an account of
   the council held with the chiefs of the Mohawks, at Stockbridge, and
   their agreement to encourage the education of their children at that
   place; mentioned the interest felt in the subject by the Mohawks and
   the Oneiyutas, and by some of the Tuscaroras; stated the vast
   importance of the existing crisis, for securing the friendship of the
   Six Nations; recited the machinations of the French, to seduce them
   from the English interest, and their hostile movements in the west;
   pointed out the religious and literary instruction of the Indians as
   the only means of securing their attachment to the British cause; and
   detailed the measures necessary to be pursued at Stockbridge, to
   promote these great objects. [42]

   When Mr. Edwards had removed his family to Stockbridge, he found
   himself exceedingly embarrassed, from the difficulty of procuring the
   land necessary for his own immediate accommodation. When the town was
   first settled, it was granted to the Housatonnucks, except six
   portions, to the late missionary, the school-master, and four other
   settlers. These portions were now distributed among fourteen
   proprietors, and could be purchased only at a very high price. He
   therefore presented a petition to the General Court, at their session
   in October, 1751, asking leave to purchase the necessary lands, for his
   own accommodation--a homestead in the centre of the town, and a piece
   of wood-land in the outskirts. The legislature granted him leave to
   purchase the homesteads, and recommended to the English inhabitants, to
   provide the necessary wood-land for their minister.

   On the tract of land, which he purchased, near the centre of the town,
   Mr. Edwards, soon after, erected a commodious dwelling, which is still
   standing.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [39] The common language of all the Indians in New England, New York,
   New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware, except the Iroquois.

   [40] This part of the letter must have been written in July, as the
   installation took place in August.

   [41] In 1734-35.

   [42] I regret that the length of this interesting letter renders its
   insertion impracticable.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XX.

   LETTER TO SIR W. PEPPERELL--LETTER TO LADY PEPPERELL--LETTER TO HIS
   FATHER--ARRIVAL OF MR. HAWLEY--INCREASING IMPORTANCE OF INDIAN
   ESTABLISHMENT--SCHEMES OF ITS ENEMIES--FIRM STAND TAKEN BY MR.
   EDWARDS--LETTER TO MR. OLIVER--LETTER TO COMMISSIONERS--DIFFICULTIES TO
   THE MISSION--ANSWER TO MR. WILLIAMS--LETTER TO THE PEOPLE OF
   NORTHAMPTON--MARRIAGE OF MR. AND MRS. BURR--LETTER TO MR.
   ERSKINE--LETTER TO MR. HOLLIS--LETTER TO MR. HUBBARD.

   the Indian establishment at Stockbridge, being gradually more and more
   known, excited more and more the attention, and interest, of the
   benevolent of England. Among these, Joshua Paine, Esq. of London,
   addressed a letter to Sir William Pepperell, the governor of the
   province; requesting the information, as to the proper plan of a school
   for Indian girls at that place. An extract from that letter was
   forwarded to Mr. Edwards from Sir William, through the secretary of the
   commissioners, with a request that he would write to Sir William on the
   subject. He accordingly addressed to him the following letter.

   "Stockbridge, Nov. 28, 1151.

   honoured sir,

   when I had the opportunity the last spring of waiting on your
   Excellency at your seat at Kittery, and was there gratified and
   honoured by the kind and hospitable entertainment of your house, I was
   favoured with some conversation with you, concerning the affairs of the
   Indians at Stockbridge, and the business of the mission here, to which
   I had then been invited. And you were then pleased generously to assure
   me of your good offices, in affording me any assistance in this
   employment, which you could render me, through your acquaintance and
   correspondence in London.

   I have lately been favoured with a letter from the Hon. Andrew Oliver,
   of Boston, wherein he was pleased to send me an extract of a letter to
   you from Joshua Paine, Esq. of London, concerning a proper plan of a
   school for Indian girls in this place, and to propose to me to write to
   you on the subject of the said extract. This encourages me to hope that
   a letter from me, on this subject, to your Excellency will be kindly
   received.

   With this hope, I would take leave to say, that I think that, as the
   boarding-schools here are now in their commencement, and are yet to
   receive their form and character, and that among a people hitherto
   unaccustomed to any method of instruction whatever, it is a great pity
   but that the method actually adopted should be free from the gross
   defects of the ordinary method of teaching among the English.

   One of these grand defects, as I humbly conceive, is this, that
   children are habituated to learning without understanding. In the
   common method of teaching, so far as my observation extends, children,
   when they are taught to read, are so much accustomed to reading,
   without any kind of knowledge of the meaning of what they read, that
   they continue reading without understanding, even a long time after
   they are capable of understanding, were it not for a habit of making
   such and such sounds, on the sight of such and such letters, with a
   perfect inattentiveness to any meaning. In like manner they are taught
   their catechism, saying over the words by rote, which they began to
   say, before they were capable of easily and readily comprehending them.
   Being long habituated to make sounds without connecting any ideas with
   them, they so continue, until they come to be capable of well
   understanding the words, and would perhaps have the ideas, properly
   signified by the words, naturally excited in their minds on hearing the
   words, were it not for an habitual hearing and speaking them without
   any ideas; so that, if the question were put in phraseology somewhat
   new, to which they have not been accustomed, they would not know what
   to answer. Thus it happens to children, even with regard to the
   plainest printed catechisms, even those which have been contrived with
   great care and art, so that they might be adapted to the lowest
   capacities.

   I should therefore think that, in these boarding-schools, the children
   should never read a lesson, without the master or mistress taking care,
   that the child be made to attend to, and understand, the meaning of the
   words and sentences which it reads; at least after the child begins to
   read without spelling, and perhaps in some degree before. And the child
   should be taught to understand things, as well as words. After it
   begins to read in a Psalter, Testament, or Bible, not only the words
   and phrases should be explained, but the things which the lesson treats
   of should be, in a familiar manner, opened to the child's
   understanding; and the master or mistress should enter into
   conversation with the child about them. Familiar questions should be
   put to the child about the subjects of the lesson; and the child should
   be encouraged, and drawn on, to speak freely, and in his turn also to
   ask questions, for the resolution of his own doubts.

   Many advantages would arise from this method. By this means, the
   child's learning will be rendered pleasant, entertaining, and
   profitable, as his mind will gradually open and expand with knowledge,
   and his capacity for reasoning be improved. His lesson will cease to be
   a dull, wearisome task, without any suitable pleasure or benefit. This
   will be a rational way of teaching. Assisting the child's reason
   enables him to see the use, and end, and benefit of reading, at the
   same time that he takes pains from day to day to read. It is the way
   also to accustom the child from its infancy to think and reflect, and
   to beget in it an early taste for knowledge, and a regularly increasing
   appetite for it.

   So also, with regard to the method of catechizing children; beside
   obliging them to give the answers in the printed catechism, or in any
   stated form of words, questions should be asked them from time to time,
   in the same familiar manner, as they are asked questions commonly about
   their ordinary affairs, with familiar instructions, explanations, and
   rehearsals of things, intermixed; and if it be possible, the child
   should be led, by wise and skilful management, into the habit of
   conversation on divine things, and should gradually be divested of that
   shyness and backwardness, usually discovered in children, to converse
   on such topics with their superiors. And when the printed catechisms
   are used, as I am far from thinking they ought to be entirely
   neglected, care should be taken, that the child should attend to the
   meaning of the words, and be able to understand them; to this end, not
   only explaining the words and sentences, but also from time to time
   varying the phraseology, putting the question in different words of the
   same sense, and also intermixing with the questions and answers,
   whether printed or not, some improvement or application, in counsels
   and warnings given to them, founded on the answers that have been
   given.

   Beside the things already mentioned, there are other things, which, as
   it appears to me, ought to be done, with regard to the education of
   children in general, wherein the common methods of instruction in New
   England are grossly defective. The teacher, in familiar discourses,
   might, in a little time, give the children a short general scheme of
   the scriptural history, beginning with the creation of the world, and
   descending through the various periods of that history, informing them
   of the larger divisions, and more important events of the story, and
   giving them some idea of their connexion one with another;--first, of
   the history of the Old Testament, and then of the New. And when the
   children had in their heads this general scheme, then the teacher
   might, at certain times, entertain them, in like familiar discourse,
   with the particular stories of the Scriptures, sometimes with one
   story, and then with another, before they can obtain the knowledge of
   them themselves, by reading; for example, at one time the story of the
   creation, at another time the story of the flood, then the dispersion
   of the nations, the calling of Abraham, the story of Joseph, the
   bringing of the children of Israel out of Egypt: and in the New
   Testament, the birth of Christ, some of the chief acts of his life, his
   death, his resurrection, his ascension, the effusion of the Holy Spirit
   at the day of Pentecost, and some of the chief of the acts of the
   apostles; withal, pointing out to them the place which each event has
   in the general scheme, and the connexion it has with other main parts
   of it. The teacher, in a familiar manner, should apply the events of
   the story discoursed upon, with the design of informing the child's
   understanding, influencing his heart, and directing his practice. A
   child, who is able to read his Bible, might be set to read a particular
   scriptural history, sometimes one, and sometimes another, diligently
   observing it, and examining for himself all that is said concerning it.
   And when he has done, he might be called to the master or mistress, and
   inquired of, concerning the particulars of the history, to see that he
   has paid attention, and is able to give a good account of it.

   And I can see no good reason, why children in general, beside the
   scriptural history, should not, in a like familiar manner of
   conversation, be taught something of the great successive changes and
   events, in the Jewish nation, and the world at large, which connect the
   history of the Old and New Testaments. Thus, they might be informed, in
   short, of the manner in which the four great monarchies succeeded each
   other, the persecutions which the Jews suffered from Antiochus
   Epiphanes, and the principal changes which happened to their church and
   state, before the coming of Christ. And they might be shown, how such
   and such events were a fulfillment of such and such prophecies. And
   when they learn the history of the New Testament, they might, with much
   profit and entertainment, have pointed out to them many plain
   prophecies of the Old Testament, which have their fulfillment in him.
   And I can see no good reason, why children cannot, or may not, be
   taught something in general of ecclesiastical history, and be informed
   how things, with regard to the state of religion and the church of God,
   have gone on, as to some of the main events, from the time when the
   scriptural history ended, to the present time; and how given prophecies
   of the Scriptures have been fulfilled in some of these events; or why
   they may not be told, what may yet be expected to come to pass
   according to the scriptural prophecies, from this time, to the end of
   the world.

   It appears to me obvious, also, that, in connexion with all this, they
   should be taught somewhat relating to the chronology of events, which
   would make the story so much the more distinct and entertaining. Thus,
   they may be taught how long it was from the creation of the world to
   the coming of Christ; how long from the creation to the flood; how long
   from the flood to the calling of Abraham, &c.; how long David lived
   before Christ; how long before the captivity in Babylon; how long the
   captivity, before Christ, &c.; how long since the birth of Christ; how
   old he was when he began to preach, and when he was crucified; how long
   after his resurrection, before he ascended; how long, also, after the
   destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, until Babylon was destroyed
   by Cyrus; how long after the Persian empire, before that empire was
   overthrown by Alexander; when was the great oppression of the Jews by
   Antiochus Epiphanes; when Judea was conquered by the Romans; how long
   after Christ's resurrection before the destruction of Jerusalem; and
   how long before the empire became christian; how long after Christ
   before the popes claimed such and such powers; when the worship of
   images was introduced; how long before the Reformation, &c. &c. All
   children are capable of being informed, and having an idea of these
   things, and can much more easily learn them, if endeavors were used to
   that end, than many things which they do learn.

   And with like ease, and with equal benefit, they might be taught some
   of the main things in geography: which way the land of Canaan lies from
   this; how far it is; which way Egypt lay from Canaan: which way Babylon
   lay from Jerusalem, and how far; which way Padan-Aram was from Canaan;
   where Rome lay from Jerusalem; where Antioch, &c. &c. And I cannot but
   think it might be a pretty easy thing, if proper means were taken, to
   teach children to spell well, and girls as well as boys. I should think
   it may be worth the while, on various accounts, to teach them to write,
   and also to teach them a little arithmetic, some of the first and
   plainest rules. Or, if it be judged, that it is needless to teach all
   the children all these things, some difference might be made in
   children of different genius, and children of the best genius might be
   taught more things than others. And all would serve, the more speedily
   and effectually, to change the taste of Indians, and to bring them off
   from their barbarism and brutality, to a relish for those things which
   belong to civilization and refinement.

   Another thing, which properly belongs to a christian education, and
   which would be unusually popular with them, and which would in several
   respects have a powerful influence, in promoting the great end in view,
   of leading them to renounce the coarseness, and filth, and degradation,
   of savage life, for cleanliness, refinement, and good morals, is
   teaching them to sing. Music, especially sacred music, has a powerful
   efficacy to soften the heart into tenderness, to harmonize the
   affections, and to give the mind a relish for objects of a superior
   character.

   In order to promote the salvation of the children, which is the main
   design of the whole Indian establishment at this place, I think that,
   beside their attending public worship on the sabbath, and the daily
   worship of the family, and catechizing in the school, and frequent
   counsels and warnings given them, when all together, by their teachers;
   each child should, from time to time, be dealt with singly,
   particularly, and closely, about the state and concerns of his soul;
   and particular care should be taken to teach and direct each child,
   concerning the duty of secret prayer, and the duty pressed and enforced
   on every one; and care should be taken, that all may have proper
   opportunity and convenience for it.

   I need say nothing concerning buildings, lodgings, household stuff,
   cattle, servants, husbandry instruments, and utensils for the
   children's work; as it is agreed on all hands, that these are
   necessary; and the providing of them will doubtless be left to the care
   and discretion of the trustees that shall be appointed.

   But I would beg leave to say further, with regard to methods to forward
   the proficiency of the children in their learning, that I cannot but
   think measures might be devised, greatly to encourage and animate them
   in it, and excite a laudable ambition to excel. One thing I have
   thought of, which, as appears to me, might have a happy tendency this
   way, in each of the boarding-schools: at certain periods, there should
   be a sort of public examination in the school, on a day appointed for
   the purpose, which shall be attended by all the trustees, and all in
   the town who are in any respect connected with Indian affairs, and some
   of the neighbouring ministers, and gentlemen and ladies; and also that
   the chiefs of the Indians be invited to attend; at which there shall be
   a public trial of the proficiency which each one has made, in the
   various branches which have been taught, as in reading, writing,
   spelling, arithmetic, knowledge in the principles of religion,
   knowledge of church history, &c.; and that a premium shall be given to
   such as are found to excel, which may be done in something that will
   very much please Indian children, with but little expense. And
   likewise, that the works of the children be then produced, to be judged
   of, that it may be determined who has made the greatest proficiency in
   learning to sew, to spin, to knit, &c.; and that a reward be given to
   such as have excelled. And perhaps, also, that a reward be then given
   to such, as, by the testimony of their teachers and governors, have
   excelled in virtue or diligence, in care to speak the truth, in
   strictly observing the sabbath, in good manners, in respect to their
   superiors, &c. And that, in the day of public trial, there be somewhat
   of an entertainment made for the members of the school, and those who
   are invited to attend. This not only might tend greatly to stimulate
   the children in their learning, but would be very pleasing and
   animating to the tribes of Indians, and would have great influence in
   rendering them very favourably disposed to the affairs of the schools.

   But your Excellency will easily see that, in order to the
   practicableness of these things, in any tolerable degree and manner, it
   is necessary that the children should be taught the English tongue; and
   indeed this is of the most absolute necessity, on almost every account.
   The Indian languages are extremely barbarous and barren, and very ill
   fitted for communicating things moral and divine, or even things
   speculative and abstract. In short, they are wholly unfit for a people
   possessed of civilization, knowledge, and refinement.

   Besides, without their learning English, their learning to read will be
   in vain; for the Indians have not the Bible, nor any other book, in
   their own language. Without this, their teachers cannot converse with
   them, and so can have no advantage to instruct them. Hence, all
   possible means must be used, in the first place, to introduce the
   English tongue among the children. To this end, much pains should be
   taken to teach them the English name for every thing, and English words
   that signify such and such actions; and an interpreter might be used
   for a while, to interpret their lessons to them, and to teach them to
   construe them, or turn them into Indian. And a number of English
   children might be put into the school with the Indian children. But the
   most effectual method of all would be, to put out some of the Indian
   children, first, into some good English families, one at a place, to
   live there a year or two, before they are brought into the school;
   which would not only be above all others the most successful method,
   but would be absolutely necessary, at least at first; but truly a great
   deal of care must be taken to find good places for them, and to look
   well to them, and to see that they are well taken care of, in the
   families to which they are sent. It is probable, that the parents of
   the children might, with proper endeavours, be persuaded to such a
   measure.

   But it will doubtless be very easily and quickly determined, by your
   Excellency, that, if such methods as those which have been mentioned,
   or any like them, or indeed any other effectual measures, are taken, it
   will be absolutely necessary that the school should be under the
   constant care and inspection of trustees, who live upon the spot, or
   very near at hand. It will be in vain for any to expect that any woman
   can look after such a school, and provide for and govern so large a
   family, and take care continually to order and regulate so many and
   great affairs pertaining to it, within doors and without, without much
   assistance of some always at hand, who are able and faithful, and are
   interested and duly empowered. If she has under her a second, or a kind
   of usher, and has servants of both sexes, yet still she will be under
   the necessity of having some superior assistance. And as to the precise
   method of teaching, and regulating the discipline of the school and
   family, it must be left very much to their discretion: for experience
   alone can certainly determine the fittest methods of ordering such an
   establishment, so new and untried, though very probable conjectures may
   be made. And experience will doubtless direct to some new measures,
   which cannot now be thought of. Hoping that your Excellency will excuse
   the particularity and minuteness into which I have unintentionally been
   led on a subject about which I cannot but feel the deepest interest,

   I remain,

   With very high respect,

   Your most humble servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   In the package to Sir William, Mr. Edwards, in consequence of her own
   request, forwarded to Lady Pepperell, who was then in very deep
   affliction, the following letter; which will probably be regarded as
   one of the happiest specimens of christian sympathy and condolence, to
   be found in epistolary writing.

   "To Lady Pepperell.

   Stockbridge, Nov. 28, 1751

   madam,

   When I was at your house in Kittery, the last spring, among other
   instances of your kind and condescending treatment to me, was this,
   that, when I had some conversation with Sir William, concerning
   Stockbridge and the affairs of the Indians, and he generously offered
   me any assistance, in the business of my mission here, which his
   acquaintance and correspondence in London enabled him to afford me, and
   proposed my writing to him on our affairs; you were also pleased to
   invite me to write to you at the same time. If I should neglect to do
   as you then proposed, I should fail not only of discharging my duty,
   but of doing myself a great honour. But as I am well assured, even from
   the small acquaintance I had with you, that a letter of mere
   compliments would not be agreeable to a lady of your disposition and
   feelings, especially under your present melancholy circumstances; so
   the writing of such a letter is very far from my intention or
   inclination.

   When I saw the evidences of your deep sorrow, under the awful frown of
   Heaven in the death of your only son, it made an impression on my mind
   not easily forgotten; and when you spoke of my writing to you, I soon
   determined what should be the subject of my letter. It was that which
   appeared to me to be the most proper subject of contemplation for one
   in your circumstances; that, which I thought, above all others, would
   furnish you a proper and sufficient source of consolation, under your
   heavy affliction; and this was the Lord Jesus Christ:--particularly the
   amiableness of his character, which renders him worthy that we should
   love him, and take him for our only portion, our rest, hope, and joy;
   and his great and unparalleled love towards us.--And I have been of the
   same mind ever since; being determined, if God favoured me with an
   opportunity to write to your Ladyship, that those things should be the
   subject of my letter. For what other subject is so well calculated to
   prove a balm to the wounded spirit.

   Let us then, dear Madam, contemplate the loveliness of our blessed
   Redeemer, which entitles him to our highest love; and, when clearly
   seen, leads us to find a sweet complacency and satisfaction of soul in
   him, of whatever else we are deprived. The Scriptures assure us that
   He, who came into the world in our nature, and freely laid down his
   life for us, was truly possessed of all the fulness of the Godhead, of
   his infinite greatness, majesty, and glory, his infinite wisdom,
   purity, and holiness, his infinite righteousness and goodness. He is
   called the brightness of God's glory, and the express image of his
   person.' He is the Image, the Expression, of infinite beauty; in the
   contemplation of which, God the Father had all his unspeakable
   happiness from eternity. That eternal and unspeakable happiness of the
   Deity is represented as a kind of social happiness, in the society of
   the persons of the Trinity; Prov. viii. 30.. Then I was by him, as one
   brought up with him; I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before
   him.' This glorious Person came down from heaven to be the Light of the
   world,' that by him the beauty of the Deity might shine forth, in the
   brightest and fullest manner, to the children of men.

   Infinite Wisdom also has contrived that we should behold the glory of
   the Deity, in the face of Jesus Christ, to the greatest advantage, in
   such a manner as should be best adapted to the capacity of poor feeble
   man; in such a manner, too, as is best fitted to engage our attention,
   and allure our hearts, as well as to inspire us with the most perfect
   complacency and delight. For Christ having, by his incarnation, come
   down from his infinite exaltation above us, has become one of our
   kinsmen and brothers. And his glory shining upon us through his human
   nature, the manifestation is wonderfully adapted to the strength of the
   human vision; so that, though it appears in all its effulgence, it is
   yet attempered to our sight. He is indeed possessed of infinite
   majesty, to inspire us with reverence and adoration; yet that majesty
   need not terrify us, for we behold it blended with humility, meekness,
   and sweet condescension. We may feel the most profound reverence and
   self-abasement, and yet our hearts be drawn forth sweetly and
   powerfully into an intimacy the most free, confidential, and
   delightful. The dread, so naturally inspired by his greatness, is
   dispelled by the contemplation of his gentleness and humility; while
   the familiarity, which might otherwise arise from the view of the
   loveliness of his character merely, is ever prevented by the
   consciousness of his infinite majesty and glory; and the sight of all
   his perfections united fills us with sweet surprise and humble
   confidence, with reverential love and delightful adoration.

   This glory of Christ is properly, and in the highest sense, divine. He
   shines in all the brightness of glory that is inherent in the Deity.
   Such is the exceeding brightness of this Sun of righteousness, that, in
   comparison of it, the light of the natural sun is as darkness; and
   hence, when he shall appear in his glory, the brightness of the sun
   shall disappear, as the brightness of the little stars do when the sun
   rises. So says the prophet Isaiah, Then the moon shall be confounded,
   and the sun shall be ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in
   Mount Zion, and before his ancients gloriously.' Isa. xxiv. 23.. But,
   although his light is thus bright, and his beams go forth with infinite
   strength; yet, as they proceed from the Lamb of God, and shine through
   his meek and lowly human nature, they are supremely soft and mild, and,
   instead of dazzling and overpowering our feeble sight, like a smooth
   ointment or a gentle eye-salve, are vivifying and healing. Thus on
   them, who fear God's name, the Sun of righteousness arises, with
   healing in his beams,' Mal. iv. 2.. It is like the light of the
   morning, a morning without clouds, as the dew on the grass, under whose
   influence the souls of his people are as the tender grass springing out
   of the earth, by clear shining after rain. Thus are the beams of his
   beauty and brightness fitted for the support and reviving of the
   afflicted. He heals the broken in spirit, and bindeth up their wounds.
   When the spirits of his people are cut down by the scythe, he comes
   down upon them, in a sweet and heavenly influence, like rain on the
   mown grass, and like showers that water the earth. (Psal. lxxii. 6)

   But especially are the beams of Christ's glory infinitely softened and
   sweetened by his love to men, the love that passeth knowledge. The
   glory of his person consists, pre-eminently, in that infinite goodness
   and grace, of which he made so wonderful a manifestation, in his love
   to us. The apostle John tells us, that God is light; (1 John i. 5.) and
   again, that God is love; (1 John iv. 8. ) and the light of his glory is
   an infinitely sweet light, because it is the light of love. But
   especially does it appear so, in the person of our Redeemer, who was
   infinitely the most wonderful example of love that was ever witnessed.
   All the perfections of the Deity have their highest manifestation in
   the work of redemption, vastly more than in the work of creation. In
   other works, we see him indirectly; but here, we see the immediate
   glory of his face. (2 Cor. iii. 18.) In his other works, we behold him
   at a distance; but in this, we come near, and behold the infinite
   treasures of his heart. (Eph. iii. 8, 9, 10.) It is a work of love to
   us, and a work of which Christ is the author. His loveliness, and his
   love, have both their greatest and most affecting manifestation in
   those sufferings, which he endured for us at his death. Therein, above
   all, appeared his holiness, his love to God, and his hatred of sin, in
   that, when he desired to save sinners, rather than that a sensible
   testimony should not be seen against sin, and the justice of God be
   vindicated, he chose to become obedient unto death; even the death of
   the cross. Thus, in the same act, he manifests, in the highest
   conceivable degree, his infinite hatred of sin, and his infinite love
   to sinners. His holiness appeared like a fire, burning with infinite
   vehemence against sin; at the same time, that his love to sinners
   appeared like a sweet flame, burning with an infinite fervency of
   benevolence It is the glory and beauty of his love to us, polluted
   sinners, that it is an infinitely pure love; and it is the peculiar
   sweetness and endearment of his holiness, that it has its most glorious
   manifestation in such an act of love to us. All the excellencies of
   Christ, both divine and human, have their highest manifestation in this
   wonderful act of his love to men--his offering up himself a sacrifice
   for us, under these extreme sufferings. Herein have abounded toward us
   the riches of his grace, in all wisdom and prudence. (Eph. i. 8.)
   Herein appears his perfect justice. Herein, too, was the great display
   of his humility, in being willing to descend so low for us. In his last
   sufferings, appeared his obedience to God, his submission to his
   disposing will, his patience, and his meekness, when he went as a lamb
   to the slaughter, and opened not his mouth, but in a prayer that God
   would forgive his crucifiers. And how affecting this manifestation of
   his excellency and amiableness to our minds, when it chiefly shines
   forth in such an act of love to us.

   The love of Christ to men, in another way, sweetens and endears all his
   excellencies and virtues; as it has brought him in to so near a
   relation to us, as our friend, our elder brother, and our redeemer; and
   has brought us into an union so strict with him, that we are his
   friends, yea, members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
   (Eph. v. 30.)

   We see then, dear Madam, how rich and how adequate is the provision,
   which God has made for our consolation, in all our afflictions, in
   giving us a Redeemer of such glory, and such love; especially, when it
   is considered, what were the ends of this great manifestation of beauty
   and love in his death. He suffered, that we might be delivered. His
   soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, to take away the sting
   of sorrow, and to impart everlasting consolation. He was oppressed and
   afflicted, that we might be supported. He was overwhelmed in the
   darkness of death, that we might have the light of life. He was cast
   into the furnace of God's wrath, that we might drink of the rivers of
   his pleasures. His soul was overwhelmed with a flood of sorrow, that
   our hearts might be overwhelmed with a flood of eternal joy.

   We may also well remember, in what circumstances our Redeemer now is.
   He was dead; but he is alive, and he lives for evermore. Death may
   deprive us of our friends here, but it cannot deprive us of this our
   best Friend. We have this best of friends, this mighty Redeemer, to go
   to, in all our afflictions; and he is not one who cannot be touched
   with the feeling of our infirmities. He has suffered far greater
   sorrows than we have ever suffered; and if we are actually united to
   him, the union can never be broken, but will continue when we die, and
   when heaven and earth are dissolved.

   Therefore, in this we may be confident, though the earth he removed, in
   him we shall triumph with everlasting joy. Now, when storms and
   tempests arise, we may resort to him, who is a hiding-place from the
   storm, and a covert from the tempest. When we thirst, we may come to
   him, who is as rivers of water in a dry place. When we are weary, we
   may go to him, who is as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
   Having found him, who is as the apple-tree among the trees of the wood,
   we may sit under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit will be
   sweet to our taste. Christ said to his disciples, In the world ye shall
   have tribulation; but in me ye shall have peace! If we are united to
   him, we shall be like a tree planted by, the waters, and that spreadeth
   out its roots by the river, that shall not see when heat cometh, but
   its leaf shall ever be green, and it shall not be careful in the year
   of drought, neither shall it cease from yielding fruit. He will now be
   our light in darkness; our morning-star, shining as the sure harbinger
   of approaching day. In a little time, he will arise on our souls, as
   the sun in his glory; and our sun shall no more go down, and there
   shall be no interposing cloud--no veil on his face, or on our hearts;
   but the Lord shall be our everlasting light, and our Redeemer our
   glory.

   That this glorious Redeemer would manifest his glory and love to your
   mind, and apply what little I have said on this subject to your
   consolation, in all your afflictions, and abundantly reward your
   kindness and generosity to me while I was at Kittery, is the fervent
   prayer, Madam, of

   Your Ladyship's most obliged

   and affectionate friend,

   and most humble servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   The repeated afflictions of a widowed sister, in the beginning of the
   next year, occasioned the following letter to his father, containing
   some allusions to the state and circumstances of his own family.

   "To the Reverend Timothy Edwards, East Windsor.

   Stockbridge. Jan 27. 1752.

   honoured sir,

   We have lately heard the sorrowful tidings of the death of two of
   sister Backus's [43] children, as we are informed, both at your house;
   which is the occasion of cousin Eunice returning from Stockbridge at
   this time; she having a desire to see her mother and surviving sisters
   at Windsor, on this melancholy occasion. We are much affected with
   sister's great and heavy afflictions, and lament the death of two such
   likely, promising children, in their early youth. It is my earnest
   desire, that it may be sanctified to us of this family. I desire your
   prayers, that it may be so; particularly to those that are young in the
   family; that they may be awakened by it to diligent preparation for
   death; and that we all may take notice of our distinguished mercies,
   with a becoming thankfulness to God. I look upon it as a great favour
   of Heaven, that you, my parents, are still preserved in the land of the
   living, to so great an age. I hope, by the leave of Divine Providence,
   to make you and sister Backus a visit in the spring. We are, through
   mercy, in our ordinary state of health, except that little Betty don't
   seem of late to be so well as she was in the summer. If she lives till
   spring, I believe we must be obliged to come again to the use of the
   cold bath with her. My wife and children are well pleased with our
   present situation. They like the place far better than they expected.
   Here, at present, we live in peace; which has of long time been an
   unusual thing with us. The Indians seem much pleased with my family,
   especially my wife. They are generally more sober and serious than they
   used to be. Beside the Stockbridge Indians, here are above sixty of the
   Six Nations, who live here for the sake of instruction. Twenty are
   lately come to dwell here, who came from about two hundred miles beyond
   Albany. We expect our son and daughter Parsons will remove hither in a
   short time. Many of their goods are already brought up.

   (After alluding to the indigent circumstances of his sister Mrs. Backus
   and her family, and mentioning that himself and Mrs. Edwards had done
   every thing for his niece which was in their power, he proceeds.)

   I hope some of her friends will be kind to her in this respect. There
   are perhaps none of her uncles but are much better able to help her
   than I am at this time; who, by reason of lately marrying two children,
   and the charge of buying, building, and removing, am, I suppose, about
   £2000 in debt, in this province money [44] . I should be glad if sister
   Mary would suggest it to brother Ellsworth to do something for her. If
   she don't care to do it in her own name, let her do it in mine, as
   doing the errand from me. Please to give my duty to my mother, and my
   love to sister Mary. My wife is at this moment from home. My children
   give their duty to their grandparents, and aunts, and love and
   affectionate condolence to their mournful surviving cousins

   I am, honoured Sir,

   Your dutiful son,

   jonathan edwards"

   The allusion to his pecuniary circumstances, made by Mr. Edwards in the
   preceding letter, requires explanation. What was the actual amount of
   his salary at Northampton, I have not been able to ascertain; but he
   speaks of it, in one of his letters, as "the largest salary of any
   country minister in New England." Soon after his settlement there, he
   purchased a valuable homestead, with the requisite lands for pasturage
   and fuel, and erected a commodious dwelling-house These, by the
   strictest economy, had all been paid for before his dismission. It was
   several years. however, after his removal to Stockbridge, before he
   could sell his property at Northampton. In the mean time, he was under
   the necessity of purchasing another homestead, and of erecting another
   dwelling-house at Stockbridge. The debt thus incurred, added to the
   expense of removing his family, subjected them for a time to very
   serious pecuniary embarrassments; and his daughters, who had received
   not only an enlightened, but a polished education, readily lent their
   aid, to relieve the family from the existing pressure. For this
   purpose, they occupied their leisure in making lace and embroidering,
   in tambouring and other ornamental work, and in making and painting
   fans; all of which, in the existing state of the country, found a ready
   market at Boston [45] : At length, the sale of his property in
   Northampton relieved him from debt, and placed his family in more
   pleasant circumstances.

   On the 5th of February, O. S. Mr. Gideon Hawley, a young gentleman of a
   liberal education, and of great prudence, firmness, and integrity,
   arrived at Stockbridge. He had been appointed, by the commissioners,
   the schoolmaster of the Mohawk and other Iroquois children, and entered
   immediately on the duties of his office. He was ordained as a minister
   and missionary, July 31, 1734, N. S. Mr. Edwards found him a most
   faithful and useful coadjutor. He also occasionally preached to the
   Iroquois, as did Mr. Edwards once every sabbath.

   Soon after the removal of Mr. Edwards to Stockbridge, in consequence of
   the misunderstandings and jealousies, subsisting between some of the
   principal English inhabitants of the town, and the confusion in which
   he saw the Indian affairs involved, he was led, in a letter to the Hon.
   Mr. Hubbard, of Aug. 31, 1751, to recommend the appointment of two or
   more trustees, "men perfectly impartial, no way interested in, related
   to, or engaged with, the contending parties." The absolute necessity of
   this step to the welfare of the mission, and of the Indian schools,
   soon became apparent [46] . In consequence of the increasing importance
   of the Indian establishment at Stockbridge, and the increasing
   attention of the public to the mission and the schools, the
   benefactions of the legislature and of individuals, were increasing,
   and still likely to increase. By the augmented numbers of the
   Housatonnucks, and the accession of a Mohawk colony, it had become the
   principal mission of the Society for Propagating the Gospel in New
   England, and appeared destined to receive the chief amount of its
   revenue; Mr. Hollis had increased his annual stipend to £160, stg.; Mr.
   Paine was proposing to support a female boarding-school; the
   legislature of the province had just voted £500, provincial currency,
   for the school-house, and would probably aid in the support of the
   mistress; an adequate support was now given to the instructor of the
   Housatonnuck school; an annual stipend was given to the Housatonnucks,
   to be expended at Stockbridge for their benefit; a similar stipend was
   to be paid for the Mohawks, if they removed in considerable numbers to
   Stockbridge; a school, to be supported by the colony, for the education
   of their children, was not only pledged, but actually begun; and hopes
   were indulged that the yearly stipend of £500, stg. granted by the
   king, to the Mohawks, might be expended under the direction of an
   agent, residing at Stockbridge, and not as before at Albany. It needed
   no great discernment to discover, that the amount of these numerous
   items must be great; and the bare possibility of engrossing the agency,
   through which this large aggregate must pass, and of turning it into a
   source of great private emolument, might easily excite the strong
   cupidity of individuals, and lead them to resort to every measure in
   their power, to secure that emolument to themselves. The opponent of
   Mr. Woodbridge, (whose influence in the town, and with the Indians, had
   been long chiefly extinct,) in consequence of the strong
   recommendation, given of him, by his nephew, while in London, to the
   directors of the Society for Propagating the Gospel in New England, had
   been appointed one of the board of commissioners of that society; as
   had the nephew himself, another of the same board; one of his family,
   through the same recommendation, had been conditionally nominated as
   the teacher of the female school; [47] one of the trustees of the
   Indian establishment was about to connect himself with the family; and,
   if the nomination should be confirmed, it was his intention to remove
   to Stockbridge, in order to take a superintendence of Indian affairs,
   which, in the absence of his colleagues, would be sole and exclusive.
   So fair was the prospect at this time, in the view of these
   individuals, of engrossing the profit and the direction of the whole
   establishment in their own hands, that they threw off their wonted
   caution, and made known their purpose of removing every obstacle in the
   way of their designs.

   Mr. Edwards well knew, that the influence of these individuals was most
   formidable: two of them being now members of the board of
   commissioners, on which, as Indian missionary, he was dependent; one of
   them being one of the trustees for the Indians at Stockbridge; one of
   them being personally acquainted with the directors in London; and two
   of them having considerable influence with the principal men in the
   provincial government. Yet he saw, just as dearly, that, if their plans
   succeeded, the funds appropriated to the literary and moral improvement
   of the Indians, would be perverted to the purpose of individual
   aggrandizement. In such a state of things, he was not at a loss as to
   his own duty. The question, whether the individual nominated by the
   board of directors in London, as the teacher of the female school,
   should be appointed, having been thus submitted, for final decision, to
   the board of commissioners in Boston; their secretary wrote to Mr.
   Edwards, for an explicit statement of the facts relating to, the
   subject. Thus called upon, he did not hesitate to present the whole
   case, in a reply to the secretary, bearing date Feb. 18, 1752.

   In this letter, after stating it to be absolutely necessary, that his
   correspondent should be let into some of the secrets of the affairs of
   Stockbridge, and after alluding to his having, on account of the
   controversy there subsisting, recommended, formerly, the appointment of
   two or more impartial trustees, no way interested in, or related to,
   the contending parties," to inspect those affairs; he states, among
   other things, the following particulars:--When he recommended the
   appointment of these trustees, he little suspected, that one of them
   would prove the furthest of any person whatever, from possessing the
   indispensable qualification of impartiality, in consequence of his
   being about to become the son-in-law of one of the contending
   parties.--The preceding year, a very formal pacification took place,
   between Mr. Woodbridge and his opponent, with solemn promises made by
   the latter, that he would thenceforward live peacefully with Mr. W, and
   no more speak ill of him, nor in any wise molest him. But the proposed
   alliance, the nomination of one of his family as teacher of the female
   school, and the appointment of himself and his nephew to the board of
   commissioners, had so elated him, that those promises appeared to be
   wholly forgotten. A sudden and strange alteration had also appeared, in
   the temper and conduct of his intended son-in-law, who, in the absence
   of his colleagues, claimed the sole management of all Indian affairs,
   so that nothing was done but he was the doer of it.--The Indians had a
   most unfavorable opinion of the opponent of Mr. Woodbridge, and the
   deepest prejudice against him, in consequence of his having often
   molested them, with respect to their lands, and other affairs, and, as
   they thought, having done very unjustly by them. This prejudice was
   extended to the family; and that to such a degree, that, after offering
   to feed and clothe such of their children, as should be sent to the
   school, attempted to be established, only four could be procured, three
   Housatonnucks and one Mohawk; and the parents of these four complained
   loudly of the treatment of their children. Whether this prejudice was
   well or ill founded, it was too deep to be eradicated.--Very improper
   use had been made of the money given by Mr. Hollis. He had made large
   remittances, and to no good purpose; and was kept in entire ignorance,
   as to the actual state of things at Stockbridge. The individual who
   received his money, and boarded, and professed to instruct the
   children, had never established a regular school, and had never kept
   any regular accounts of his expenditures. No government was maintained,
   little attention paid to the manners of the children, and all was
   suffered to go on in wildness, filth, and confusion, to the great
   offence of such as visited the place. The generous design of Mr. Hollis
   had been totally defeated, and the large sum of money he had given, had
   been wholly lost, and worse than lost. The same boys, without this
   additional expense, would have been far better instructed and governed
   at the school of Mr. Woodbridge. There, they would have been taught
   reading, cleanliness, good manners and good morals; all of which had
   been wholly neglected, on the part of their professed instructor, who
   had himself been absent from Stockbridge for a long period.--This
   irregularity, and disorderly management, led the Mohawks to take all
   their children away from him, after the arrival of Mr. Hawley, and to
   place them under the care of the latter. Yet the former, wishing some
   pretext for drawing the money of Mr. Hollis, and not being able to
   procure any of the Indian boys to form a school, went regularly into
   the school kept by Mr. Hawley, and proceeded to treat the boys as if
   they were under his own care; alleging, that he was the superintendent
   of the male school.--No one had been more open and abundant, in
   speaking of his uselessness, his exceeding unfitness for the business
   of an instructor, and the disorder and filthiness in which things were
   kept under his care, or in declaring, that it was high time that he was
   dismissed from the employment, than the resident trustee; but, in
   consequence of his new connexion, he had suddenly changed his mind, and
   now declared, that he must be retained.--A similar change had taken
   place in his treatment of Mr. Edwards. For many years he had constantly
   professed the highest respect for him, far beyond what the latter
   could, with any modesty, expect. He had often expressed a higher esteem
   of him than of any minister in New England, as well as a very strong
   desire of living under his ministry. Yet, although Mr. Edwards had
   never had a word of difference with him, or his new connexions, his
   whole conduct was suddenly and entirely changed, and he had sided with
   them, in all their measures of opposition and violence.

   Very singular management had been used, with respect to Mr. Hawley.
   Before his arrival, dark representations were carried to
   him,--misrepresentations of the actual state of things at
   Stockbridge.--to discourage him from accepting his appointment. Soon
   after his arrival, it was openly given out, that he would soon be
   removed. Had it not been for his firmness, prudence, and steadiness of
   temper, he would have been laid under great and permanent
   disadvantages. The resident trustee had warned him not to depend on Mr.
   Edwards, and challenged to himself the whole authority of directing the
   school, and the affairs of the Indians.--When the society in London
   recommended the proposed teacher of the female school, they could not
   have been aware, that her nearest kinsmen were to be the committee to
   examine her accounts. But the actual state of things was soon to be
   still more preposterous. She being the mistress, her nearest relatives
   were to be her council, and her husband the sole committee to examine
   her accounts, and make report to the legislature.

   Mr. Edwards then adds, "I write these things, honoured Sir, because I
   am satisfied you have not heretofore been enlightened, in the true
   state of things, as you ought to have been It was my knowledge of some
   of these matters, though but little in comparison, which occasioned me,
   when last in Boston, so earnestly to press the commissioners frequently
   to visit this place I have been slow to speak. My disposition has been
   entirely to suppress what I knew, that would be to the disadvantage of
   any of the people here. But I dare not hold my peace any longer. You
   doubtless will own, Sir, that it is but doing you justice, for somebody
   or other to let you know the true state of things, in a matter of such
   vast importance, which is under your care, and which you being at so
   great a distance never can know, but by the information of some that
   live here; and I know of no one from whom you can more reasonably
   expect it, than from the missionary you have sent here, to have the
   special care of the interests of religion among the Indians. I did not
   intend to interfere with the affair of the teacher of the female
   school, or to say any thing that should tend to hinder it; and
   therefore avoided every thing of that nature, in my letter to Sir
   William Pepperell. But being now questioned again by the honourable
   commissioners, and the tendency of the measure more and more appearing,
   I thought that this was the time when God called on me to speak, and
   that if I should hold my peace now, I should perhaps lay a foundation
   for great uneasiness to my conscience all my life after; when I might
   deeply lament the continued consequences of my silence, and when it
   would be too late to speak."

   The next day Mr. Edwards addressed a letter to the commissioners in
   Boston, in which, after announcing the arrival of Mr. Hawley, and the
   high gratification of the Mohawks at the establishment of a regular
   school for their boys, he states the number of his scholars to be at
   that time thirty-six, mentions his happy qualifications as an
   instructor, and in compliance with their request gives, very summarily,
   his own views respecting a proper teacher for the female
   boarding-school.

   During the spring of 1752, the state of affairs in Stockbridge, instead
   of improving, only grew worse. The interference of the former
   school-master with the school of Mr. Hawley, produced so much
   confusion, that, in the latter part of April, one half of the Mohawks
   left Stockbridge in utter disgust with him and his friends, and fully
   resolved never to return. A few days after their departure an intimate
   friend of the former school-master and his associates, visiting the
   male Mohawk school, under the care of Mr. Hawley, struck a child of the
   chief sachem at the Onohquaugas on the head with his cane, without any
   manner of provocation. The mother of this child was a woman of
   remarkable piety. This unhappy occurrence excited the universal
   indignation of the remaining Iroquois; and they appeared resolved, all
   of them, to pack up their effects immediately, and be gone. Mr. Hawley
   and the interpreter, finding it impossible to calm them, came to Mr.
   Edwards for advice, but he, having been often blamed for, interfering
   with the affairs of the Iroquois, and told that, in doing so, he
   meddled with that which was none of his business, referred them to the
   resident trustee; advising them to represent the whole affair to him,
   that he might use proper means to prevent the fatal consequences which
   were feared. Their doing so was, however, regarded as the result of a
   disposition to find fault with him and his friends. The chiefs of the
   Onohquaugas, finding no redress, went to Mr. Edwards to make their
   complaint for this violent assault. There they found the aggressor;
   who, in order to pacify them, was persuaded to pay them a sum of money.
   The resident trustee, angry at what had occurred, went to the
   boarding-school, and proceeded to abuse Mr. Hawley in the presence of
   the whole school, in a very fervid manner; telling him that he was a
   man of no judgment, and of no prudence, and that he was unfit for the
   business he was in; and continued this abuse for three hours together
   As his conversation was very loud, the Iroquois heard it, and came to
   the spot, expressing their fears for the personal safety of Mr. Hawley,
   to whom they had become much attached. Apprehending that, in
   consequence of this violence, he might be induced to leave Stockbridge,
   they declared, in a body, that, if he went away, they would go also. By
   these occurrences, the Indian were as effectually alienated from the
   resident trustee, as they had previously been from his new friends.

   In consequence of these unhappy measures, and of a settled
   determination, on his part, to take, in the absence of his colleagues,
   the whole management of Indian affairs on himself; they also were
   disgusted. One of them relinquished all connexion with the business,
   and ceased to visit Stockbridge altogether. The other openly announced
   his entire discouragement, and declared that he would do his utmost to
   induce the government to withdraw their support from the establishment
   of the Iroquois. This led to an attempt to procure the dismission of
   the latter, and the appointment of a connexion of the resident trustee;
   which however proved unsuccessful. At the same time, it was publicly
   and repeatedly announced, that Mr. Edwards himself would be removed
   from his mission; and, as soon after appeared, a vigorous attempt was
   actually made to accomplish this object [48] .

   Having stated these facts in a letter to the secretary of the
   commissioners, of May, 1752, Mr. Edwards proceeds,--"But still I think
   there is no necessity of the Iroquois establishment being broken up,
   unless its enemies are resolved to have it so. The dependence of the
   establishment, as to continuance and prosperity, is chiefly on the
   Onohquaugas, who are much the best disposed of any of the Iroquois, and
   most likely to come in considerable numbers. They have not been here so
   long as the others, to see so much to discourage them, and they alone
   are willing to settle at the Hop-lands. The affair is not at all
   desperate as to them, nor as to some of the Mohawks, if there be a
   speedy alteration. But if the two individuals, who challenge to
   themselves the whole direction of the affairs of the Iroquois, continue
   here, there is no hope of the continuance of Mr. Hawley, or of Mr.
   Ashley and his wife. They will not continue under one whom they regard
   as so despotic an inspector. And there will be no way to retain any of
   the Indians, unless it be some who are entirely mercenary, who may be
   persuaded to stay for the sake of the presents that are made them, and
   to be maintained and live here in mere idleness. This, it is now very
   apparent, is all that moves many of the Conneenchees, in being and
   continuing here"

   "The resident trustee [49] has plainly discovered many designs, tending
   to bring money into his own pocket: viz. a design of taking care of Mr.
   Hollis's boys himself; a design of being steward of both
   boarding-schools, by which he will have the opportunity of supplying
   the Indians out of his own shop, and of getting his pay from the
   British funds; a design of introducing his son, as the master of the
   boarding-school, under the idea of a present supply, another proper
   person not appearing; and an expectation of diverting the king's
   bounty, of £500 sterling, to the Six Nations, from New York. The former
   school-master has given hints of an agreement, between himself and him,
   to resign the care of Mr. Hollis's scholars to him, when things are
   ripe for it, he providing for their maintenance, and taking care of
   their instruction by his son. Beside these things, his wife is to be
   mistress of the female school; and two of their sons to be maintained
   and educated at the public expense, and two of their girls, in like
   manner, to be maintained in the female school; and one of his family to
   be his wife's usher; and his servants to be paid for, under the
   character of servants employed in the affairs of the female school; and
   the house for the boarding-school set on his wife's land; and then the
   farm to be bought by the country for the school, with the advantage of
   selling it at a high rate; and yet the family in a great measure to be
   maintained on the produce of it; beside the advantage of carrying on a
   trade, both with the Stockbridge Indians and the Mohawks. A man had
   need to have a great stock of assuredness, to urge a public affair,
   under so manifold temptations of private interest."

   The time of Mr. Edwards had been so much occupied by his removal from
   Northampton, the comfortable establishment of his family at
   Stockbridge, the ordinary duties of his parish and his mission, the
   claims of the Mohawks, the concerns of the various Indian schools, and
   the unhappy contentions of the whites; that he had, at first, no
   leisure to attend to the Reply of Mr. Williams. In the latter part of
   the spring, however, he began an answer to that gentleman, which he
   sent to the press the beginning of July [50] , with the following title
   "Misrepresentations Corrected, and Truth Vindicated, in a Reply to the
   Rev Mr. Solomon Williams's Book, entitled, The True State of the
   Question, concerning the Qualifications necessary to Lawful Communion
   in the Christian Sacraments." It was read with deep interest by both
   parties, was admitted by both to be a triumphant answer to the "True
   State of the Question," and, taken in connexion with the" Humble
   Attempt," was regarded by the friends of strict communion, at that
   time, as it has ever since been, as an unanswerable defense of their
   system. If the opposers of that system have not so regarded it, they
   have not publicly avowed the opposite opinion; as no attempt to answer
   it has hitherto appeared. Mr. Williams is said to have asked the advice
   of some of his friends, among the clergy, whether he had better
   commence a reply; but, finding that no one would encourage him to an
   attempt, which must end in reiterated defeat, he is reported to have
   sat down in mortified silence.

   Appended to this publication was a letter from Mr. Edwards to his late
   flock at Northampton. They had published Mr. Williams's pamphlet at
   their own expense, and distributed it to every family in the town. That
   pamphlet, though so unsuccessful an attempt to answer Mr. Edwards, was
   yet filled with many lax and sceptical notions, derived from the
   writings of Dr. Taylor of Norwich, and apparently adopted by Mr.
   Williams, in the existing emergency, though in direct opposition, not
   only to Mr. Stoddard, whom he professed at once to venerate and defend,
   but to his own former publications. Though Mr. Edwards knew that the
   work of Mr. W. must soon go to its proper place, yet he also knew the
   state of fervid excitement in which his former congregation had long
   been; that they had printed and dispersed the pamphlet of Mr. W., (even
   without knowing its contents,) as an answer to his own treatise, and
   thus, in a sense, had adopted it before the world as their own work.
   These circumstances led him to fear, that the fatal errors abounding in
   the work of Mr. Williams might, at a period when the principles of Dr.
   Taylor of Norwich were gaining many converts in the colonies, mislead
   many, especially of the young, among his former people. To save them
   from this danger, he addressed to them an affectionate and truly
   pastoral letter, which will be found at the close of the Answer to Mr.
   Williams [51] .

   On the 29th of June, 1752, Mr. Edwards married his third daughter,
   ESTHER, to the Rev AARON BURR, of Newark, president of the college of
   New Jersey, then established in that town, and a few years afterwards
   removed to Princeton.

   In the following letter to Mr. Erskine, which is rich in intelligence,
   as well as thought, the reader will find one fact not generally
   known,--that Mr. Edwards, in the latter part of the summer of 1751, was
   applied to, with much earnestness, by some parish in Virginia, to go
   and settle with them in the ministry. They offered him a handsome
   support, and sent a messenger with the offer, but his installment at
   Stockbridge had taken place before his arrival.

   "To the Rev. John Erskine.

   Stockbridge, July 7, 1752

   rev. and dear brother,

   The last spring I received a letter from you, dated, at the beginning,
   July 17, and at the end, Sept. 5,1751 and the week before last I
   received another letter, dated Feb 11, 1752, with a packet, containing
   Arnauld de la fréquente Communion, Goodwin's Sermon at the Ordination
   of Mr. Pickering; Mr. Jarvis's Sermon on Methods for reviving Religion;
   Reasons of Dissent from the Sentence of the General Assembly; Edwards
   on Christ, God-man; Mr. Hartley's Sermon, Parish on the Assembly's
   Catechism; and Dr Gill's Sermon on Isaiah xi. 12. I heartily thank you
   for these letters and pamphlets. Arnauld on frequent Communion will not
   be very profitable to me, by reason of my not understanding the French.
   But several of the rest have been very agreeable to me. That letter
   which you mention in your last, dated Feb.11, as sent about a
   twelve-month before, containing some Remarks on the Decay of the Power
   of the Papal Clergy, and an Abstract of Venema's Reasonings to prove
   that Judas was not present at the Lord's Supper, I never received, and
   regret it much that I missed it, and request that you would still send
   me those Remarks on the Decay of the Papal Clergy.

   I am obliged to you for the particular information you have given me,
   concerning Mr. Adam of Falkirk's affair. Though it is a pity so
   deserving a person should suffer at all from his brethren, only for not
   acting contrary to his conscience; yet it is a matter of thankfulness,
   that the Assembly of the year 51 showed so much better temper than that
   of the preceding year. I shall be glad to hear concerning the temper
   and conduct of the Assembly of this present year, 1752.

   I am sorry to learn, that there is so much reason to fear, that the
   revival of religion in the Netherlands will be hindered, and brought
   under a cloud, through the prevailing of imprudences. It is what I was
   afraid I should hear. I should be glad to see the Pastoral Letter you
   mention against Fanaticism, though written by one disaffected to the
   revival. I wish I could see a History of Enthusiasm through all ages
   written by some good hand, a hearty friend of vital religion, a person
   of accurate judgment, and large acquaintance with ecclesiastical
   history. Such a history, well written, might doubtless be exceedingly
   useful and instructive, and of great benefit to the church of God;
   especially, if there were united with it a proper account and history
   of true religion. I should therefore choose, that the work should be a
   history of true, vital, and experimental religion, and enthusiasm:
   bringing down the history from age to age, judiciously and clearly
   making the distinction between one and the other; observing the
   difference of source, progress, and issue; properly pointing out the
   limits, and doing justice to each, in every age, and at each remarkable
   period. I don't know that there is any such thing extant, or any thing
   that would, in any good measure, answer the same purpose. If there be,
   I should be glad to hear of it.

   I thank you for the account you give me of Mr. Taylor's writings, and
   of the things which he is doing to propagate his opinions. It now
   appears to be a remarkable time in the Christian world; perhaps such an
   one, as never has been before: things are going down-hill so fast, and
   truth and religion, both of heart and practice, are departing by such
   swift steps, that I think it must needs be, that a crisis is not very
   far off, and what will then appear, I will not pretend to determine.

   The last week I sent away my answer to Mr. Williams. If I live till it
   is published, I will endeavour to send one to you, and some other
   friends in Scotland. I hope now, in a short time, to be at leisure to
   resume my design, of writing something on the Arminian controversy. I
   have no thought of going through with all parts of the controversy at
   once, but the subject which I intended, God willing, first to write
   something upon, was Free-will and Moral Agency; endeavouring, with as
   much exactness as I am able, to consider the nature of that freedom of
   moral agents, which makes them the proper subjects of moral government,
   moral precepts, councils, calls, motives, persuasions, promises and
   threatenings, praise and blame, rewards and punishments: strictly
   examining the modern notions of these things, endeavouring to
   demonstrate their most palpable inconsistency and absurdity;
   endeavouring also to bring the late great objections and outcries
   against Calvinistic divinity, from these topics, to the test of the
   strictest reasoning; and particularly that great objection, in which
   the modern writers have so much gloried, so long triumphed, with so
   great a degree of insult towards the most excellent divines, and in
   effect against the gospel of Jesus Christ:--viz. That the Calvinistic
   notions of God's moral government are contrary to the common sense of
   mankind. In this Essay, I propose to take particular notice of the
   writings of Dr. Whitby, and Mr. Chubb, and the writings of some others,
   who, though not properly Pelagians, nor Arminians, yet in their notions
   of the freedom of the will, have, in the main, gone into the same
   scheme. But, if I live to prosecute my design, I shall send you a more
   particular account of my plan after it is perfected.

   I suppose there has been a trial before now, whether a national
   collection can be obtained in Scotland, for New Jersey college: unless
   it has been thought prudent, by such as are friends of the affair, to
   put it off a year longer; as some things I have seen seem to argue.
   There was a design of Mr. Pemberton's going to England and Scotland. He
   was desired by the trustees, and it was his settled purpose, to have
   gone the last year; but his people, and his colleague, Mr. Cummings,
   hindered it. His intention of going occasioned great uneasiness among
   his people, and created some dissatisfaction towards him, in the minds
   of some of them. Since that President Burr has been desired to go, by
   the unanimous voice of the trustees. Nevertheless. I believe there is
   little probability of his consenting to it; partly, on the account of
   his having lately entered into a married state. On the 29th of last
   month, he was married to my third daughter.

   What you write of the appointment of a gentleman, to the office of
   lieut. governour, of Virginia, who is a friend of religion, is an event
   that the friends of religion in America have great reason to rejoice
   in; by reason of the late revival of religion in that province, and the
   opposition that has been made against it, and the great endeavours to
   crush it, by many of the chief men of the province. Mr. Davies, in a
   letter I lately received from him, dated March 2, 1752, mentions the
   same thing. His words are, we have a new governor; who is a candid,
   condescending gentleman. And, as he has been educated in the church of
   Scotland, he has a respect for the Presbyterians; which I hope is a
   happy omen.' I was in the latter part of the last summer applied to,
   with much earnestness and importunity, by some of the people of
   Virginia, to come and settle among them, in the work of the ministry;
   who subscribed handsomely for my encouragement and support, and sent a
   messenger to me with their request and subscriptions; but I was
   installed at Stockbridge before the messenger came I have written some
   account of the state of things at Stockbridge to Mr. M'Laurin; which
   you doubtless will have opportunity to see.

   July 24. The people of Northampton are still destitute of a minister,
   and in broken, sorrowful circumstances. They had the last winter Mr.
   Farrand, a young gentleman from New Jersey college, but contended much
   about him, so that he has left them They are now in a state of
   contention; my warmest opposers are quarrelling among themselves. I
   hear they have lately sent for a young preacher, a Mr. Green of
   Barnstable, who is soon expected; but I know nothing of his character.

   Another minister has lately been dismissed from his people, on the same
   account that I was dismissed from Northampton: viz. Mr. Billings of
   Cold Spring. Many of the Cold Spring people were originally of
   Northampton, were educated in the principles, and have followed the
   example, of the people there.

   I heartily thank you for the accounts you have from time to time sent
   me of new books, that are published in Great Britain. I desire you
   would continue such a favour. I am fond of knowing how things are going
   on in the literary world.

   Mr. John Wright, a member of New Jersey college; who is to take the
   degree of Bachelor of Arts, the next September; is now at my house. He
   was born in Scotland; has lived in Virginia; is a friend and
   acquaintance of Mr. Davies; has a great interest in the esteem of the
   religious people of Virginia, and is peculiarly esteemed by President
   Burr, has been admitted to special intimacy with him; and is a person
   of very good character for his understanding, prudence, and piety. He
   has a desire to have a correspondence with some divine of his native
   country, and has chosen you for his correspondent, if he may be
   admitted to such a favour. He intends to send you a letter with this;
   of which I would ask a favourable reception, as he has laid me under
   some special obligations.

   My wife joins with me in affectionate salutations to you, and Mrs.
   Erskine. Hoping that we shall continue to remember each other at the
   throne of grace, I am,

   Dear Sir,

   Your affectionate and obliged

   Brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   Soon after he had entered on the mission at Stockbridge, Mr. Edwards
   addressed the Rev. Mr. Hollis, by letter, concerning the Indian
   schools, and the state of the mission at large. The observations of a
   year had now brought him far more intimately acquainted with the actual
   state of things, and particularly, with the manner in which the annual
   benefactions of that gentleman had been expended; and he felt himself
   bound, at whatever hazard, to make the facts known. In doing this, he
   presented him, in a letter bearing date July 17,1752, with a succinct
   and well drawn history of the mission, and stated, in general terms,
   the unhappy disagreement subsisting among the English inhabitants of
   Stockbridge, as well as various other circumstances of malignant
   aspect, which threatened ruin to the mission, and to the Indian
   schools. Want of room forbids its insertion. With this letter, he
   forwarded to Mr. Hollis a certificate, from a large number of the most
   respectable people of the town, stating the actual conduct of his
   agent, or instructor, the condition of the Indian boys, and the manner
   in which his benefactions had been perverted.

   The firm and undeviating course of conduct pursued by Mr. Edwards, with
   regard to the Indian schools, and the general concerns of the mission,
   at length convinced the resident trustee, and his new friends, that
   they had nothing to hope from any compliances on his part. They
   resolved, therefore, if possible, to effect his removal from
   Stockbridge. With this view, that gentleman repaired to Boston, and
   endeavoured, in conversation, not only with the commissioners, but with
   some of the principal men in the government, (and among others, with
   the secretary of the province,) to produce in their minds very
   unfavourable impressions concerning him particularly, that he was a man
   of an unyielding character, and unwilling to be reconciled to those
   from whom he had differed; and that, by this course, he was likely to
   ruin the Indian mission. The friends of Mr. Edwards, in Boston, giving
   him timely notice of this attempt; he addressed a letter to the Hon.
   Mr. Willard, in his own defense, bearing date July 17, 1752; in which
   he so effectually refuted these representations, that the influence of
   that gentleman was permanently secured, in favour of the mission, and
   its real friends.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [43] Mrs. Backus, the fifth sister of Mr. Edwards, was now a widow. Her
   husband the Rev. Simon Backus of Newington (Wethersfield) was
   designated by the Connecticut legislature, as chaplain to the troops
   sent to Louisburg in 1746, to prevent its recapture by the French. He
   died there soon after his arrival. The vessel, containing his effect,
   and a considerable sum contributed by the gentlemen of the army for his
   family, was cast away on its return: and the family were left in very
   indigent circumstances.

   [44] I suppose that this means £2000 old tenor as it was then called;
   the value of which continually varied, but has been estimated at 6s.
   8d. sterling to the pound.

   [45] So severe was this pressure, for a considerable time, that Mr.
   Edwards found himself necessitated to practise the most rigid economy,
   in everything?even the article of paper. Much of what he know wrote,
   for his for his own use, was written in the margins of useless
   phamphlets, the covers of letters, and the remnants of the silk used in
   making fans.

   [46] A representation having been made to the legislature , in
   pursuance of this recommendation, three trustees or commissioners were
   appointed on behalf of the province.

   [47] That is, provided the commissioners, in Boston, approved of the
   appointment.

   [48] With reluctance I have yielded to the necessity of this minuteness
   of detail; but the fact, that Mr. Edwards had no very marked success in
   the Stockbridge mission, cannot not otherwise be explained; and the
   failure of the Iroquois establishment at Stockbridge cannot otherwise
   be accounted for. Unhappily the Indians at that place, like all other
   Indians in the vicinity of whites, were exposed to the impositions, the
   seductions and the oppressions, of their civilized neighbors. In these
   counteracting causes, both the friends and the enemies of the Indian
   missions may learn, why it is so difficult to reform and christianize
   savages.

   [49] I have regarded the use of antonousasia as correct in this and
   some other quotations.

   [50] It was not published until November.

   [51] This excellent letter, omitted here for want of room, will be
   found in vol. i. pp. 529-231, and should be read in this place.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XXI.

   VOTE OF THANKS OF COMMISSIONERS--SERMON AT NEWARK--MEASURES OF THE
   ENEMIES OF THE MISSION DEFEATED--LETTER TO MR. OLIVER--FREEDOM OF THE
   WILL--LETTER TO MR. ERSKINE--DEPOSITION OF MR. GILLESPIE--LETTER TO
   DO--LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--REPORT OF INDIAN AGENT--REPLY OF MR.
   EDWARDS--FURTHER DEFEAT OF THE ENEMIES OF THE MISSION.

   On the 29th of June, the secretary of the commissioners in Boston
   forwarded, by their direction, to Mr. Edwards and Mr. Hawley, an
   official expression of the approbation, entertained by that board, of
   the firmness and integrity manifested by them, in their conduct
   relative to the Stockbridge mission [52] . The commissioners knew of
   the attempt made, to shake their own confidence, and that of the
   public, in their agents in that mission; and doubtless intended, by
   this prompt and unequivocal act of justice, at once to sustain the
   hearts of these gentlemen, under their severe trials, and to make it
   manifest to all men, that, notwithstanding that attempt, they continued
   to repose in them an undiminished confidence. In his reply, bearing
   date Aug. 27, 1752, Mr. Edwards, after returning his thanks to those
   gentlemen, for this very decisive expression of their favourable
   opinion, made to their secretary his regular report of the state of the
   mission.

   After observing, that the people of the town, both English and Indians,
   notwithstanding repeated and vigorous efforts to break up their union,
   and, particularly, to excite a disaffection in them towards their
   ministers, were all happily united in opinion and affection, except one
   individual and his family; he mentions the alliance of the resident
   trustee with his family, which took place soon after the arrival at
   Stockbridge of his nephew from Connecticut. The latter gentleman soon
   called on Mr. Edwards, and, after alluding to the fact, that he was
   opposed to the appointment of his cousin, as superintendent of the
   female boarding-school, insisted, as a member of the society in London,
   and of the board of commissioners, on knowing his reasons, and, at the
   same time, offered to be the instrument of settling the differences
   subsisting at Stockbridge. Mr. Edwards, preferring to answer this
   demand by letter, declined to make a representation of the case before
   him, but offered to join with him, in an earnest representation to the
   board of commissioners, that they would appoint a committee, to come on
   the spot, to inquire into the existing difficulties; on the ground,
   that it was more proper to have such a committee, as judges or
   mediators, than an individual, who was very nearly related to the
   family chiefly interested in these contentions; and proposed, that the
   commissioners, by their committee, should be desired to look into the
   management of the affairs at Stockbridge, from the beginning, by all
   the living inhabitants and residents of the town, who had had any hand
   in them, in any respect; declaring himself ready to open himself with
   freedom before such a committee.--His correspondent, in reply, declined
   this proposal, reasserted his right to know the objections to the
   proposed teacher of the boarding-school, and intimated the regret which
   be should feel, if obliged to inform the society in London of the
   existing state of things at Stockbridge.--Mr. Edwards, in his answer,
   insisted anew on his former proposal, of referring the case to the
   commissioners, declared himself not satisfied, that his correspondent,
   acting singly, had authority to demand the reasons of his judgment, as
   to the teacher of the female school, whatever the society in London, or
   their commissioners in Boston, acting as a body, might have; and
   concluded, by referring himself again to the commissioners, who were
   his constituents, and who had, a little before, informed him, that they
   looked upon their agents as accountable to them only.

   The arrival of this gentleman, and the assurances be gave them or his
   influence with the society in London, revived for a time the drooping
   courage of his friends, particularly of the resident trustee, and of
   the agent of Mr. Hollis, who had, just before that event, resolved on
   removing from Stockbridge.--Having thus alluded to the mischievous
   consequences growing out of this unhappy state of things, Mr. Edwards
   proceeds,--"Thus things go on, in a state of confusion, of which those
   at a distance can scarcely have any idea. In the mean time, the affair
   of the Six Nations is languishing to death. The affair of the Mohawks
   is, I fear, past recovery, and in a manner dead. They seem to be
   discouraged, are most of them gone, and I do not expect will come up
   again; unless it be to get presents, and satisfy their hunger, in the
   present time of great scarcity in their own country. They have
   apparently very much given up the idea of coming hither for
   instruction. The Onohquaugas have not been here so long, to be
   discouraged by our management. But if things go on in this manner, it
   may be expected that they will be discouraged also. The management of
   things has a great while been in wrong hands. They ought to be
   conducted exclusively by the commissioners, who have had the care of
   Stockbridge affairs; but here are others, who seem to aim to engross
   all to themselves, to be indefatigably active in prosecuting their
   particular designs, and impatient of every thing that stands in their
   way.

   Very much depends on the appointment or a teacher of the female school.
   If that affair is settled to their minds, their influence here is well
   established. They are sensible that affairs depend very much on this
   simple point, and therefore this is the point they drive at with all
   their might. The wisdom of the commissioners will easily discover, that
   this is the juncture, in which the foundation is to be laid of the
   future state of things in Stockbridge; of their prosperity or
   adversity; and perhaps with no opportunity of future redress. I look
   upon myself as called upon to speak somewhat freely at such a juncture;
   and therefore I hope my so doing will be candidly interpreted by the
   commissioners. I do not think that our affairs will ever prosper, if
   they must be under the bands of the resident trustee and his friends."

   In the month of September, Mr. Edwards went into New Jersey, and, on
   the 28th of that month, preached a sermon from James ii. 19. before the
   synod at Newark, entitled, "True Grace distinguished from the
   Experience of Devils," which was published at their request. It is a
   clear, condensed, and powerful exhibition of the differences between
   real religion and its counterfeits, and will be found eminently useful,
   as a criterion of Christian character.

   In the unhappy controversy, between Mr. Woodbridge and his opponent,
   perhaps no one circumstance had been more mortifying to the latter, or
   had had a more direct tendency to defeat all ins measures, than the
   fact, that the white inhabitants of the town, (his own immediate family
   connexions excepted,) as well as the Indians of both nations, were, to
   a man, opposed to himself, and friendly to his antagonist. This
   rendered his daily life uncomfortable; it discouraged every attempt to
   forward his plans at the public meetings of the town; and when any
   point in controversy was to be decided, or any measure attempted, at
   Boston, he found that Mr. Woodbridge had a host of substantial
   witnesses on the spot, who gave in their testimony without fear. In
   this way, hitherto, every important design had been frustrated.

   The winter, that was approaching, was regarded by both parties as a
   most important and interesting period; during which, in all
   probability, the affairs of the mission, and of the town, would be
   brought to a crisis. Those opposed to Mr. Woodbridge, were not
   ignorant, that, if Mr. Edwards were continued as the missionary at
   Stockbridge, such was his influence at Boston, and his general weight
   of character, there was too much probability, that Mr. Woodbridge would
   be continued the school-master of the Housatonnucks, and Mr. Hawley of
   the Iroquois. In that case, there was but little chance of the female
   school being placed in the desired hands; if that faded, the
   stewardship of all the schools would fail; and then the whole system of
   measures, apparently so happily conceived, would be defeated. But if
   Mr. Edwards could be removed from Stockbridge, the removal of Mr.
   Woodbridge would be attended with less difficulty; that of Mr. Hawley,
   a young man, would follow of course, which would make way for the son
   of the resident trustee: these changes would almost necessarily insure
   the female school, as well as the stewardship and agency, in the
   family; and then the other objects in view could scarcely fail to be
   accomplished. As so much depended on the fact, whether Mr. Edwards was
   continued at Stockbridge, or not; there seemed to be held out, to minds
   capable of being influenced by them, very strong inducements to make
   one vigorous effort to effect his removal. This was accordingly
   resolved on, and, by some of the persons concerned, incautiously
   proclaimed.

   One of the steps taken to accomplish this so desired object, is
   mentioned in the following letter. Whether it was one of the measures
   concerted, or was the self-suggested plan of the individual, who
   attempted to execute it, does not certainly appear. Could he have
   succeeded, could the English inhabitants of the town have been changed,
   and a new set of inhabitants have been introduced, all of them his
   adherents; no event probably would have so much furthered the objects
   in view. The almost utter impossibility of its success, connected with
   its total and immediate discomfiture, rendered the attempt supremely
   ridiculous, and covered the individual making it, and his party, with
   confusion.

   "To Andrew Oliver, Esquire.

   Stock bridge, Oct. 1752.

   sir,

   Since my letter of Aug. 27, various things have occurred among us, of
   which it may not be improper to inform you. It seems as though there
   was a resolution, in the people on the hill, to carry their schemes
   into effect, though the earth should be removed for it. The opponent of
   Mr. Woodbridge has lately made a vigorous and vehement attempt,
   suddenly to change the English inhabitants of the town, by buying out,
   at once, the old inhabitants in general. To thus end, he arose very
   early in the morning, and went out before day, and called some of them
   out of their beds, offering to buy their farms. In this manner, he went
   from one to another, until he had been to almost all the inhabitants in
   that forenoon; offering very high prices, and cash in hand; vehemently
   pressing that the bargain should be immediately closed, and the
   writings drawn, and the affair completed, without delay; urging it most
   pressingly on each one. One of the inhabitants completed and finished
   the affair with him. Some others came to a verbal agreement, on
   conditions. But, notwithstanding the great and extraordinary vigour,
   with which this matter was carried on, yet the design was discovered,
   before it could be completed, and so disappointed; and then his
   friends, and he himself too, were glad to lay this conduct to
   distraction.

   A scheme is plainly laid, entirely to thrust Mr. Hawley out of the
   schools; let his friends and constituents do what they will to prevent
   it. The resident trustee has told Mr. Hawley, that it is the design of
   Mr. Hollis's former school-master, to set up a distinct independent
   school, under another teacher, whom he shall provide to keep the school
   on Mr. Hollis's behalf, and that he intends to take up all boys who
   come, to board them and clothe them well, better than heretofore.
   Probably he presumes, that the clothing and presents that will be
   offered, will tempt them all to subject themselves to himself, rather
   than to Mr. Hawley.

   I have lately been a journey to Newark, in New Jersey, where I saw Mr.
   Hazzard, a merchant in New York, who told me that he, the last June,
   received and answered two bills from him, drawn on Mr. Hollis, of £80
   sterling apiece. By this, it appears, that he has drawn full pay from
   Mr. Hollis, for the two years past, as much as he had in the preceding
   years, without clothing the boys in the least, imposing on Mr. Hollis,
   in an almost unprecedented manner, considering the greatness of the
   injury, the plainness of the case, and the obstinacy with which he has
   proceeded to such a step, after this part of the country had been, so
   long a time, so full of objections to his being here at Mr. Hollis's
   expense, without being engaged in the business to which Mr. Hollis
   appointed him, and for which he agreed to send him his money. In the
   beginning of the year before last, he professedly threw up Mr. Hollis's
   school, and dismissed all his boys, supposing that Mr. Hollis was dead;
   it having been long since he heard any thing from him. In what he did
   afterwards, in teaching the Mohawks, he did not pretend to proceed on
   Mr. Hollis's plan, or with any expectation of any pay from him. And he
   never pretended to take up any boys on Mr. Hollis's account, till about
   a year afterwards, viz. The last autumn after he had received a letter
   from Mr. Hollis; and it is but little he has done since. The charge he
   has been at, in clothing the boys, is but a trifle. He has never really
   kept any school at all, though sometimes he has pretended to teach some
   children to read, in a most confused manner. But, through a great part
   of the last year, he has not done even that. He has been absent, at
   least one third of the year, and the greater part of the time that he
   has been here, he has not had so much as the shadow of a school, nor
   been in any business whatsoever.

   I some time ago wrote a letter to Mr. Hollis, giving him some account
   of the state of his affairs here, accompanied with letters from some of
   the inhabitants of Stockbridge. I desired Mr. Prince to show those
   letters to some of the commissioners.

   One of the trustees has lately been here, but staid only two or three
   days. While he was here, there was little else but altercation, and
   warm contest, between his colleague and him, concerning the mode of
   managing affairs, and concerning the female school. And he is gone away
   entirely discouraged, with a resolution to have no more to do with the
   affairs of Stockbridge, which, he says, are blown up already. If it be
   not altogether so, yet I think it is high time the honourable
   commissioners had full information of the state of things among us. We
   have long waited for an opportunity to send, but none has presented.
   Mr. Hawley meets with many things to discourage him; his circumstances
   here are very difficult and precarious; he greatly needs the advice of
   the commissioners; he has a strong inclination to see the commissioners
   himself, and to confer with them, freely and fully, about the affairs
   in which he is concerned, and it appears to me necessary that he should
   do this, both for the public interest, and on his own account. He is
   kept out of business, and probably very good business, in which he
   might settle elsewhere, and I do not wonder that he is uneasy, and
   thinks it necessary to talk with the commissioners. We have had
   thoughts of his staying, until Mr. Woodbridge went to the general
   court, the necessity of whose going appears more and more apparent; but
   the court being prorogued, and we not knowing for how long a time and
   the important matters of intelligence to the commissioners, and to Mr.
   Hollis, having been so long delayed for want of opportunity, which so
   much require their speedy notice; our calamities also continuing, and
   growing worse and worse; and it being now a time, wherein most of the
   Mohawks are gone, and so a time in which Mr. Hawley can be absent, with
   far less inconvenience than some time hence, when many of the Mohawks
   are expected down, in consequence of the want of provisions in their
   own country; and considering that probably the commissioners might have
   a more free opportunity to hear and consider Mr. Hawley's
   representations now, than in the time of the sitting of the court, and
   likewise, that it might be some convenience to the commissioners, to
   have notice of the state of our affairs, so as to ripen their thoughts
   with regard to them, before the sitting of the court;--I say,
   considering these things, it was thought advisable for Mr. Hawley not
   to delay his journey. That the Most High would give wisdom, and
   counsel, and success to the commissioners, in their consultations on
   our affairs, and direct and aid those who are here employed, in so
   important a service, is the humble and earnest prayer of

   Their most obedient servant,

   jonathan edwards

   From these scenes of unsuccessful intrigue, and disappointed avarice,
   all notice of which, could the life of Mr. Edwards, as a missionary at
   Stockbridge, have been fairly exhibited without thus detailing them,
   would have been most gladly dispensed with; the reader will turn with
   pleasure, even for a short interval, to communications prompted by
   friendship, and relating to the more general interests of the church.

   Some years before this, through the kindness of Mr. Erskine, he had
   received the writings of some of the more considerable Arminian
   writers, particularly of Dr. Taylor of Norwich, and Dr. Turnbull;
   which, with of Dr. Whitby and those of Chubb and Tindal, already in his
   possession, furnished him with the means of examining their whole
   system. This examination he commenced, in form, a considerable time
   before he left Northampton; and in the summer of 1747, as we have
   already seen, he announced, in his first letter to Mr. Erskine, the
   general plan of a Discourse on the Freedom of the Will, and Moral
   Agency. This subject drew his attention, even while he was a member of
   college; and, from an investigation of the nature of Power, to which he
   was led by reading the article, in the Essay on the Human
   Understanding, relating to that subject, he derived the all-important
   principle, that men, in a proper sense, may be said to have power to
   abstain from sin, and to repent, to do good works, and to live holily;
   because it depends on their will.--After Mr. Edwards had thus announced
   his plan, his attention was necessarily diverted from its execution,
   during his residence in Northampton, by the controversy respecting the
   Qualifications for Communion, his Treatise on that subject, and the
   many perplexities and embarrassments, which terminated in his
   dismission. His removal from Northampton, the establishment of his
   family at Stockbridge, the Answer to Mr. Williams and his ordinary
   duties as minister and missionary, and the unhappy controversy
   subsisting respecting the mission, engrossed his whole time, until
   July, 1752. In August following, he entered upon the work, and pursued
   it a short time; but the violence of that controversy, and the attempts
   of the party hostile to Mr. Woodbridge, to force him from Stockbridge,
   compelled him to intermit his labours. Some of these circumstances are
   alluded to, in the following letter to Mr. Erskine, in which the reader
   will also find some interesting details, relative to the Dutch church,
   and to the state of religion in New Jersey.

   Stockbridge, November 23, N. S. 1752.

   rev. and dear brother,

   In August last I wrote to you, and sent away the letter, (with letters
   to some of my other correspondents,) to Boston, to be conveyed to
   Scotland. Therein I acknowledged the receipt of two letters from you,
   one of July 17,1751: another of Feb. 11,1752; with the pamphlets, put
   with the last letter, and now acknowledge the receipt of another letter
   from you of May 14, 1752; and the pamphlets you sent with the last. The
   letter I received the latter end of September: the pamphlets I did not
   receive till very lately: they were forgotten by Mr. Prince. The
   Treatise against Fanaticism I shall have no benefit from, because I am
   not acquainted with the French language. What the Jewish convert has
   published of his conversion, &c is very agreeable. And I now heartily
   thank you for this letter and packet. I am very glad to see what you
   write concerning the state of religion in the Netherlands. But I
   believe there is more of a mixture of what is bad with the good, that
   appears in that land, than Mr. Kennedy, and many other ministers there,
   are aware of, and that they will find, that the consequences of their
   not carefully and critically distinguishing between the good and bad,
   and guarding with the utmost caution and diligence against the latter,
   will prove worse than they now conceive of. By your account, it is now
   exactly with Mr. Kennedy, as it was with many pious ministers in
   America, in the time of the great religious moving here. They looked
   upon critical inquiries, into the difference between true grace and its
   counterfeits, or at least a being very busy in such inquiries, and
   spending time in them, to be impertinent and unseasonable; tending
   rather to damp the work of the Spirit of God, than promote it;
   diverting their own minds, and the minds of others, as they supposed,
   from that to which God, at such an extraordinary time, did loudly call
   them more especially to attend. The cry was, O, there is no danger, if
   we are but lively in religion, and full of God's Spirit, and live by
   faith, of being misled! If we do but follow God, there is no danger if
   being led wrong! 'Tis the cold, carnal and lifeless, that are most
   likely to be blind, and walk in darkness. Let us press forward, and not
   stay and hinder, the good work, by standing and spending time in these
   criticisms and carnal reasoning! &c. &c. This was the language of many,
   till they ran on deep into the wilderness, and were taught by the
   briers and thorns of the wilderness. However, tis no wonder that
   divines in Europe will not lay very much weight on the admonitions they
   receive from so obscure a part of the world. Other parts of the church
   of God must be taught as we have been; and when they see and feel, then
   they will believe. Not that I apprehend there is in any measure so much
   enthusiasm and disorder, mixed with the work in Holland, as was in many
   parts of America, in the time of the last revival of religion here. But
   yet I believe the work must be more pure, and the people more
   thoroughly guarded from his wiles, who beguiled Eve through his
   subtlety, and who corrupts the minds of zealous people from the
   simplicity that is in Christ, before the work goes on to a general
   conquest, and is maintained in its power and glory for a great length
   of time. But God will have his own way --Who, being his counsellor,
   hath taught Him?' We must expect confusion and uproar, before we have
   that abundance of peace and truth, which the Scriptures speak of: many
   must run to and fro, and knowledge will be increased.

   The Dutch ministers in America, whom you mention, whom I have
   acquaintance with, are some of the younger ministers, and such as were
   born in America, though several of them have had part of their
   education in Holland. I have not acquaintance enough with them, to know
   their sentiments, particularly, about those corrupt mixtures above
   mentioned, and the care which is to be used in guarding against them.
   However, tis not very likely, if some of them should write to their
   brethren in Holland, that their letters would have more influence upon
   them than letters from you, and some others of the ministers of
   Scotland. Nevertheless, there is a prospect, that there will in time be
   very happy effects of the growing acquaintance and union, there is
   between a very considerable number of very hopeful and pious Dutch
   ministers, in the province of New York and New Jersey, and many English
   and Scotch ministers in America. The number of well disposed Dutch
   ministers in these provinces, has of late remarkably increased; so that
   I think when they meet together in their Coetus, they make the major
   part. Some of the elder ministers seem to be of quite contrary
   sentiment and disposition, not appearing friendly, as the others, to
   what they esteem the power of religion, nor approving of awakening,
   searching, strict, and experimental preaching; which has occasioned
   various contests among them. However, the stricter sort being the
   prevailing part, are like to carry the day.

   The Dutch churches in these provinces have hitherto been so dependent
   on the Classis in Holland, that, whenever any among them have been
   educated for the ministry, and any churches have been desirous of their
   administrations, they could not receive their orders on this side of
   the water, but have been obliged to go to Holland for ordination; which
   has been a great encumbrance, that has attended the settlement of
   ministers among them, and has undoubtedly been one occasion of such
   multitudes of the Dutch being wholly without ministers. Application was
   made not long since, through the influence of the forementioned serious
   young ministers, (as I take it,) by the Coetus here, to the Classis in
   Holland, for their consent, that they might unite themselves to the
   Presbyterian synod of New York, which now consists of English and
   Scotch. But the success of their application was prevented, by a letter
   written by one of the elder ministers, remonstrating against it, very
   falsely representing the New York synod, as no proper Presbyterian
   synod, but rather a company of independents. On which, the Classis of
   Holland advised them, by no means, to unite themselves with that synod.

   The last September I went a journey into New Jersey, and had
   opportunity, in my journey, of seeing some of these young ministers,
   and conversing with them on the subject They seem resolved, by some
   means or other, to disengage themselves and their churches from the
   forementioned great encumbrance, of being obliged to cross the ocean
   for the ordination of every minister. I was much gratified, during the
   little opportunity I had, to observe the agreeable disposition of these
   ministers.

   There were, also, many other things I had opportunity to observe in
   those parts, which were very agreeable. I was there, at the time of the
   public commencement in the college, and the time of the meeting of the
   trustees of the college, the time of the meeting of the correspondents
   of the society for propagating Christian knowledge, and the time of the
   meeting of the New York synod; so that I had opportunity to converse
   with ministers from Long Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
   and Virginia The college is in flourishing circumstances; increases
   apace; and is happily regulated. The trustees seem engaged to their
   utmost to promote learning, virtue, and true religion, in it; and none
   more so than Governor Belcher; who is the president of the trustees,
   and was at the commencement, and at the trustees' meeting. But they
   very much want further supplies, for the convenient support of the
   college. I had considerable opportunity to converse with Governor
   Belcher, and was several times at his house at Elizabeth-town. He
   labours under many of the infirmities of age, but savours much of a
   spirit of religion, and seems very desirous of doing all the good he
   can, while he lives. The New York synod is in flourishing
   circumstances: much more so than the Philadelphia synod. They have the
   greatest body of ministers now, and increase much faster than the
   other. They are in higher credit with the people in almost all parts,
   and are chiefly sought to for supplies by distant congregations.

   With respect to the proceedings of the correspondents, they have
   dismissed Mr. Horton from his mission on Long-Island, and he is about
   to settle in a congregation in New Jersey. He was dismissed by reason
   of his very much failing of employment: many of the clans of Indians,
   he used to preach to, having dwindled away, by death or dispersion, and
   there being but little prospect of success among others that remain,
   and some being so situated, that they may conveniently be taken care of
   by other ministers. The correspondents have it in their view to employ
   the money, by which he used to be supported, to support a mission among
   the Six Nations; after they have found a suitable person to undertake
   the business of such a mission, and he is fitted for it by learning the
   language. They used endeavours to obtain a suitable person for the
   business, in New Jersey; but, meeting with no success, they voted to
   empower Mr. Bellamy, Mr. Hopkins of Sheffield, and myself; to procure a
   suitable person, if we can find such an one, in New England, for the
   present, to come and live at Stockbridge, to be here learning the
   Mohawk language with Mr. Hawley, our school-master for the Mohawk; to
   fit him for the mission. Persons proper to be employed, and such as may
   be obtained, are very scarce; and tis doubtful whether we shall be able
   to obtain one.

   There is a very dark cloud, that at present attends the affair,
   relating to the Indians at Stockbridge, occasioned very much by one of
   the agents of the province, (who lives at Stockbridge,) pursuing
   measures very contrary to the measures of the commissioners of the
   society in London. The opposition is maintained, not with a small
   degree of stiffness and resolution; and the contest is become so great
   that it has brought things into very great confusion. This gentleman is
   a man of some role; and his wife's relations earnestly engage with him,
   and many of them are persons of considerable figure in the country. The
   commissioners all very much dislike his conduct. This contest occasions
   no misunderstandings among the people in Stockbridge, in general: all,
   excepting those nearly related to the family, both English and Indians,
   are happily united to me and my family. It would be very tedious for me
   to write, and for you to read, all the particulars of this
   uncomfortable affair. The commissioners are exerting themselves to
   relieve us of this calamity; and it is probable they will be
   successful.

   I thank you for the account you give of some valuable books published:
   I desire you would continue to favour me in this manner. I began the
   last August to write a little on the Arminian controversy, but was soon
   broke off: and such have been my extraordinary avocations and
   hinderances, that I have not had time to set pen to paper about this
   matter since. But I hope that God, in his providence, will favour me
   with opportunity to prosecute the design. And I desire your prayers,
   that God would assist me in it, and in all the work I am called to, and
   enable me to conduct my life to his glory and acceptance, under all
   difficulties and trials.

   My wife joins with me in most hearty and affectionate salutation to
   you, and Mrs. Erskine.

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate and obliged

   Brother and servant.

   jonathan edwards."

   "P. S. I propose with this, to send you Mr. Hobart's second address to
   the members of the episcopal church in New England, and my answer to
   Mr. Williams, which I would desire you to give your neighbours, my
   correspondents, opportunity to read, if they desire it."

   The correspondence of Mr. Edwards and the Rev. Thomas Gillespie of
   Carnock, in Scotland, has already interested the attention of the
   reader. This gentleman was born in 1708, pursued his theological
   studies under Dr. Doddridge, and was ordained and settled in the parish
   of Carnock, in 1741. He was a faithful and indefatigable minister.--"I
   never (says Dr. Erskine, who was several months his stated hearer at
   Carnock, and often heard his occasional efforts in other places) sat
   under a minister better calculated to awaken the thoughtless and
   secure, to caution convinced sinners against what would stifle their
   convictions and prevent their issuing in conversion, and to point out
   the differences between vital Christianity and specious, counterfeit
   appearances of it."--His popularity and usefulness were very great, not
   only in his own parish, but in Edinburgh and the west of Scotland. In
   1752 an event occurred, which forms an era in the ecclesiastical
   history of that country. The Rev. Andrew Richardson of Broughton was
   presented to the charge of the town of Inverkeithing, by the lay patron
   of the parish--the individual who had that living in his gift.--The
   inhabitants refused to receive him as their minister. The case was
   appealed from court to court, until the General Assembly, in May, 1752,
   directed the presbytery of Dunfermline to admit Mr. R. to the charge of
   Inverkeithing, and appointed Mr. Gillespie to preside on the occasion.
   Mr. Gillespie, and several others in the presbytery, had conscientious
   scruples on the subject of lay patronage, and fully believed that no
   one, on the principles of the gospel, could have any right to place a
   clergyman over a parish but the people themselves [53] . He therefore,
   and those who thought with him, declined obedience to the mandate: and
   while they were subjected to various ecclesiastical censures, he was
   deposed from the ministry, and removed from the parish of Carnock. When
   called to the bar to receive his sentence, he replied," Moderator, I
   receive this sentence of the General Assembly with reverence and awe.
   But I rejoice that it is given to me, on the behalf of Christ, not only
   to believe on his name, but to suffer for his sake"

   For about a year he preached to his people out of doors, hoping that
   the sentence would be reversed; at the close of which, a church having
   been purchased for him in Dunfermline, a short distance from Carnock,
   he preached there, as an independent, about six years, unconnected with
   any associate in the ministry. In 1758 he united with the Rev. Thomas
   Boston, Jr., and formed a new establishment, called, The Presbytery of
   Relief; to which some dissenting ministers of England soon acceded. The
   congregations at present connected with them, and known, as an
   ecclesiastical body, by the name of the relief, are 65 in number, are
   found in all the principal towns, and many of the country parishes, of
   Scotland, and are computed to consist of towards 60,000 individuals
   [54] . They provide ministers for the inhabitants of those parishes,
   which do not submit to ministers introduced by lay patronage; and
   readily admit to ministerial and church communion, evangelical
   ministers of the church of Scotland, and of the church of England.

   The correspondents of Mr. Edwards had forwarded to him various
   publications relative to the deposition of Mr. Gillespie; and the views
   which he formed with regard to it, as expressed in the following
   letter, while they must, at the time, have been consoling and
   supporting to the excellent man to whom they were sent, will also
   probably harmonize with those of every reader of these pages.

   "To the Rev. Thomas Gillespie, Carnock.

   Stockbridge, Nov. 24, 1752.

   rev. and dear brother,

   In letters and pamphlets lately forwarded to me, by some of my
   correspondents in Scotland, I have received the affecting and
   surprising account of your deposition, for not assisting in the
   settlement of Mr. Richardson, at Inverkeithing. The circumstances of
   which affair seem to be such, as abundantly manifest your cause to be
   good; at the same time that they plainly show the persecuting spirit
   with which you have been proceeded against. It is strange, that a
   protestant church should condemn and depose one of her ministers, for
   conscientiously declining to act in a forced settlement of a minister,
   over a congregation that have not chosen him as their pastor, but are
   utterly averse to his administrations, at least as to a stated
   attendance upon them. It is to be wondered at, that such a church, at
   this time of day, after the cause of liberty in matters of conscience
   has been so abundantly defended, should arrogate to herself such a kind
   of authority over the consciences of both ministers and people, and use
   it in such a manner, by such severity, to establish that, which is not
   only contrary to the liberty of Christians, wherewith Christ has made
   them free; but so directly contrary to her own professed principles,
   acts, and resolutions, entered on public record The several steps of
   this proceeding, and some singular measures taken, and the hastiness
   and vehemence of the proceeding, are such, as savour very strongly of
   the very spirit of persecution, and must be greatly to the dishonour of
   the church of Scotland; and are such, as will naturally engage the
   friends of God's people, abroad in the world, in your favour, as
   suffering very injuriously. It is wonderful, that a church, which has
   itself suffered so much by persecution, should be guilty of so much
   persecution. This proceeding gives reason to suspect, that the church
   of Scotland, which was once so famous, is not what it once was. It
   appears probable to me, at this distance, that there is something else
   at the bottom, besides a zeal to uphold the authority of the church.
   Perhaps many of the clergy of the church of Scotland have their minds
   secretly infected with those lax principles of the new divinity, and
   have imbibed the liberal doctrines, as they are accounted, which are so
   much in vogue at the present day, and so contrary to the strict,
   mysterious; spiritual, soul-humbling principles of our forefathers. I
   have observed, that these modern fashionable opinions, however called
   noble and liberal, are commonly attended, not only with a haughty
   contempt, but an inward malignant bitterness of heart, towards all the
   zealous professors and defenders of the contrary spiritual principles,
   that do so nearly concern the vitals of religion, and the power of
   experimental godliness. This, be sure, has been the case in this land.
   I have known many gentlemen, (especially in the ministry,) tainted with
   these liberal principles; who, though none seem to be such warm
   advocates as they, for liberty and freedom of thought, or condemn a
   narrow and persecuting spirit so much as they; yet, in the course of
   things, have made it manifest, that they themselves had no small share
   of a persecuting spirit. They were, indeed, against any body's
   restraining their liberties, and pretending to control them in their
   thinking and professing as they please; and that is what they mean,
   truly, when they plead for liberty. But they have that inward enmity of
   spirit towards those others mentioned, that, if they see an opportunity
   to persecute them under some good cloak, and with some false pretext,
   they will eagerly embrace it, and proceed with great severity and
   vehemence. Thus far, perhaps, if the truth were known, it would appear,
   that some of your most strenuous persecutors hate you much more for
   something else, than they do for your not obeying the orders of the
   general assembly. I do not pretend to know how the case is. I only
   speak from what I have seen and found, here in America, in cases
   somewhat similar. However, it is beyond doubt, that this proceeding
   will stand on the records of future time, for the lasting reproach of
   your persecutors; and your conduct, for which you have suffered, will
   be to your lasting honour in the church of God. And what is much more,
   that, which has been condemned in you by man, and for which you have
   suffered from him, is doubtless approved by God, and I trust you will
   have a glorious reward from him. For the cause you suffer in, is the
   cause of God; and if God be for us, who can be against us? If he
   justifies, what need we care who condemns? Not only is the mercy of
   God, dear brother, manifested, in its being granted you to suffer for
   his sake, but his mercy is to be taken notice of, in many of the
   circumstances of this suffering. Particularly, that he has excited so
   many to appear for you: that you had the major part of the presbytery,
   which you belong to, with you in the affair, though God has honoured
   you above all the rest, in calling you to suffer for his name: that the
   major part of the commission of the General Assembly did in effect
   approve of the conduct of the presbytery, judging it no censurable
   fault: that no greater part of the Assembly had a hand in your
   deposition: that so many of God's, people have, on this occasion, very
   boldly appeared to befriend you, as suffering in a righteous cause,
   openly condemning the conduct of your most bitter prosecutors, and
   testifying an abhorrence of their conduct: and that many have appeared,
   liberally to contribute to your outward support; so that, by what I
   understand, you are likely to be no loser in that respect; by which,
   your enemies will, perhaps, be entirely disappointed. And, above all,
   that you have been enabled, through the whole of this affair, to
   conduct yourself with so much Christian meekness, decency, humility,
   proper deference to authority, and composure and fortitude of mind;
   which is an evident token that God will appear for you, and also, that
   he will appear against your enemies. When I received your kind letter,
   soon after my dismission from Northampton, so full of expressions of
   sympathy towards me under what I suffered, I little thought of your
   being brought so soon under sufferings so similar. But, seeing God has
   so ordered it in his providence, my prayer and hope is, that he would
   abundantly reward your sympathy in my case. 'Blessed are the merciful,
   for they shall obtain mercy.''

   As to myself, I still meet with difficulties in my new station, which
   arrive partly from private views (as it is to be feared) of some
   particular persons of some note and distinction, who are concerned with
   the affair of the Mohawks here, and partly from the same spirit and the
   same persons, and others nearly related to them, who fomented the
   contention with me at Northampton. However, all the people, both
   Indians and English, except the very few of the above-mentioned
   connexion, are firmly united to me: and the commissioners in Boston,
   who are my constituents, and from whom I have my support, are
   altogether on my side; and are endeavouring to the utmost to remove the
   difficulties that attend our affairs, by which the cause of religion
   here, especially among the Mohawks, suffers much more than I do, or am
   like to do, in my personal and temporal interests. These difficulties
   which have arisen, have, indeed, almost brought the Mohawk affair to
   ruin, which the last year was attended with so glorious a prospect It
   would be very tedious to relate the particulars of this unhappy affair.
   I think that God, by these sufferings, calls me to expect no other than
   to meet with difficulties and trials while in this world. And what am I
   better than my fathers, that I should expect to fare better in the
   world, than the generality of Christ's followers in all past
   generations. May all our trials be for our justification, and our being
   more and more meet for our Master's use, and prepared to enter into the
   joy of our Lord, in a world where all tears shall be wiped from the
   eyes of God's people. Let us, dear Sir, earnestly pray one for another,
   that it may be thus with us; and that, however we may be called to
   labour and to suffer, we may see peace on God's Israel, and hereafter
   eternally glory and triumph with his inheritance. God has of late
   mercifully preserved my wife and youngest daughter, in time of very
   sore and dangerous sickness, and restored them again. My eldest
   daughter has also been sick, and is restored in a considerable degree.

   The Northampton people remain in sorrowful circumstances, destitute of
   a settled minister, and without any prospect of a settlement; having
   met with many disappointments. But all don't as yet seem to be
   effectual, to bring them to a suitable temper of mind. I much desire to
   hear from you, and to be informed of your present circumstances.

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate brother in the gospel,

   brother in the gospel,

   jonathan edwards."

   With the preceding letter was sent the following to Mr. M'Culloch.

   "Stockbridge, Nov 24, 1752.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I thank you for your letter of March 3, 1752, which I received this
   fall. I thank you for your friendly and instructive observations, on
   God's dealings with me and my family. Though God's dispensations
   towards me, have been attended with some distinguishing trials, yet the
   end of the Lord has been very gracious. He has ever manifested himself
   very pitiful and of tender mercy, in the midst of difficulties we have
   met with, in merciful circumstances with which they have been attended,
   and also in the event of them. Our circumstances, here at Stockbridge,
   are in many respects comfortable. We here live in peace and friendship,
   with the generality of the people. But we are not without our
   difficulties and troubles here. The Indian affair, which the last year
   was attended with so pleasing and glorious a prospect, has since been
   unspeakably embarrassed, through the particular schemes of certain
   individuals, who are opposed, in their counsels and measures, to the
   commissioners of the Society in London, and are, to their utmost,
   striving to accomplish their designs in opposition to them; and in this
   great contest I am looked on as a person not a little obnoxious. They
   belong to a family of some note, who vigorously abetted and set forward
   my opposers at Northampton, and were a chief occasion of my removal
   from that town; to whom my settlement at Stockbridge was very grievous;
   who now take occasion to exert themselves to the utmost to weaken my
   interest and influence: and I have all reason to think, would, if it
   were possible, undermine me, and procure my removal far hence. Many
   endeavours have been used to disaffect my people towards me, but all in
   vain. They are all firmly united to me, excepting the forementioned
   family. Endeavours have been used, also, to disaffect some of the
   commissioners; but wholly in vain. They seem to have their eyes very
   wide open, as to their particular designs and schemes, and the true
   spring of their opposition. We hope for an end of this lamentable
   contest before long. But its effects hitherto have been very sorrowful,
   especially with regard to the Mohawks. Some other things have happened,
   which have much prejudiced the cause of religion among the Indians; and
   among other things, the discovery of the famous Tartarian root,
   described in Chambers's dictionary, called Ginseng, which was found in
   our woods the last summer, and is since found in the woods in many of
   these western parts of New England, and in the country of the Six
   Nations. The traders in Albany have been eager to purchase all that
   they could, of this root, to send to England; where they make great
   profit by it. This has occasioned our Indians of all sorts, young and
   old, to spend abundance of time in wandering about the woods, and
   sometimes to a great distance, in the neglect of public worship, and of
   their husbandry; and also in going much to Albany, to sell their roots,
   (which proves worse to them than their going into the woods,) where
   they are always much in the way of temptation and drunkenness;
   especially when they have money in their pockets. The consequence has
   been that many of them have laid out their money, which they have got
   for their roots of Ginseng, for rum; wherewith they have intoxicated
   themselves.

   God has been very gracious to my family of late, when some of them have
   been visited with sore sickness. My wife has lately been very
   dangerously sick, so as to be brought to the very brink of the grave.
   She had very little expectation of life, but seemed to be assisted to
   an unweaned resignation to the Divine will, and an unshaken peace and
   joy in God, in the expectation of a speedy departure. But God was
   pleased to preserve her, and mercifully to restore her to a pretty good
   state of health. My youngest daughter also, who has been a very infirm
   child, was brought nigh unto death by a sore fit of sickness, and is
   now also restored to her former state. My daughter Parsons, my eldest
   daughter, who with her husband has removed from Northampton, and dwells
   in Stockbridge, has also very lately been very sick, but is in a
   considerable measure restored. My daughter Esther's marriage with
   President Burr, of Newark, seems to be very much to the satisfaction of
   ministers and people in those parts, and also of our friends in Boston,
   and other parts of New England.

   As to the state of religion in America, I have but little to write that
   is comfortable; but there seems to be better appearances in some other
   colonies than in New England. When I was lately in New Jersey, in the
   time of the synod there, I was informed of some small movings and
   revivals in some places on Long-Island and New Jersey. I there had the
   comfort of a short interview with Mr. Davies of Virginia, and was much
   pleased with him and his conversation. He appears to be a man of very
   solid understanding, discreet in his behaviour, and polished and
   gentlemanly in his manners, as well as fervent and zealous in religion.
   He gave an account of the probability of the settlement of a Mr. Todd,
   a young man of good learning and of a pious disposition, in a part of
   Virginia near to him. Mr. Davies represented before the synod, the
   great necessities of the people in the back parts of Virginia, where
   multitudes were remarkably awakened and reformed several years ago, and
   ever since have been thirsting after the ordinances of God. The people
   are chiefly from Ireland, of Scotch extraction. The synod appointed two
   men to go down and preach among these people; viz. Mr. Henry, a
   Scotchman, who has lately taken a degree at New Jersey college, and Mr.
   Greenman, the young man who was educated at the charge of Mr. David
   Brainerd.

   The people of Northampton are in sorrowful circumstances, are still
   destitute of a minister, and have met with a long series of
   disappointments in their attempts for a resettlement of the ministry
   among them. My opposers have had warm contentions among themselves, Of
   late, they have been wholly destitute of anybody to preach steadily
   among them. They sometimes meet to read and pray among themselves, and
   at other times set travellers or transient persons to preach, that are
   hardly fit to be employed.

   My wife joins with me in most respectful salutations to you and yours.
   Desiring your prayers, that God would be with us in all our wanderings
   through the wilderness of this world,

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your most affectionate brother,

   In the labours of the gospel,

   jonathan edwards."

   The chagrin and mortification, and entire loss of influence and
   respect, consequent upon the indiscreet attempt to force Mr. Edwards
   from Stockbridge, by buying out all the English inhabitants, and upon
   its utter discomfiture, had, in its connexion with the infirmities of
   age, such an effect upon the individual who made it, that he was soon
   after induced to part with his property in that town, and remove to a
   distance. His children, though somewhat disheartened by so untoward an
   event, and now assured that if help came to them, it could not come
   from Stockbridge, appear however to have resolved, that they would not
   lose all their labour, and all their hope; without a struggle. The
   commissioners in Boston, of the Society in London, were now to a man
   firmly opposed to them, and resolved to resist them to the utmost. But
   their kinsman who was a member of the Society in London, was well
   acquainted with its board of directors, and had written to them in
   behalf of his cousin. He had also applied to Mr. Hollis, to secure to
   her husband the management of his benefactions. The latter gentleman
   also, and the brother of the former, had considerable influence at
   Boston, and this influence had now been exerted for a considerable
   period, to procure the removal of Mr. Edwards. At the opening of the
   general court, in the autumn, all the influence and all the efforts of
   the family, and its friends, were brought to bear on this one point;
   and representations most unfavourable to the character and
   qualifications of Mr. E. were made to many of the principal men of the
   province. The Annual Report of the resident trustee was drawn up with a
   direct and immediate reference to this subject, and was read to the
   legislature, when Mr. Edwards knew nothing of its contents, and when,
   being at the distance of one hundred and fifty miles, he of course
   could not at once answer it. Mr. Woodbridge, however, was on the spot,
   as were the honourable commissioners of the Society in London, and they
   made such counteracting statements, as the circumstances rendered
   proper. Of this Report we shall take notice further on.

   While Mr. Woodbridge was at Boston, he was informed, and that too most
   incautiously, by the son of his opponent, who went thither in company
   with his brother-in-law, the author of the Report, that the latter had
   solicited his Excellency, Sir William Pepperell, governor of the
   province, to write to England, and to use his influence, with the
   corporation in London, that Mr. Edwards might be removed from the
   office of missionary; and that Sir William had engaged to do it. On
   this information, coming so directly, Mr. Edwards felt himself bound,
   from a regard to his own reputation, and to the welfare of his family,
   to address Sir William on the subject; which he did in a letter,
   bearing date January 30, 1753 [55] . In this letter, after reciting the
   preceding facts, as his apology for writing it, and mentioning the
   great disadvantage under which he lay, in attempting to defend himself,
   at such a distance, when he did not know what had been said to his
   prejudice, he states, among other things, the following: That, since
   the revival of religion in 1734, the family, with which the writer of
   the Report was now connected, had discovered an unceasing hostility
   towards himself, and his own family, notwithstanding the best
   endeavours he could use to remove it; that they deeply engaged
   themselves in the controversy at Northampton, on the side of his
   opposers, upholding, directing, and animating them, in all their
   measures; that two of them, especially, had been the confidential
   advisers of the opposition, in procuring his dismission; that when his
   removal to Stockbridge was proposed, the whole family, there and
   elsewhere, opposed it, with great vehemence, though, when they saw an
   entire union and universal engagedness in all the rest of the
   inhabitants, both English and Indians, for his settlement there, and
   that there was no hope of preventing it, they appeared as though their
   minds were changed;--that the author of the Report, during the whole
   controversy at Northampton, in direct opposition to the family, with
   which he was now connected, had remained his zealous friend and
   advocate; that he warmly advocated his removal to Stockbridge, and
   expressed a strong desire of living under his ministry; (for the
   evidence of which facts, he refers Sir William to two of the most
   respectable gentlemen in the province;) that this confidential
   friendship lasted until his connexion with that family, and then was
   suddenly changed, first into secret, and afterwards into open
   opposition; that he had personally blamed him for preaching to the
   Mohawks, as intermeddling with what was none of his business, although
   Mr. E. produced the note of the commissioners, expressly desiring him
   to preach to the Mohawks, until a distinct missionary was appointed
   over them; that the reason, openly assigned for the very great
   resentment of the author of the Report, and that of his friends,
   against Mr. Edwards, was, his having opposed the appointment of the
   wife of that gentleman, as teacher of the female school, although he
   neither said nor did any thing respecting it, until his opinion was
   expressly desired in writing by the commissioners, and then, that he
   opposed it on the ground, that it was impossible for an individual, who
   had the care of two numerous families of children, to instruct and
   govern the children of an Indian school;--and that, as to his
   qualifications for the business of a missionary, his communicative
   faculty , &c which were now denied, he could only appeal to those, who
   had the best opportunity of judging, from their own
   experience,--particularly, to every man, woman, and child, in
   Stockbridge, that had any understanding, both English and Indians,
   except the families of the opponent of Mr. Woodbridge, and of the
   author of the Report. Mr. Edwards then adds, "Now, Sir, I humbly
   request, that, if you had resolved on endeavouring to have me removed
   from my present employment here, you would once more take the matter
   into your impartial consideration. And I would pray you to consider,
   Sir, what disadvantages I am under; not knowing what has been said of
   me in conversation; not knowing, therefore, the accusation, or what to
   answer to. The ruin of my usefulness, and the ruin of my family, which
   has greatly suffered in years past, for righteousness sake, are not
   indeed things of equal consideration with the public good. Yet,
   certainly, I should first have an equal, impartial, and candid hearing,
   before I am executed for the public good. I must leave the matter, dear
   Sir, to your justice and Christian prudence; committing the affair to
   Him, who knows all the injuries I have suffered, and how wrongfully I
   now suffer, and who is the Great Protector of the innocent and
   oppressed; beseeching him to guide you in your determination, and
   mercifully to order the end."

   In the month of February, 1753, the building erected for the
   instruction of the Mohawk boys, usually denominated the
   boarding-school, took fire in a way unknown, and, with considerable
   furniture in it, was reduced to ashes. Mr. Hawley had furnished a
   chamber in the building, and resided in it. By this calamity, he lost
   his clothing, books, and furniture. It was supposed, with some grounds,
   to have been set on fire by design; and its destruction was, for the
   time, a very serious interruption to the labours of Mr. Hawley.

   The Report of the Indian agent was read early in the session. It
   contained various insinuations and charges, of a general nature,
   against Mr. Edwards. Other charges were busily circulated among the
   members, with the hope of procuring his removal. But it was well
   understood, that Mr. Edwards was at a great distance, and had had no
   notice of these charges. He had likewise a character for integrity, too
   well established, to be shaken by general insinuations, or covert
   attacks. Mr. Woodbridge, and the commissioners, were also on the spot,
   and took care that the real state of things should be made known, and
   the conduct of Mr. Edwards adequately defended. So effectually and
   satisfactorily was this done, that, when Mr. Edwards received a copy of
   the Report by Mr. Woodbridge, he appears also to have been apprized, by
   his friends in Boston, that the design of his enemies, in this attack,
   had been completely frustrated. What these insinuations and charges
   were, we learn from his letter to the Speaker of the House of
   Representatives, written for the purpose of being communicated, if he
   thought necessary, to the legislature. It deserves here to be
   mentioned, as a singular and very kind dispensation of Providence, that
   the author of the Report had, some time before, addressed a letter to
   Mr. Edwards, while he was his friend, and when he hoped for his
   co-operation; particularly, in the appointment of his son as
   school-master to the Mohawks; in which he had either furnished the
   means of contradicting the statements made in the Report, or had
   expressly requested Mr. Edwards to do the very things, which he now
   complained of, and made the ground of complaint. Of this letter Mr.
   Edwards enclosed a copy; offering to forward the original, if desired,
   and, at the same time, to substantiate every part of his own statement,
   by numerous witnesses, of the most unexceptionable character.

   From his letter to the Speaker, it appears, that the writer of the
   Report charged him--with introducing Mr. Hawley into the school;--with
   introducing a master, in his absence, and when there was reason to
   expect his return;--with doing this, when he had been at the expense of
   a journey of his son of 260 miles, to procure Mr. Hawley as master of
   the boys;--with introducing Mr. Ashley, the interpreter, as assistant
   instructor;--and with opposing the appointment of his wife, as teacher
   of the female school;--and that he also alleged, that the school was in
   very desirable circumstances, until Mr. Hawley took it, and that it
   then declined;--that the Mohawks had been discouraged, through the
   conduct of the agents of the mission;--and that Mr. Edwards was not
   qualified for his office, because, on account of his age, he could not
   learn the language of the Indians.

   To these charges Mr. Edwards replied,--that he introduced Mr. Hawley,
   because he was directed so to do, by the letter of the commissioners,
   of Dec. 31, 1751,--that he introduced a master, in the absence of the
   author of the Report, for two reasons, 1. Because he knew not when he
   was to return; and, 2. Because the author of the Report, himself, in a
   letter sent him by his son, requested him, at that very time, to
   introduce a master into the school; of which letter he enclosed a copy,
   with the offer of forwarding the original, if desired;--that, when the
   author of the Report sent his son on the specified journey, it was not
   to procure Mr. Hawley to be a master for the boys, but it was, that the
   son himself might be the master; for evidence of which, appeal is also
   made to the copy of the same letter;--that, as to the appointment of
   teacher of the female school, he said nothing about it, until expressly
   requested to give his opinion by the commissioners;--that so far was
   the school from being in desirable circumstances, before the
   introduction of Mr. Hawley, that the author of the Report had, himself,
   represented it as having been, until that time, in most lamentable
   circumstances, in the very letter of which he enclosed a copy, in which
   he requested Mr. Edwards to introduce his son into the school, in the
   room of the former master;--that the school continued to flourish under
   Mr. Hawley, until his opposers used their utmost endeavours to destroy
   it; for evidence of which, be offers the testimony of the substantial
   inhabitants of the town;--that Hendrick, and the other chiefs, and the
   Mohawks generally, had expressly assigned their dissatisfaction with
   the conduct of these individuals, as the reason of their leaving
   Stockbridge, for evidence of which, he offers the same testimony;--and,
   as to his learning the Housatonnuck language, that the author of the
   Report knew how the case would be, before he recommended him to the
   office of missionary; and that Mr. Sergeant, after fourteen years
   study, had never been able to preach in it, nor even to pray in it
   except by a form, and had often expressed the opinion, previous to his
   death, that his successor ought not to trouble himself in learning the
   language. He then requests, that the Speaker would communicate his
   letter to the Assembly, and prays that honourable body, if they
   proposed to take any order on the case, first to give him opportunity
   to meet his accuser face to face.

   I have no means of ascertaining whether the preceding letter was, or
   was not, read to the legislature. If not, it was because the honourable
   Speaker, who was a personal friend of Mr. Edwards, found it to be
   wholly unnecessary. And it can scarcely be necessary to inform the
   reader, that the attack, made thus directly upon Mr. Edwards, and
   indirectly upon all his associates in the mission, not only failed
   altogether of its intended effect; but, by leading to a development of
   the mercenary scheme, devised to divert, to the purposes of private
   emolument, the consecrated charities of the province and of
   individuals, recoiled with increased violence upon its authors.

   Thus far the individuals, opposed to the Stockbridge missionaries, had
   met with little success to encourage their efforts. They had looked for
   help to various sources; to the Indians and to the people of
   Stockbridge, to the commissioners and to the provincial legislature, to
   Mr. Hollis and to the Society in London; and in every instance, so far
   as the result was known, they had looked in vain. The Housatonnucks had
   refused all intercourse with them. From disgust at their management, a
   part of the Mohawks had actually retired, and the rest were threatening
   to retire, to their own country. The people of Stockbridge had, to a
   man, united against them. The commissioners were equally unanimous, in
   sustaining the individuals whose overthrow they had attempted. And now,
   before the provincial legislature, they had made their great and united
   effort, and had failed. In the mean time, Mr. Edwards was even more
   firmly established as the Indian missionary, and Mr. Woodbridge as the
   schoolmaster of the Housatonnucks; Mr. Hawley had not been compelled to
   resign his place to the son of the resident trustee; the female school
   had not as yet been secured to his wife, and obviously could not now
   be, unless secured to her in London; and the stewardship of the three
   schools was not likely to be conferred on himself. Such was the state
   of things in the spring of 1753. It looked as though the great struggle
   was over; and that the party, which had hitherto acted on the
   offensive, would thenceforward be quiet, from a conviction, that every
   hostile movement must issue in defeat. The result justified this
   conclusion.

   To Mr. Edwards, and his associates in the mission, as well as to their
   friends, this result must have been in a high degree satisfactory. On
   his arrival in Stockbridge, he found this controversy waging, and soon
   discovered that it was a controversy between the friends and enemies of
   the mission; between those who aimed at the real welfare of the
   Indians, and those who endeavoured to use them as instruments of their
   own private emolument; that one party relied on wealth, and office, and
   influence, to carry its measures; and the other, on personal integrity,
   a conscientious discharge of duty, and the protection of God. For a
   time he avoided taking any part in it; and his own temporal comfort,
   and the welfare of his family, seemed to require, that he should
   persevere in the same course. But his conscience forbade it. He must
   either sit quietly by, and see the charities of the province, of the
   Society in London, and of Mr. Hollis, diverted from their appointed
   course, to fill the coffers of private avarice; or he must unite with
   those who were exerting their whole influence to prevent it. In such a
   state of things, he could not deliberate, and, through the divine
   blessing, he and his associates were now permitted to see, that they
   had not toiled and suffered in vain.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [52] The copy designed for Mr. Hawley was enclosed in the letter to Mr.
   Edwards. Probably a similar vote was forwarded directly to Mr.
   Woodbridge, as that gentleman always enjoyed their fullest confidence.

   [53] Lay patronage was wholly rejected by the Scottish reformers, and
   was not introduced by law until 1711. For a long period the law was
   regarded as a public grievance, but is now submitted to.

   [54] "Mr. Gillespie died, Jan. 19th, 1774, in serenity of mind, and
   good hope through grace."

   [55] This letter is too long for insertion.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XXII.

   LETTER TO HIS ELDEST SON--RETURN OF GREATER PART OF THE MOHAWKS--LETTER
   TO COMMISSIONERS--MISSION OF MR HAWLEY TO ONOHQUAUGA--REMAINDER OF
   MOHAWKS DIRECTED TO RETURN--"FREEDOM OF THE WILL"--LETTER TO MR.
   ERSKINE--PROPOSAL OF SOCIETY IN LONDON--LETTER TO MR. GILLESPIE--DESIGN
   AND CHARACTER OF THE "FREEDOM OF THE WILL"--LETTERS FROM MR.
   HOLLIS--SURRENDER OF MOHAWK SCHOOL TO MR. EDWARDS--ENTIRE DEFEAT OF
   ENEMIES OF MISSION--RETURN OF REMAINING MOHAWKS.

   early in the ensuing spring, the eldest son of Mr. Edwards, then a lad
   of fourteen, went to New York, and thence to New Jersey; and on his way
   was much exposed to the small-pox. On his return to New York, he was
   seized with a violent fever His father hearing this, and not knowing
   whether it an ordinary fever, or the small-pox, addressed to him the
   following letter; which, like all his letters to his children,
   indicates that his chief anxiety was for their salvation.

   "To Master Timothy Edwards, at New York.

   Stockbridge, April, 1753

   my dear child,

   Before you will receive this letter, the matter will doubtless be
   determined, as to your having the small-pox. You will either be sick
   with that distemper, or will be past danger of having it, from any
   infection taken in your voyage. But whether you are sick or well, like
   to die or like to live, I hope you are earnestly seeking your
   salvation. I am sure there is a great deal of reason it should be so,
   considering the warnings you have had in word and in providence. That
   which you met with, in your passage from New York to Newark, which was
   the occasion of your fever, was indeed a remarkable warning, a
   dispensation full of instruction, and a very loud call of God to you,
   to make haste, and not to delay in the great business of religion. If
   you now have that distemper, which you have been threatened with, you
   are separated from your earthly friends, as none of them can come to
   see you; and if you should die of it, you have already taken a final
   and everlasting leave of them while you are yet alive, so as not to
   have the comfort of their presence and immediate care, and never to see
   them again in the land of the living. And if you have escaped that
   distemper, it is by a remarkable providence that you are preserved. And
   your having been so exposed to it, must certainly be a loud call of
   God, not to trust in earthly friends or any thing here below. Young
   persons are very apt to trust in parents and friends when they think of
   being on a death-bed. But this providence remarkably teaches you the
   need of a better Friend, and a better Parent, than earthly parents are;
   one who is every where present, and all sufficient, that cannot be kept
   off by infectious distempers, who is able to save from death, or to
   make happy in death, to save from eternal misery, and to bestow eternal
   life. It is indeed comfortable, when one is in great pain, and
   languishing under sore sickness, to have the presence, and kind care,
   of near and dear earthly friends; but this is a very small thing, in
   comparison of what it is, to have the presence of a heavenly Father,
   and a compassionate and almighty Redeemer. In God's favour is life, and
   his loving-kindness is better than life. Whether you are in sickness or
   health, you infinitely need this. But you must know, however great need
   you stand in of it, you do not deserve it: neither is God the more
   obliged to bestow it upon you, for your standing in need of it, your
   earnest desiring of it, your crying to him constantly for it from fear
   of misery, and taking much pains. Till you have savingly believed in
   Christ, all your desires, and pains, and prayers lay God under no
   obligation; and, if they were ten thousand times as great as they are,
   you must still know, that you would be in the hands of a sovereign God,
   who hath mercy on whom he will have mercy. Indeed, God often hears the
   poor miserable cries of sinful vile creatures, who have no manner of
   true regard to Him in their hearts; for he is a God of infinite mercy,
   and he delights to show mercy for his Son's sake, who is worthy, though
   you are unworthy, who came to save the sinful and the miserable, yea,
   some of the chief of sinners. Therefore, there is your only hope, and
   in him must be your refuge, who invites you to come to him, and says,
   Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out.' Whatever your
   circumstances are, it is your duty not to despair, but to hope in
   infinite mercy, through a Redeemer. For God makes it your duty to pray
   to him for mercy; which would not be your duty, if it was allowable for
   you to despair. We are expressly commanded to call upon God in the day
   of trouble, and when we are afflicted, then to pray. But, if I hear
   that you have escaped,--either that you have not been sick, or are
   restored,--though I shall rejoice, and have great cause of
   thankfulness, yet I shall be concerned for you. If your escape should
   be followed with carelessness and security, and forgetting the
   remarkable warning you have had, and God's great mercy in your
   deliverance, it would in some respects be more awful than sore sickness
   It would be very provoking to God, and would probably issue in an
   increasing hardness of heart; and, it may be, divine vengeance may soon
   overtake you. I have known various instances of persons being
   remarkably warned, in providence, by being brought into very dangerous
   circumstances, and escaping, and afterwards death has soon followed in
   another way. I earnestly desire, that God would make you wise to
   salvation, and that he would be merciful and gracious to you in every
   respect, according as he knows your circumstances require. And this is
   the daily prayer of

   Your affectionate and tender father,

   jonathan edwards"

   "P.S. Your mother and all the family send their love to you, as being
   tenderly concerned for you."

   At length the event, so long predicted by Mr. Edwards, actually took
   place. The Mohawks, who had manifested exemplary patience under the
   vexatious and embarrassments to which they had been subjected by the
   whites, were at last wearied out; and, in the month of April, the
   greater part of them relinquished their lands and settlements at
   Stockbridge, and returned finally to their own country. After a brief
   allusion to this fact, in a letter to the commissioners, Mr. Edwards
   communicated to them a variety of interesting intelligence relative to
   the Iroquois, and to the mission proposed to be established among them

   "To the Commissioners in Boston.

   Stockbridge, April 12, 1753.

   gentlemen,

   The last Tuesday, about two-thirds of the Mohawks, young and old, went
   away from Stockbridge, and are never likely to return again. They have
   long manifested a great uneasiness at the management of affairs here,
   and at the conduct of those persons on whom their affairs have almost
   wholly fallen; and have shown themselves very much grieved, that
   others, who used to be concerned, have been excluded. They have, once
   and again, represented the grounds of their uneasiness to the
   provincial agent, but without redress. They have been dissatisfied with
   his answers, and there has appeared in them a growing dislike of the
   family, who have lately left their own house, and taken up their
   constant abode among them, in the female boarding-school.

   The correspondents, in New York and New Jersey, of the Society in
   Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge, have determined, if
   Providence favours, to settle a mission among the Six Nations. To that
   end, they have chosen Mr. Gordon, a pious young gentleman, who has
   lately been a tutor at New Jersey college, to come to Stockbridge, and
   remain here with Mr. Hawley, to learn the Mohawk language with him, in
   order to his being fitted for the business. Mr. Gordon is expected here
   to prosecute this design in the beginning of May.

   In addition to this, Mr. Brainerd, the pastor of the Indian
   congregation at Bethel in New Jersey, who is supported by the
   correspondents, having met with much trouble from the enemies of
   religion in those parts; and his Indians being greatly disturbed, with
   regard to the possession and improvement of their lands; the
   correspondents have of late had a disposition, that he, with his
   school-master and whole congregation, should remove, if a door might be
   opened, and take up a new settlement, somewhere in the country of the
   Six Nations. Mr. Hawley has seen Mr. Brainerd, and conversed with him
   on the subject, this spring. He manifests an inclination to such a
   removal, and says his Indians will be ready for it. If such a thing as
   this could be brought to pass, it would probably tend greatly to the
   introduction of the gospel, and the promotion of the interests of
   religion, among the Six Nations; as his congregation are, I suppose,
   the most virtuous and religious collection of Indians in America, and
   some of them have now been long established in religion and virtue.

   According to the best information I can get, of the country of the Six
   Nations, the most convenient place, to be chosen as the chief seat of
   missionary operations, is the country about Onohquauga, near the head
   of the Susquehannah river.

   I apprehend, from some things of which Mr. Woodbridge informed me, that
   the commissioners have had very wrong information concerning the
   Onohquauga Indians, as though they were a very despicable company, a
   kind of renegadoes, scarcely to be reckoned as of the Six Nations,
   living out of the country of those nations. There are, indeed, some
   here, who have sometimes spoken very contemptuously of them; which
   seems to have been, not from any manner of ground in fact, or so much
   as any colour of reason, but merely because these Indians appeared
   peculiarly attached to Mr. Ashley and his wife, and under their
   influence. But there are other persons in Stockbridge, who have had as
   much opportunity to know what is the true state of these people, as
   they. The Onohquauga Indians, who have been here, are properly, not
   only of the Six Nations, but of the five nations, who are the original
   united tribes of the Iroquois. All, but one or two of them, are of the
   nation of the Oneiutas; and they appear not to be looked upon as
   contemptible, by the rest of the Five Nations, from what was once
   openly said of them, at a public council, by the sachems of the
   Conneenchees, or proper Mohawks, who advised us to treat the
   Onohquaugas with peculiar care and kindness, as excelling their own
   tribe in religion and virtue; giving at the same time many instances of
   their virtue. We have found the testimony which they gave of them to be
   true. They appear to be far the best disposed Indians with which we
   have had any connexion. They would be inclined to the utmost, to
   assist, encourage, and strengthen, the hands of missionaries and
   instructors, should any be sent among them, and to do all they could to
   forward their success, among themselves, and the other Indians round
   about.

   There seems to be no room for a missionary, in the country of the
   Conneenchees. The Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts,
   have long since taken them under their care, and pretended to support a
   mission among them. A mission from the commissioners in Boston would
   not be borne by them, nor by the Dutch, who are always among them. And
   as to the country of the Quinqua*s, and the original seat of the
   Oneiutas, they seem not to be convenient places for settling a mission,
   on two accounts. They are on the road to Oswego, where the Dutch are
   incessantly passing and repassing with their rum; with which they are
   continually making them drunk, and would be, in many other respects, a
   continual hindrance and affliction to a missionary; for they are
   exceedingly opposed to the New England people having any thing to do
   with the Iroquois. The nation of the Quinquas, also, are mostly in the
   French interest, as well as many of the Oneiutas; so that a missionary
   would there be afflicted, and perhaps in danger, by the French. And it
   is very evident, that the country of the Onondagas, is no country for
   our missionaries to attempt to establish a mission in. It would be like
   establishing a mission in Canada; for that nation have entirely gone
   over to the French interest. They are on the road of the French, as
   they go up a trading to Mississippi, and their distant settlements, and
   the nations on the great lakes; and the French have of late built a
   fort in their country, and have in effect annexed it to Canada. And the
   country of the Senecas will not be much more convenient for the
   purpose, both by reason of its very good distance, and also because
   most of the nation are firmly united to the French, who constantly
   maintain their missionaries among them.

   Onohquauga is within the territory of the Five Nations, and not so far
   from the other settlements, but that it may be convenient for making
   excursions to the several tribes; as convenient perhaps as any place
   that can be found. It is, I suppose, as near to the heart of the
   country as any place, unless Oneiuta and Quinquah. They are also much
   out of the way of the French, and considerably out of the way of the
   Dutch, are in a pleasant fruitful country, surrounded by many
   settlements of Indians on every side, and where the way is open by an
   easy passage down the river, which runs through one of the most
   pleasant and fruitful parts of America, for four or five hundred miles,
   exceedingly well peopled on both sides, and on its several branches, by
   Indians. Onohquauga is the road, by which several of the nations pass,
   as they go to war with the southern nations. And there will be this
   advantage, which missionaries will have, that the Onohquauga Indians
   are fast friends to the English; and though some of the Dutch have
   tried much to disaffect them to the English, their attempts have been
   in vain. They are very desirous of instruction, and to have the gospel
   established in their country.

   There are several towns of the Onohquaugas; and several missionaries
   might probably find sufficient employment in those parts. If Mr.
   Brainerd should settle somewhere in that country, with his Christian
   Indians, and one or two more missionaries, not at a great distance,
   they might be under advantage to assist one another; as they will
   greatly need one another's company and assistance, in so difficult a
   work, in such a strange distant land. They might be under advantage to
   consult one another, and to act in concert, and to help one another, in
   any case of peculiar difficulty. Many English people would be found to
   go from New England, and settle there; and the greatest difficulty
   would be, that there would be danger of too many English settlers, and
   of such as are not fit for the place.

   But, in order to accomplish this; especially in order to such a body of
   new Indians coming from the Jerseys, and settling in the country of the
   Six Nations; the consent of those nations, or at least of several of
   them, must be obtained. The method which Mr. Woodbridge, Mr. Hawley,
   and I, have thought of, which we submit to the wisdom of the
   commissioners, is this,--that Mr. Woodbridge, and Mr. Ashley and his
   wife, should go, as speedily as possible, into the country of the
   Conneenchees;--they being the first tribe in honour, though not in
   numbers;--and there spend some weeks, perhaps a month, among them, to
   get acquainted with them, and endeavour to gain their approbation of a
   mission, for settling the gospel in the country of the Six
   Nations.--Mr. Hawley, in the mean time, to keep Mr. Woodbridge's
   school. Then, that Mr. Hawley and Mr. Gordon should join them there,
   and go with them from thence to Onohquauga, and when they have
   acquainted themselves well with the people, and the state of the
   country, and find things agreeable, and see a hopeful prospect, then
   for Mr. Woodbridge to return, and leave Mr. Hawley and Mr. Gordon
   there, and forthwith send word to Mr. Brainerd, and propose to him to
   come up, with some of his chief Indians, to see the country. And if, on
   the observations they make, and the acquaintance they get with the
   people and country, they think there is an encouraging prospect, then
   to endeavour to gain a conference with some of the chiefs of the Five
   Nations, at an appointed time, to know whether they will consent to
   their coming to settle in their territories. All this will occupy some
   considerable time; so that, if they can obtain their consent, Mr.
   Brainerd must return home: and he and his chief Indians must come again
   to the treaty, at the time and place appointed.

   You will easily perceive, Gentlemen, that these things will require
   time, and that, in order to carry these various measures into effect
   this year, there will be need of expedition, which may show the reason
   why we think it necessary, that Mr. Hawley should come to Boston; for,
   if these things are to be done this year, we had need speedily to know
   the minds of the commissioners, and therefore that the case would not
   allow of waiting for, and depending on, uncertain accidental
   opportunities, of sending to them, and hearing from them. It is also
   proper, that the commissioners should have opportunity to agree with
   Mr. Hawley, concerning the reward of his services.

   Mr. Brainerd told Mr. Hawley, that, if he removed with his Indians, he
   should choose to do it speedily; and that, the longer it was delayed,
   the more difficult it would he, by reason of his building, and the
   Indians increasing their buildings and improvements at Bethel.
   Probably, if the removal cannot be brought about the next year, it
   never will be. And if his Indians remove the next year, it will be
   necessary that they remove as early as the spring, in order to plant
   there that year. And if so much needs to be done this summer, it is as
   much as it will be possible to find time for.

   Though we project the measures mentioned above, we are sensible they
   will be attended with much uncertainty. Man's heart deviseth his way,
   but the Lord directeth his steps. Many are the desires of men's hearts,
   but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. Unthought of
   difficulties may arise, to confound all our projects; as unforeseen
   difficulties have dashed all the pleasing hopes we entertained, and the
   fair prospects we had, concerning the affairs of the Mohawks at
   Stockbridge, the year before last. And I would humbly propose it for
   consideration, whether it will not be necessary, to leave these
   affairs, in some measure at discretion, to be determined as the
   complicated, uncertain, changing state of things shall require; to save
   the trouble and expense of frequently going or sending to Boston, for
   new instructions; and to prevent the disadvantages, under which our
   affairs may be laid, through the lengthy, uncertain way of sending for
   and receiving new orders, by occasional opportunities.

   There will be a necessity of Mrs. Ashley's going as an interpreter, and
   of her husband going with her. He will be qualified to instruct the
   Indians in their husbandry: having been well instructed in it himself.
   I believe he will not be very difficult as to his wages, though
   probably he expects to know what they will be.

   I have the honour to be,

   Gentlemen,

   Your obliged and obedient servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   During the month of April, Mr. Hawley received a letter from the
   commissioners, directing him to go to Onohquauga, for the purpose of
   commencing a new mission at that place. He left Stockbridge May 22d, in
   company with Mr. Woodbridge, and Mr. and Mrs. Ashley, travelling
   through the wilderness, and on the 4th or June arrived at the place of
   their destination. The Indians received the intelligence of their
   proposed mission with strong expressions of satisfaction. Mr.
   Woodbridge returned soon after to Stockbridge. Mr. Hawley appears to
   have remained, with his interpreter; and his labours, as a missionary,
   were attended with considerable success.

   In the course of the summer, not long after the return of the larger
   part of the Mohawks, from Stockbridge to their own country, a general
   council of the nation was held, at their principal settlement on the
   Mohawk; in which, after due examination of the facts, it was decided,
   that the rest of the Mohawks at Stockbridge, should return early in the
   spring, as soon as the hunting season was over. Instructions, to this
   effect, were immediately transmitted, from the chief sachem of the
   tribe, to the residue of the little colony, and made known to the
   people of Stockbridge.

   About this time, the agent of Mr. Hollis, discouraged, doubtless, by
   the state of things, as far as it was known, and probably auguring no
   very favourable result to himself, or his friends, from the application
   to Mr. Hollis, quitted Stockbridge, and went back to Newington; leaving
   the few boys, whom, by offering to board and clothe them gratuitously,
   he had persuaded to live with him, in the hands of the resident
   trustee.

   This unhappy controversy, now drawing to its close, which, during its
   continuance, had threatened to subvert the whole Indian mission, and to
   destroy the prosperity of the village, and the temporal welfare of Mr.
   Edwards and his family, must have occupied so much of his attention,
   that when our readers remember, that he preached two discourses a week
   to the whites, as well as one, by an interpreter, to the Housatonnucks,
   and one to the Mohawks; and also catechised the children of the whites,
   the Housatonnucks, and the Mohawks; they will be ready to believe, that
   he found no time for any additional labours. And when they also
   recollect, that, on the 23d of November, 1752, he says, in his letter
   to Mr. Erskine,--"I began, the last August, to write a little on the
   Arminian controversy, but was soon broken off: and such have been my
   extraordinary avocations and hindrances, that I have not had time to
   set pen to paper, about this matter, since. But I hope God, in his
   providence, will favour me with opportunity to prosecute the deign, and
   I desire your prayers that God would assist me in it;"--and that this
   proposed work, on the Arminian controversy, was none other, than the
   treatise on the freedom of the will; they will conclude, of course,
   that the execution of it must have been deferred to some happier
   period, when, amid the leisure and tranquillity of retirement, he could
   give his uninterrupted attention, and his individual strength, to its
   accomplishment. What then will be their surprise, when they find him
   opening his next letter to Mr. Erskine, under the date of April 14th,
   1753, with the following annunciation.--"After many hindrances, delays,
   and interruptions, Divine Providence has so far favoured me, and smiled
   on my design of writing on the Arminian controversy, that I have almost
   finished the first draught of what I first intended; and am now sending
   the proposals for subscription, to Boston, to be printed." Let it be
   remembered, that the Essay on the Freedom of the Will, which, in the
   opinion of Dugald Stewart, raises its author to the same rank as a
   metaphysician with Locke and Leibnitz, was written within the space of
   four months and a half; and those, not months of leisure, but demanding
   the additional duties of a parish, and of two distinct Indian missions;
   and presenting, also, all the cares, perplexities, and embarrassments
   of a furious controversy, the design of which was to deprive the
   author, and his family, of their daily bread. So far as I am aware, no
   similar example, of power and rapidity united, is to be found on the
   annals of mental effort [56] ."

   "Stockbridge, April 14, 1753.

   rev. and dear sir,

   After many hinderances, delays, and interruptions, Divine Providence
   has so far favoured me, and smiled on my design of writing on the
   Arminian controversy, that I have almost finished the first draught of
   what I first intended and am now sending the proposals for subscription
   to Boston to be printed; with a letter of Mr. Foxcroft, to send thirty
   of those proposals to Mr. M'Laurin, with a letter to him; in which I
   have desired him to deliver half of them to you, as you have manifested
   yourself ready to use endeavours to get subscriptions in Scotland. The
   printing will be delayed to wait for subscriptions from thence. I
   therefore request that you endeavour to promote and expedite the
   affair.

   Stockbridge affairs, relating to the Indians, are, in many respects,
   under a very dark cloud. The affair of the Iroquois, or Six Nations,
   here is almost at an end, as I have given a more particular account to
   Mr. M'Laurin. The commissioners in Boston, I believe, are discouraged
   about it, and have thoughts of sending and settling a missionary in
   their own country. The correspondents of the Society in Scotland, have
   also determined to send a missionary there, and have chosen Mr. Gordon
   a tutor of the college at Newark, for that end. Mr. Gordon is expected
   here at the beginning of May, to live at my house with Mr. Hawley, in
   order to learn the Iroquois language with him. It is probable that he
   and Mr. Hawley will go up, and spend the summer, in the Iroquois
   country.

   The correspondents have also a disposition, that Mr. Brainerd should
   remove, with the whole congregation of Indians, to settle somewhere in
   the country of the Six Nations; and he himself and his Indians, are
   ready for it. Tis probable that something will be done to prepare the
   way for it; and at least to see, whether the way can be prepared, or
   any door opened for it, this summer. Some of these Indians have a great
   desire, that the gospel should be introduced and settled in their
   country.

   Some of the Stockbridge Indians have of late been under considerable
   awakenings,--two or three elderly men, that used to be vicious persons.
   My family is now in usual health. My daughter Burr, in New Jersey has
   been very ill all the winter past. We last heard from her about five
   weeks ago; when it was hoped there was some amendment.

   My wife joins with me, in respectful and affectionate salutations to
   you and Mrs. Erskine. Desiring a remembrance in your prayers,

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate brother,

   and obliged friend and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   The representations of the nephew of the opponent of Mr. Woodbridge,
   and those of the commissioners of Boston, to the Society in London, the
   former hostile, and the latter friendly, to Mr. Edwards and his
   associates, were sent forward, and arrived at their place of
   destination, in due season. That gentleman had entertained an
   overweening estimate of his own influence with the board of directors
   of the Society in London. They gave full credit to the statements of
   their own commissioners, and sustained them in upholding their
   missionaries and instructers. Perceiving, however, that an unhappy
   controversy subsisted at Stockbridge, relative to the mission, and
   knowing that their commissioners at Boston were 150 miles distant; they
   endeavoured to devise a plan, by which the existing evils might be
   remedied. Mr. Edwards, in his letter to Mr. Mauduit, one of their
   number, had observed, "What renders it the more necessary, that things
   here should he under the immediate care of trustees on the spot, is,
   the misunderstanding and jealousy here subsisting, between some of the
   chief of the present English inhabitants of the town, which is one of
   our greatest calamities. Things, on this account, do much need careful
   inspection; and therefore, the gentlemen intrusted ought to be such, as
   are perfectly impartial, and no way interested in, or related to, these
   contending parties." The plan suggested by the directors was this, That
   eleven persons,--two in New York, two in Albany, one in Wethersfield,
   two in Hartford, one in Windsor, one in Suffield, one in Hadley, and
   one in Stockbridge,--should be a board of consultation, to advise their
   agents at Stockbridge, and to act, by correspondence, with the
   commissioners; and they counted upon the preceding extract, as what had
   confirmed them in the measure [57] . At the request of the Hon. Mr.
   Bromfield, one of the commissioners, Mr. Edwards, in a letter, dated
   Oct. 19, 1753, expressed his own views of the plan, and pointed out its
   inconvenience, if not utter impracticability. The commissioners having
   expressed similar views to the directors; the plan was relinquished.
   This was the result of the application to the Society in London [58] .

   The General Assembly of the church of Scotland, for the year 1753,
   having refused, by a very small majority, to restore Mr. Gillespie to
   the ministry in the kirk, and to his parish of Carnock;--an act of
   plain justice, which he would not ask them to render him,--Mr. Edwards
   addressed to him the following letter; a part of which must have been
   sweet and consoling to the feelings of suffering piety.

   "Stockbridge, October 18, 1753

   rev. and dear sir,

   The last November I wrote you a letter, and desired Mr. Foxcroft to put
   up with it, for you, one of my Answers to Mr. Williams. After that, in
   the latter part of the winter, I received a letter from you, dated June
   15th, 1752, with Milton on Hirelings; and duplicates of a Letter from a
   Gentleman in Town, &c.; and Answers to the Reasons of Dissent, &c. I
   now return you my hearty thanks for these things. Since that, I have
   received letters from Mr. M'Laurin and Mr. Erskine, with various
   pamphlets and prints relative to your extraordinary affair I think,
   dear Sir, although your sufferings are like to continue, the General
   Assembly having refused to restore you to your former station and
   employments in the church of Scotland; yet they are attended with many
   manifestations of the goodness, and fatherly kindness, and favour of
   the great Governor of the world, in the many alleviations and
   supporting circumstances of your persecutions; in that so many of God's
   ministers and people have appeared to be so much concerned for you; and
   have so zealously, and yet so properly, exerted themselves in your
   behalf; and have so many ways given their testimony to the goodness of
   the cause in which you suffer, and the unrighteousness of the hardships
   which you have been subjected to; and that even so great a part of the
   General Assembly, themselves, have, in effect, given this testimony for
   you, there being but a very small majority, but what openly appeared
   for the taking off of the censure of the former Assembly, without any
   recantation on your part, or so much as an application from you,
   desiring them so to do. You have some peculiar reasons to rejoice in
   your sufferings, and to glorify God on account of them. They having
   been so greatly taken notice of by so many of the people of God, and
   there being so much written concerning them, tends to render them, with
   their circumstances, and particularly the patience and meekness with
   which you have suffered, so much the more extensively and durably to
   the glory of the name of your blessed lord, for whom you suffer. God is
   rewarding--you for laying a foundation, in what has been said and done
   and written concerning your sufferings, for glory to his own name, and
   honour to you, in his church, in future generations. Your name will
   doubtless be mentioned hereafter with peculiar respect, on the account
   of these sufferings, in ecclesiastical history; as they are now the
   occasion of a peculiar notice, which saints and angels in heaven take
   of you, and of their praises to God on your account; and will be the
   occasion of a peculiar reward, which God will bestow upon you, when you
   shall be united to their assembly.

   As to my own circumstances, I still meet with trouble, and expect no
   other, as long as I live in this world. Some men of influence have much
   opposed my continuing a missionary at Stockbridge, and have taken
   occasion abundantly to reproach me, and endeavour my removal. But I
   desire to bless God, he seems in some respects to set me out of their
   reach. He raises me up friends, who are exerting themselves to
   counteract the designs of my opposers; particularly the commissioners
   for Indian affairs in Boston; with whom innumerable artifices have been
   used, to disaffect them towards me; but altogether in vain. Governor
   Belcher, also, has seen cause much to exert himself, in my behalf, on
   occasion of the opposition made to me. My people, both English and
   Indians, stedfastly adhere to me; excepting the family with whom the
   opposition began, and those related to them; which family greatly
   opposed me while at Northampton. Most numerous, continued, and
   indefatigable endeavours have been used, to undermine me, by attempting
   to alienate my people from me; innumerable mean artifices have been
   used with one another, with young and old, men and women, Indians and
   English: but hitherto they have been greatly disappointed. But yet they
   are not weary.

   As we, dear Sir, have great reason to sympathize, one with another,
   with peculiar tenderness; our circumstances being in many respects
   similar; so I hope I shall partake of the benefit of your fervent
   prayers for me. Let us then endeavour to help one another, though at a
   great distance, in travelling through this wide wilderness; that we may
   have the more joyful meeting in the land of rest, when we have finished
   our weary pilgrimage.

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your most affectionate brother,

   and fellow-servant,

   jonathan edwards"

   "P. S. My wife joins in most affectionate regards to you and yours."

   The proposals for publishing the Essay on the Freedom of the Will, were
   issued in Massachusetts, in 1753; but in consequence of the kind offer
   of Mr. Erskine and Mr. M'Laurin, to circulate the papers, and procure
   subscribers for it in Scotland, the printing was postponed until the
   success of their efforts was known. What that success was, probably
   cannot now be ascertained. The work was published early in the year
   1754, under the title of "A careful and strict Inquiry into the modern
   prevailing Notions of that Freedom of the Will, which is supposed to be
   essential to Moral Agency, Virtue and Vice, Reward and Punishment,
   Praise and Blame." This work is justly considered as the most laboured
   and important of the metaphysical investigations undertaken by the
   author. The subject, as will be obvious from the preceding title, lies
   at the very foundation of all religion and of all morality. That it was
   also a subject of no ordinary difficulty, appears generally to have
   been felt, and in effect acknowledged; for until the time of Mr.
   Edwards, it had never been thoroughly investigated either by
   philosophers or theologians, though it was constantly recurring in
   their reasonings on the great principles connected with the moral
   government of God, and the character of man. Calvin, in his chapter on
   the Slavery of the Will, may be taken as an example of the most that
   had been done to settle the opinions of the orthodox, and refute their
   opposers on this subject before this period. His defect, and that of
   his followers, until the time of Mr. Edwards, is seen in this one
   thing; that they insisted on the great fact, merely that the will of
   man was not in a state of indifference, but so strongly fixed in its
   choice as to require supernatural grace for conversion, overlooking in
   a great measure the nature of moral agency, and what is essential to
   its nature. Their opposers, on the contrary, were constantly affirming,
   that freedom of will was necessary to moral agency, and carried their
   views to the extent that the will determined itself, and could not be
   enslaved. In this state of ethical and theological science, Mr. Edwards
   set himself to the task of examining the great subject of moral agency,
   as connected with the human will; and by the precision of his
   definitions and statements, the cogency of his reasonings, the fulness
   of his illustrations, the thorough handling of all objections, and the
   application of his views to many scriptural truths, he placed the grand
   points of his subject in a light so overwhelmingly convincing, as to
   leave little room for any doubt or dispute afterwards.

   In this treatise it is contended, that the power of choosing, or
   willing, does itself constitute freedom of agency; and that particular
   acts of will are determined, i.e. are rendered certain, or become such
   as they are, rather than otherwise, by some sufficient cause or reason,
   in perfect consistency with their being acts of will, or in perfect
   consistency with that power of willing which constitutes freedom of
   agency. On the ground that the power of willing pertains to man, the
   author asserts a natural ability, which is the just occasion of
   precept, invitation, &c. or of the will of God being addressed to him,
   and on the ground that his acts of will are rendered certain, by a
   sufficient cause, the author asserts a moral inability. The principal
   point contended for, and which is most essential to the defence of the
   Calvinistic scheme of faith, in distinction from the Arminian, is the
   latter one, that the acts of the will are rendered certain by some
   other cause than the mere power of willing. What the particular cause
   or causes may be, is not particularly considered, but this question is
   dismissed with a few brief remarks. The fact, that there is and must
   be, some such cause, is the great subject argued, and most powerfully
   demonstrated. This cause he asserts is the foundation of necessity, in
   the sense merely of certainty of action, and does not therefore destroy
   natural ability or the power of choice, nor imply that man acts
   otherwise than electively, or by choice; so that it is a necessity
   consistent with accountability, demerit, or the contrary and so with
   rewards and punishments. He asserts that all such terms as must,
   cannot, impossible, tenable, irresistible, unavoidable, invincible, &c.
   when applied here, are not applied in their proper signification, and
   are either used nonsensically, and with perfect insignificance, or in a
   sense quite diverse from their proper and original meaning, and their
   use in common speech; and that such a necessity as attends the acts of
   men's wills, is more properly called certainty than necessity.

   Rightly to understand this controversy, it must be observed, that he
   and his opponents, alike, considered sin to consist in acts of will.
   Had this not been the case, it would have been idle for Mr. Edwards to
   have confined himself, in his whole treatise, to acts of choice, and
   the manner in which they are determined, i.e. rendered certain. He
   must, in that case, have agitated the previous question, respecting
   acts of choice themselves; and have asserted and maintained, that
   something else of specifically a different nature, enters into moral
   character, and forms the ground of praise and blame, or retribution.
   But the question which he considered to be at issue, is this: Does the
   mind will, in any given manner, without a motive, cause or ground,
   which renders the given choice, rather than a different choice,
   certain. Whitby, the writer whom he especially has in view, in his
   remarks on the freedom of man, asserts, that man, by his own activity
   alone, decides the choice. Mr. Edwards acknowledges that man chooses;
   but asserts, in opposition to the opinion of Whitby, and those who side
   with him, that there must be some other ground or cause, beside the
   mere activity of man, or his power of choosing, which occasions his
   choosing in one manner, rather than another. He asserts, that
   "doubtless common sense requires men's being the authors of their own
   acts of will, in order to their being esteemed worthy of praise or
   dispraise, on account of them." The very act of volition itself, is,
   doubtless, a determination; i.e. it is the mind's drawing up a
   conclusion, or coming to a choice, between two things or more, proposed
   to it. But determining among external objects of choice, is not the
   same as determining the act of choice itself, among various possible
   acts of choice. The question is, What influences, directs, or
   determines, the mind or will, to such a conclusion or choice as it does
   form? Or what is the cause, ground, or reason, why it concludes thus,
   and not otherwise? This is the question, on his own statement.

   In the latter part of February, 1754, a letter was received from Mr.
   Hollis, by Mr. Edwards, containing his explicit directions as to the
   school, for which he had expended so much money, to so little purpose.
   By this letter, Mr. Hollis withdrew the care of the school, and the
   expenditure of his benefactions, from the hands of those who had had
   the charge of them, and placed them in the hands of Mr. Edwards [59] .
   On the 25th, Mr. Edwards enclosed a copy of this letter, in a note to
   the provincial agent, requesting, from him, an account of the existing
   state of the school, and of the furniture and books belonging to it. On
   the 27th, he went to the school, to examine into its actual condition,
   and found in it six Indian boys. The following day, he mentioned this
   fact, in a second note to the agent, and informed him, that, as the
   Mohawks had long had the resolution to leave Stockbridge, early in the
   spring, he had appointed a conference with them, on the 1st of March,
   to learn whether they still persisted in that resolution; to the end,
   that, if they did so, he might suspend any further expense upon them,
   on Mr. Hollis's account. At this conference, which was held with all
   the Mohawks, men, women, and children, in the presence of many of the
   people of the town, they informed him, that they had all agreed in the
   autumn, that they would return, in the spring, to their own country;
   and that this agreement was owing to the determination of the council
   of their nation, the sachems of the Conneenchees, and could not be
   altered, unless by a new determination of their sachems. Of this he
   gave the agent due notice the day following, as well as of his purpose
   to expend none of Mr. Hollis's money upon them, so long as they
   persisted in that resolution.

   As the general court had interested themselves in the affairs of Mr.
   Hollis, and had waited to know his mind concerning them, that they
   might order their own measures accordingly; Mr. Edwards, in a letter to
   the secretary of the province, dated March 8th, enclosed an extract
   from the letter of Mr. Hollis, and informed him of the actual state of
   the school, of the determination of the council of the Mohawks, and the
   consequent resolution of the little colony to return to their own
   country, and of the notice he had given the agent, that he should
   withhold any subsequent expense of Mr. Hollis's money upon them. He
   likewise informed him, that some of the Mohawks had, since the
   conference, brought their children to him, and earnestly requested that
   they might be instructed; offering to take the charge of their
   maintenance themselves; and that he had consented to receive them [60]
   . He also asks the advice of the secretary, whether he might still
   occupy the schoolhouse, which had been built on the lands of the
   Indians, at the expense of the province, for the benefit of Mr.
   Hollis's school.

   The individuals opposed to Mr. Edwards and Mr. Woodbridge, thus found
   every plan, which they had formed of connecting themselves with the
   Stockbridge mission, defeated, and their last hope extinguished. In
   1750, the prospects of the mission, in consequence of the arrival of
   the two detachments of the Mohawks and Onohquaugas, which seemed to be
   mere harbingers of still larger colonies of their countrymen, were
   uncommonly bright and promising. And could the benevolent intentions of
   Mr. Hollis, of the Society in London, and of the provincial
   legislature, in behalf of the Iroquois, have been carried forward to
   their full completion, with no obstructions thrown in their way, by
   greedy avarice or unhallowed ambition; it is difficult to conceive of
   the amount of good which might have been accomplished. A large and
   flourishing colony of the Iroquois would soon have been established at
   Stockbridge, drawn thither for the education of their children, and
   brought directly within the reach of the means of salvation. What would
   have been the ultimate effect of such a colony on their countrymen at
   home, and on the more remote Indian tribes, can only be conjectured. By
   the steadfast resolution of those persons to oppose these plans of
   benevolence, unless the management of the funds by which they were to
   be accomplished could be placed in their own hands, this whole system
   of beneficence towards the Iroquois, which would only have enlarged
   with the opportunity of exerting it, was frustrated finally and for
   ever. We will not cherish the belief, that the disappointed individuals
   found any thing in this melancholy result, to console them under the
   shame and mortification of their own defeat; although they thus
   effectually prevented the benevolent efforts of their opponents, by
   driving the intended objects of them beyond their reach. A short time
   after the letter of Mr. Hollis was received, the individual, in whose
   hands the Mohawk school had been left by the former teacher, removed
   with his family to his former place of residence; leaving behind him
   only one of his associates at Stockbridge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [56] Sir Henry Moncrieff Wellwood, who had the MS. Letters of Mr.
   Edwards to Dr. Erskine in possession, while writing his Life of the
   latter, observes, "It was not, however, till the month of July, 1752,
   that he [Mr. Edwards] appears to have resumed his studies, on the
   subject of Free Will; for, on the 7th of that month, he writes Dr.
   Erskine, that he hoped soon to be at leisure, to resume his design." He
   then adds, "Whatever opinion may be held, with regard to Mr. Edwards
   argument, it must appear astonishing to those, who are capable of
   appreciating the difficulty of his subject, that, in nine months from
   the date of his letter (on the 14th of April, 1753) he could write Dr.
   Erskine, that he had almost finished the first draught of what he
   originally intended." The passage, in Mr. Edwards's letter of Nov. 23,
   1752, announcing, that he began to write in August, but was soon broke
   off; and had not, from that time, been able to put pen to paper, about
   the matter: and that he hoped, that God, in his providence, would
   favour him with an opportunity to prosecute the design; obviously
   escaped Sir Henry's notice. If he regarded it as astonishing, that Mr.
   Edwards should have been able to write the work in nine months: what
   would have been his view of the subject, if, after first reading the
   details of the Stockbridge controversy, he had then discovered, that it
   was not written, not in nine months, but in four and a half.

   [57] The directors, knowing the characters of the respective
   individuals residing in these places, whom they designated; and
   perceiving, from an inspection of the map, that Stockbridge was nearly
   central to most of the places mentioned; appear to have supposed, that
   they might all meet there, without inconvenience.

   [58] On this account only, is the plan worthy of being mentioned here.

   [59] Many benevolent men, on being surprized of such a wanton and
   shameful perversion of the funds, appropriated by themselves to a given
   charity, would, at once, have wholly discontinued their benefactions;
   but the benevolence of Mr. Hollis, like a living and copious fountain,
   could neither be dried up, nor obstructed.

   [60] These children of the Mohawks, and the children of the
   Onohquaugas, constituted, from this time, the male Iroquois
   boarding-school at Stockbridge. How long it was continued I have not
   been able to ascertain; but suppose it was removed to Onohquauga, soon
   after the establishment of the mission of Mr. Hawley at that place.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XXIII.

   SICKNESS OF MR. EDWARDS--"GODS LAST END IN CREATION"--"NATURE OF
   VIRTUE"--MR. EDWARDS SECOND SON RESIDES AT ONOHQUAUGA--DANGERS OF THE
   WAR--LETTER TO MR. ERSKINE--LETTER TO COL. WILLIAMS--LORD
   KAIMES--LETTER TO MR. ERSKINE--LETTER TO MR. M'CULLOCH--LETTER OF DR.
   BELLAMY--"TREATISE ON ORIGINAL SIN"--LETTER TO HIS FATHER--LETTER TO
   MR. ERSKINE.

   In July, 1754, Mr. Edwards had a most severe attack of the ague and
   fever, which lasted until January. It wholly disqualified him from
   writing even to his correspondents, and greatly enfeebled his
   constitution. In the course of the spring following, he began the
   preparation of two other treatises, which were entitled, "A
   Dissertation concerning the End for which God created the World;" and
   "A Dissertation concerning the Nature of True Virtue." These two
   subjects are fundamental in a system of theology. On the first, many
   writers had hazarded occasional remarks; yet it has rarely occupied the
   space even of a chapter or a section in theological systems; and I know
   not whether any writer before Mr. Edwards had made it the subject of a
   formal and separate treatise. From the purest principles of reason, as
   well as from the fountain of revealed truth, he demonstrates that the
   chief and ultimate end of the Supreme Being, in the works of creation
   and providence, was the manifestation of his own glory, in the highest
   happiness of his creatures. The treatise was left by the author, as at
   first written, without being prepared for the press; yet it exhibits
   the subject in a manner so clear and convincing, that it has been the
   manual of theologians from the time of its publication to the present.

   The nature of virtue has been a frequent subject of discussion among
   ethical writers of almost every class, heathen, infidel, and Christian.
   Aristotle, and other ancient moralists, supposed virtue to consist in
   avoiding extremes, and in following the mean in everything. Others of
   the ancients defined virtue to be living according to nature. Balguy
   and Doddridge represent it as consisting in acting agreeably to the
   moral fitness of things. Wollaston places it in regard to truth.
   Hutcheson defines it to be " a quality apprehended in some actions
   which produces approbation and love towards the actor, from those who
   receive no benefit from the action. Many writers, ancient and modern,
   have placed virtue in imitation of God; and many others in obedience to
   the will of God. Waterland, Rutherforth, and (John) Brown, have placed
   it in a wise regard to our own interest. Bishop Butler says, that "a
   due concern about our own interest or happiness, and a reasonable
   endeavour to promote it, is virtue;" and that "benevolence, singly
   considered, is in no sort the whole of virtue." Hume, who appears to
   have read several of the works or Edwards, and to have made use of them
   in accommodation to his own views, includes in his description of
   virtue, whatever is agreeable and useful to ourselves and others. Adam
   Smith refers it to the principal of sympathy. Paley, who read Edwards
   with care, defines virtue to be "The doing good to mankind in Obedience
   to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness."
   Cumberland, in his Laws of Nature, justly regards it as consisting in
   the love of God, and of our fellow-creatures, and explains himself
   thus, "The foundation of all natural law is the greatest benevolence of
   every rational agent towards all.

   Mr. Edwards represents virtue as founded in happiness; and as being
   love to the greatest happiness, or love to the happiness of universal
   being. He describes it, as leading its possessor to desire, and to
   promote, as far as in him lies, the happiness of all beings, and a
   greater degree of happiness in preference to a less. His account of the
   subject is in exact accordance with the decision of reason. Happiness
   is the end, for which intelligent beings were made, the perfection of
   their existence; and therefore virtue, or moral excellence, must be
   love to that happiness. It is also in exact accordance with the
   Scriptures. The sum of our duty is unquestionably virtue. But Moses
   sums up our duty in two commands, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
   with all thy heart" and "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself:" in
   other words, Thou shalt love the happiness of universal being.

   When the Scriptures had so plainly pointed out the nature of virtue, as
   consisting in love; and its foundation, as being happiness; it is not a
   little remarkable, that so many acute writers, with the Scriptures in
   their hands, should have formed views either so obscure, or so
   erroneous, of these subjects; and, perhaps not less remarkable, that
   Mr. Edwards should have been able to discover its true nature, and its
   real foundation, at a very early age, as clearly as he did in
   after-life. That this was the case, no one will want evidence, who
   reads the various articles under the head of Excellency, particularly
   the last, in the Notes on the Mind [61] .

   These two treatises were first published together in a pamphlet, in
   Boston, in 1788, without alteration from the rough draught of the
   author. He designed them both for publication, but never prepared
   either of them for the press. Though conceived and expressed with great
   perspicuity, they treat of subjects, which demand close thought in the
   reader, as well as the writer; and, on this account, have often been
   imperfectly comprehended, even by divines. But wherever they have been
   read and understood, they have to such a degree formed and regulated
   the views of theologians, with regard to the subjects of which they
   treat, that other treatises are consulted, rather as objects of
   curiosity, or history, than as guides of opinions and principles [62] .

   In February, or early in March, this year, Mr. Edwards sent his second
   son, Jonathan, [63] then a lad of nine years of age, to Onohquauga, to
   reside with Mr. Hawley, that he might learn more perfectly the language
   of the Iroquois. He continued there about a twelvemonth; when, in
   consequence of the war with France, the danger of attack from the
   Indians became so imminent, that Mr. Hawley returned with him to his
   father's house.

   The war of 1754 was most disastrous to the colonies; and the frontier
   settlements of New England, of which Stockbridge was one, were exposed
   to unceasing anxiety and alarm, from their constant liability to attack
   from the French savages. In the autumn, several of the inhabitants of
   Stockbridge were killed by these marauders; in consequence of which it
   became a garrisoned town; and every family had quartered upon it its
   own quota of the soldiers, necessary for the defence of the place. The
   state of things, in this respect, may be learned from the following
   letter of Mr. Edwards, to the officer who had the command of the troops
   in that part of the county.

   "Stockbridge, Feb. 26, 1755.

   sir,

   We have not lodgings and provisions, so as to board and lodge more than
   four soldiers; and being in a low state as to my health, and not able
   to go much abroad, and upon that and other accounts, under much greater
   disadvantages than others to get provisions, it is far this reason, and
   not because I have a disposition to make difficulty, that I told the
   soldiers of this province, who had hitherto been provided for here,
   that we could not board them any longer. I have often been told that
   you had intimated, that you have other business for them in a short
   time. Captain Hosmer has sent three of his men to lodge at my house,
   whom I am willing to entertain, as I choose to board such as are likely
   to be continued for our defence in times of danger. Stebbins has
   manifested to us a desire to continue here. Him, therefore, I am
   willing to entertain, with your consent. Requesting your candid
   construction of that, which is not intended in any inconsistence with
   my having all proper honour and respect, I am

   Your humble servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   The subsequent letter to Mr. Erskine will show, still more fully, the
   state of alarm and terror then existing at Stockbridge.

   "Stockbridge, April 15, 1755.

   rev. and dear sir,

   The last year, in the spring, I received, without a letter, a packet
   containing the following books: Casaubon on Enthusiasm; Warburton's
   Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion; Merrick on Christ the True
   Vine; Campbell's Apostles no Enthusiasts; Discourse on the Prevailing
   Evils of the Present Time; Remarks on Apostles no Enthusiasts;
   Moncrieff's Review and Examination of some Principles in Campbell's
   Apostles no Enthusiasts; Gilbert on the Guilt and Pardon of Sin; Hervey
   on the Cross of Christ; An Account of the Orphan School, &c. at
   Edinburgh; Memorial Concerning the Surgeon's Hospital; Gairdner's
   Account of the Old People's Hospital; State of the Society in Scotland
   for Propagating Christian Knowledge; Abridgment of the Rules of said
   Society; Regulations of the Town's Hospital at Glasgow; and Annals of
   the Persecution of the Protestants in France.

   In the beginning of last December, I received another packet without a
   letter; the wrapper superscribed with your hand. In this were the
   following pamphlets: A Sermon by a Lay Elder, before the Commission; A
   Letter to a Gentleman at Edinburgh; Resolutions of the General
   Assembly, of May 22d, 1736; Rutherford's Power of Faith and Prayer;
   Inquiry into the Method of Settling Parishes; The Nature of the
   Covenant and Constitution of the Church of Scotland; Essay on Gospel
   and Legal Preaching; Necessity of Zeal for the Truth; A Vindication of
   the Protestant Doctrine of Justification, against the Charge of
   Antinomianism. The last week I received a letter from you, dated 11th
   July, 1754; which was found at Mr. Prince's by one that went to Boston
   from hence, and had lain there Mr. Prince could not tell how long. In
   this letter you make mention of these last-mentioned pamphlets,
   received last December. I now return you my hearty thanks for this
   letter, and these generous presents. I should have written to you long
   ago, had I not been prevented by the longest and most tedious sickness
   that ever I had in my life: It being followed with fits of ague which
   came upon me about the middle of last July, and were for a long time
   very severe, and exceedingly wasted my flesh and strength, so that I
   became like a skeleton. I had several intermissions of the fits by the
   use of the Peruvian bark; but they never wholly left me till the middle
   of last January. In the mean time, I several times attempted to write
   letters to some of my friends about affairs of importance, but found
   that I could bear but little of such writing. Once, in attempting to
   write a letter to Mr. Burr, a fit of the ague came upon me while I was
   writing, so that I was obliged to lay by my pen. When my fits left me
   they left me in a poor weak state, so that I feared whether I was not
   going into a dropsy. Nevertheless, I have of late gradually gained
   strength.

   I lately received a letter from Mr. M'Laurin, dated Aug. 13, 1754;
   which Mr. Prince sent me, with a letter from himself, wherein he
   informed me that a captain of a ship from Glasgow, then lately arrived,
   brought an account of Mr. M'Laurin's death; that he died very suddenly,
   with an apoplexy, a little before he left Glasgow. Since I received
   that letter, I sent to Mr. Prince, desiring to know more of the
   certainty of the account. This is an affecting piece of news. It is an
   instance of death which I have much cause to lament. He has long shown
   himself to be a very worthy, kind, and obliging friend and
   correspondent of mine. And doubtless, the church of Scotland has much
   cause to lament his death. There is reason to think that he was one of
   them that stood in the gap to make up the hedge in these evil times. He
   was a wise, steady, and most faithful friend of gospel truth and vital
   piety, in these days of great corruption. I wish that I may take
   warning by it, as well as by my own late sickness, to prepare for my
   own departure hence.

   I have nothing very comfortable to write respecting my own success in
   this place. The business of the Indian mission, since I have been here,
   has been attended with strange embarrassments, such as I never could
   have expected, or so much as once dreamed of; of such a nature, and
   coming from such a quarter, that I take no delight in being very
   particular and explicit upon it. But, beside what I especially refer
   to, some things have lately happened that have occasioned great
   disturbance among the Indians, and have tended to alienate them from
   the English. As particularly, the killing of one of them in the woods,
   by a couple of travellers, white men, who met him, and contended with
   him. And though the men were apprehended and imprisoned; yet on their
   trial they escaped the sentence of death: one of them only receiving a
   lighter punishment, as guilty of manslaughter: by which these Indians,
   and also the Indians of some other tribes, were greatly displeased, and
   disaffected towards the English. Since the last fall, some Indians from
   Canada, doubtless instigated by the French, broke in upon us, on the
   sabbath, between meetings, and fell upon an English family, and killed
   three of them; and about an hour after killed another man, coming into
   the town from some distant houses; which occasioned a great alarm in
   the town, and in the country. Multitudes came from various parts, for
   our defence, that night, and the next day; and many of these conducted
   very foolishly towards our Indians on this occasion, suspecting them to
   be guilty of doing the mischief, charging them with it, and threatening
   to kill them, and the like. After this, a reward being offered by some
   private gentlemen, to some that came this way as soldiers, if they
   would bring them the scalp of a Canada Indian; two men were so
   extremely foolish and wicked, that they, in the night, dug up one of
   our Indians, that had then lately died, out of his grave, to take off
   his scalp; that, by pretending that to be a scalp of a Canada Indian,
   whom they had met and killed in the woods, they might get the promised
   reward. When this was discovered, the men were punished. But this did
   not hinder, but that such an act greatly increased the jealousy and
   disaffection or the Indians, towards the English. Added to these
   things, we have many white people, that will, at all times, without any
   restraint, give them ardent spirits, which is a constant temptation to
   their most predominant lust.

   Though I have but little success, and many discouragements, here at
   Stockbridge, yet Mr. Hawley, now a missionary among the Six Nations,
   who went from New England to Onohquauga, a place more than 200 miles
   distant from hence, has, of late, had much encouragement. Religion
   seems to be a growing, spreading thing, among the savages in that part
   of America, by his means. And there is a hopeful prospect, of way being
   made for another missionary in those parts, which may have happy
   consequences, unless the Six Nations should go over to the French;
   which there is the greatest reason to expect, unless the English should
   exert themselves, vigorously and successfully, against the French, in
   America, this year. They seem to be waiting to see whether this will be
   so or no, in order to determine, whether they will entirely desert the
   English, and cleave to the French. And if the Six Nations should
   forsake the English, it may be expected, that the Stockbridge Indians,
   and almost all the nations of Indians in North America, will follow
   them. It seems to be the most critical season, with the British
   dominions in America, that ever was seen, since the first settlement of
   these colonies; and all, probably, will depend on the warlike
   transactions of the present year. What will be done I cannot tell. We
   are all in commotion, from one end of British America to the other; and
   various expeditions are projected, and preparing for; one to Ohio,
   another to the French Forts in Nova Scotia, another to Crown Point. But
   these affairs are not free from embarrassments: great difficulties
   arise, in our present most important affairs, through the dispirited
   state of the several governments. It is hard for them to agree upon
   means and measures. And we have no reason to think that the French are
   behind us in their activity and preparations. A dark cloud seems to
   hang over us: we need the prayers of all our friends, and all friends
   to the protestant interest. Stockbridge is a place much exposed; and
   what will become of us, in the struggles that are coming on, God only
   knows. I have heard that Messrs. Tennent and Davies are arrived in
   America, having had good success in the errand they went upon. Mr.
   Bellamy is not likely to go to New York, principally by reason of the
   opposition of some of the congregation, and also of some of the
   neighbouring ministers. I have heard, they have lately unanimously
   agreed to apply themselves to Mr. M'Gregor, of New Londonderry, alias
   Nutfield, in New England, to be their minister; who is a gentleman
   that, I think, if they can obtain him, will be likely to suit them, and
   competent to fill the place. And I have heard, that there has been some
   difference in his own congregation, that has lately made his situation
   there uneasy. If so, he will be more likely to consent to the motion
   from New York.

   My wife joins with me in respectful and affectionate salutations to you
   and Mrs. Erskine.

   I am, dear Sir, your affectionate and obliged brother,

   jonathan edwards."

   "P.S. In a journey I went to Northampton, the last April, I carried the
   foregoing letter, with others for Scotland, so far, seeking an
   opportunity to send them from thence to Boston; and there I met another
   letter from Mr. Prince, with a joyful contradiction of his former
   account of Mr. M'Laurin's death; which occasioned my bringing my packet
   home again. Nevertheless, after I had broken open and perused this
   letter, I thought best to send it along, enclosed in a wrapper to Mr.
   M'Laurin; who, I hope, is yet living, and will convey it to you.

   J.E.

   Stockbridge, June 2, 1755."

   In the beginning of September, the danger became so imminent, that Mr.
   Edwards, at the request of the people of the town, addressed the
   following urgent letter to the colonel of the county.

   "To Col. Israel Williams.

   Stockbridge, Sept. 5, 1755.

   sir,

   Yesterday the English inhabitants of the town sent away a letter,
   directed to you, to be conveyed to Hatfield, respecting the state of
   the town, stating that it was left very greatly exposed, by the drawing
   off of all the Connecticut soldiers; that Governor Shirley, by his
   urgency, had persuaded away almost all the Indian inhabitants fit for
   war, who objected much against going, on that account, that the
   departure of so many would leave the town, and their wives and children
   too, defenceless; that the governor removed their objection, by
   promising that a sufficient number of English soldiers should be
   maintained here, during their absence, for the defence of the town; and
   also, that we had just now information sent in writing, from Mr.
   Vanschaak, that two large parties of Indians are lately gone out of
   Crown Point, against our frontiers; and so entreating that soldiers may
   be speedily sent. But being informed to-day, that you are gone from
   Hatfield, and not knowing whether you will seasonably receive the
   aforementioned letter, I now, at the desire of the people, give you
   this brief information of what was therein written; earnestly desiring,
   that we may not be left so easy and open a prey to our enemies, who, we
   have reason to think, have the means of learning our situation, and are
   certainly preparing to attack some of the most defenceless of the
   frontier villages. We hope that the troops may be forwarded
   immediately; for, having no adequate means of repelling an attack, we
   have no security for a single day.

   I am respectfully,

   Your obedient servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   In 1751, an anonymous work was published in Edinburgh, entitled "Essays
   on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion," [64] of which
   Henry Home, [65] Esq. soon avowed himself the author. These essays,
   though written by a member of the church of Scotland, were regarded as
   decidedly sceptical in their tendency, and brought the author into some
   difficulties with the particular church with which he was connected.
   This led to a public discussion of the character of the work at
   large--particularly of the Essay on Liberty and Necessity. When this
   discussion was commencing, the Essay on the Freedom of the Will arrived
   in Scotland. It was extensively read by men of speculative minds; and,
   though presenting a view of the subject wholly new, gave great
   satisfaction to men of all classes. Lord Kaimes and his friends, having
   read the work of Mr. Edwards, endeavoured to show that the view of
   liberty and necessity, in the Freedom of the Will, was substantially
   the same with that given by his lordship. Mr. Erskine apprized Mr.
   Edwards of this fact. In the following letter, the latter barely
   alludes to the work of Lord Kaimes, as a work of corrupt tendency. In a
   subsequent letter to his friends, written in the summer of the
   following year, and now appended to the Treatise on the Freedom of the
   Will, [66] he examines the views of liberty and necessity by his
   lordship, shows their entire discordance with his own views, as
   exhibited in the Freedom of the Will, and exposes their inconsistency,
   not only with reason but with each other. This letter, from a sense of
   justice to its author, was immediately published, in the form of a
   pamphlet, by Mr. Erskine, and produced a universal conviction, that
   Lord Kaimes had wholly misunderstood the view taken of liberty and
   necessity by Mr. Edwards; and that his own views of it were at war,
   alike with reason and revelation. Indeed, his lordship himself appears
   to have been of the same opinion; for, in a subsequent edition, the
   Essay on Liberty and Necessity is said to have been much changed, as to
   present essentially different views of those important subjects.

   "To the Rev. John Erskine, Minister of the Gospel, at Culross,
   Scotland.

   Stockbridge, Dec. 11, 1755

   rev. and dear sir,

   I last wrote to you July 24th, 1755. Since that I received a letter
   from you, dated June 23, 1755, together with the Essays on the
   Principles of Morality and Natural Religion,* from Mr. Hogg, and the
   Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments of Sopho, from yourself.
   I thank you for your letter and present, and shall write a letter of
   thanks to Mr. Hogg, for his present by your hand, added to former
   instances of his generosity. I had before read that book of Essays,
   having borrowed Mr. Bellamy's, and also that book of Mr. David Hume's,
   which you speak of. I am glad of an opportunity to read such corrupt
   books, especially when written by men of considerable genius; that I
   may have an idea of the notions that prevail in our nation. You say
   that some people say, that Lord Kaimes's being made a Lord of Session
   would have been prevented, if Chancellor Hardwick and Archbishop
   Herring had seasonably seen his book. I should be glad to know who this
   Chancellor Hardwick is, and what is his character. By your mentioning
   him in such a manner, I am ready to suppose he may be, in some
   respects, of good character; and it is a matter of thankfulness, if a
   man of good character, and a friend to religion, be Lord Chancellor.

   As to our warlike concerns, I have not heretofore been very particular
   in writing about them, in my letters to Scotland, supposing it highly
   probable that you would have earlier accounts from Boston, New York,
   and Philadelphia, than any I can send you, living at so great a
   distance from any of the sea-ports. Nevertheless, seeing you propose my
   sending you some account of the present posture of affairs, I would
   say, that it appears to me that notwithstanding some remarkable favours
   of Heaven, of which we are very unworthy, it has in the general been a
   year of great frowns of Providence on British America. Notwithstanding
   our success at Nova Scotia, and in having the better in the battle near
   Lake George, and taking the French general prisoner; yet, considering
   the advantages the enemy hath obtained against us, by General
   Braddock's defeat, especially in gaining over and confirming the
   Indians on their side, and disheartening and weakening our friends, and
   what we have suffered from our enemies, and how greatly we are weakened
   and almost sunk with our vast expenses, especially in New England, and
   the blood as well as money we have expended; I say, considering these
   things, and how little we have gained by our loss and trouble, our case
   is no better, but far worse than it was in the beginning of the year.
   At least, I think it certain, that we have attained no advantage, in
   any wise, to balance our trouble and expense of blood and treasure. The
   expedition to the eastward has been remarkably successful; but the
   other three expeditions, that against the French forts on the Ohio,
   that against Niagara, and that against Crown Point, have all been
   unsuccessful, as to their main designs. And though the army under
   General Johnson had a kind of victory over the French, and took the
   Baron Dieskau, their general, prisoner; yet we suffered very greatly in
   the battle, and the taking of the French general probably, was the
   saving of his army. For, by telling a lie to our army, viz. that the
   French were in constant expectation of being greatly enforced by a
   large body, that marched another way, and had appointed to meet them
   near that place, our army was prevented from pursuing the enemy, after
   they had repelled them; which, if they had done, the French might have
   been under great advantages to have cut them off, and prevented the
   return of almost all of them to Crown Point, which could be no
   otherwise than through the water in their batteaux. Our army never
   proceeded any farther than the place of their engagement; but, having
   built a fort there, near Lake George, alias Lake St. Sacrament, after
   they had built another near Hudson's river, about fourteen miles on
   this side, and left garrisons, has lately returned. As also has the
   army under General Shirley, (who went with designs against Niagara,)
   after having built some vessels of force in the lake Ontario, and
   strengthened the fortifications at Oswego, and sent for the remains of
   General Braddock's army to Albany, there to go into winter quarters.
   The governors of the several provinces, in the latter part of the last
   month, had a meeting to confer together, concerning our warlike
   affairs, and to agree on a plan of operations to be recommended to the
   government at home for the next year. But I have heard nothing of their
   determinations. The Indians have not done much mischief on the
   frontiers of New England, since our army have been about us; but have
   been dreadful in their ravages, on the back settlements of Virginia and
   Pennsylvania.

   It is apparent that the ministry at home miss it very much, in sending
   over British forces to fight with Indians in America, and in sending
   over British officers, to have the command of our American forces. Let
   them send us arms, ammunition, money, and shipping; and let New England
   men manage the business in their own way, who alone understand it. To
   appoint British officers over them, is nothing but a hindrance and
   discouragement to them. Let them be well supplied, and supported, and
   defended by sea, and then let them go forth under their own officers
   and manage in their own way, as they did in the expedition against Cape
   Breton. All the provinces in America seem to be fully sensible, that
   New England men are the only men to be employed against Canada; as I
   had opportunity abundantly to observe, in my late journey to New York,
   New Jersey, and Philadelphia. However, we ought to remember that
   neither New England men, nor any other, are any thing unless God be
   with us; and when we have done all, at finding fault with men and
   instruments employed, we cannot expect prosperity, unless the accursed
   thing be removed from our camp.

   God has lately frowned on my family, in taking away a faithful servant,
   who was a great help to us; and one of my children has been under
   threatening infirmities, but is somewhat better. I desire your prayers
   for us all.

   My wife joins with me in affectionate and respectful salutations to you
   and Mrs. Erskine.

   I am, Rev, and dear Sir.

   Your obliged brother,

   and affectionate friend,

   jonathan edwards. "

   The effect of the war on the Indian mission will be seen from the
   following letter to Mr. M'Culloch.

   "Stockbridge, April 10, 1756.

   rev. and dear sir,

   I thank you for your favour of August, 1755, with Mr. Imries's letter,
   which came to hand in the latter part of the last month. It recommends
   a man, especially a minister of the gospel, to me, to see in him
   evidences of a disposition to be searching into the prophecies of
   Scripture, relating to the future advancement of Christ's kingdom on
   earth. It looks as though he was a man, who felt concern for Christ's
   kingdom and interests in the world; as though he were one of those, who
   took pleasure in the stones, and favoured the dust of Zion. But it has
   proved by events, that many divines, who have been of this character,
   have been over-forward to fix the times and the seasons, which the
   Father hath put in his own power. However, I will not positively charge
   Mr. Imries with this, before I see what he has to offer, in proof of
   those things which he has advanced. I think that neither I nor any
   other person, that knows no more than what is contained in his letter,
   of the reasons that he builds his opinions upon, have any opportunity
   to judge of those opinions. And therefore I should think it a pity that
   his private letter to Mr. Hogg was published to the world, before his
   reasons were prepared for the press. This letter has been reprinted in
   Boston; but coming abroad, with so little mention of the grounds of his
   opinion, it gives occasion to the profane to reproach and ridicule it,
   and its author.

   With respect to Mr. Hawley, and Mr. Brainerd, and their Indians,
   concerning which you desire to be informed; the correspondents have
   altered their determination, from time to time, with respect to Mr.
   Brainerd and his Indians. They seemed inclined at first to their
   removal to Wawwoming, alias Wyoming, and then to Onohquauga, and then
   to Wyoming again; and finally, about a twelve-month ago, they wholly
   dismissed him from employ as a missionary to the Indians, and pastor to
   the Indian church at Bethel. I cannot say I am fully satisfied with
   their conduct in doing this so hastily; nor do I pretend to know so
   much, concerning the reasons of their conduct, as to have sufficient
   grounds positively to condemn their proceedings. However, the
   congregation is not wholly left as sheep without a shepherd, and are in
   part committed to the care of Mr. William Tennent, who lives not far
   off, and is a faithful, zealous minister, who visits them, and preaches
   to them, once a week; but I think not often upon the sabbath. The last
   fall, I was in New Jersey and Philadelphia, and was present at a
   meeting of the correspondents; when Mr. Tennent gave an agreeable
   account of the then present state of these Indians, with respect to
   religion, and also of their being in better circumstances, as to their
   lands, than they had been. Mr. Brainerd was then at Newark with his
   family, where he had been preaching, as a probationer for settlement,
   ever since Mr. Burr's dismission from that place, on account of his
   business as president of the college. But whether Mr. Brainerd is
   settled, or like to settle there, I have not heard. At the
   forementioned meeting of the correspondents, I used some arguments, to
   induce them to re-establish Mr. Brainerd, in his former employ with his
   Indians, and to send them to Onohquauga. But I soon found it would be
   fruitless to urge the matter. What was chiefly insisted on, as an
   insuperable obstacle to Mr. Brainerd's going, with his family, so far
   into the wilderness, was Mrs. Brainerd's very infirm state. Whether
   there was indeed any sufficient objection to such a removal, at that
   time, or no; Divine Providence has, since that, so ordered the state
   and consequences of the war, subsisting here in America, that
   insuperable obstacles are laid in the way of their removal, either to
   Onohquauga, Wawwoming, or any other parts of America, that way. The
   French, by their indefatigable endeavours with the nation of the
   Delawares, so called, from their ancient seat about Delaware river,
   though now chiefly residing on the Susquehannah and its branches, have
   stirred them up to make war on the English; and dreadful have been the
   ravages and desolations, which they have made of late, on the back
   parts of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. They are the principal nation
   inhabiting the parts about Susquehannah river, on which both Wyoming
   and Onohquauga stand. The latter indeed is above the bounds of their
   country, but yet not very far from them; and the Delaware Indians are
   frequently there, as they go to and fro; on which account there is
   great danger, that Mr. Hawley's mission and ministry there will be
   entirely broken up. Mr. Hawley came from there about two months ago,
   with one of my sons, about ten years old; who had been there with him
   near a twelvemonth, to learn the Mohawk language. He has since been to
   Boston, to consult the commissioners for Indian affairs, that have
   employed him, and returned: and yesterday went from my house, to meet
   some of his Indians, at an appointed time and place in the Mohawk
   country; to determine with them, whether it will be safe for him to
   return to abide with them. If not, yet will he be under the pay of the
   commissioners till next fall, and the issue be seen of the two
   expeditions now in prosecution, one against Crown Point, the other
   against the French forts at Frontenac and Niagara, near Lake Ontario;
   which may possibly make a great alteration, as to the state of the war
   with the Indians. If Mr. Hawley determines not to return to Onohquauga
   this spring, he will probably go as chaplain to the Indians, in General
   Shirley's army, in the expedition to Lake Ontario.

   You speak of the vast superiority of the numbers of the English, in
   America, to those of the French; and that some therefore think, the
   settlements of the former are in no great danger from the latter.
   Though it be true, that the French are twenty times less than we are in
   number, yet it may be a question, whether other things, in which they
   exceed us, when all jointly considered, will not more than
   counterbalance all our excess of numbers. They vastly exceed us in
   subtilty and intrigue, in vigilance and activity, in speed and secrecy;
   in acquaintance with the continent of North America, in all parts west
   of the British settlements, for many hundred leagues, the rivers,
   lakes, and mountains, the avenues and passes; and also in the influence
   they have among the various tribes and nations of Indians, and in their
   constant skill and indefatigable diligence in managing them, to
   alienate them from the English, attach them firmly to themselves, and
   employ them as their tools. Beside the vast advantage they have, in
   time of war, in having all united under the absolute command of one
   man, the governor of Canada; while we are divided into a great many
   distinct governments, independent of one another, and, in some
   respects, of clashing interests: interests which unspeakably clog and
   embarrass our affairs, and make us, though a great, yet an unwieldy,
   unmanageable body, and an easy prey to our vigilant, secret, subtle,
   swift and active, though comparatively small, enemy.

   As to a description of the situation of those parts you mention, I can
   give you no better than you have, in many that abound in Great Britain.
   With respect to the situation of Stockbridge, it is not in the province
   of New York, as you have been informed, but in the utmost border of the
   province of Massachusetts, on the west, next to the province of New
   York; about 40 miles west of Connecticut river, about 25 miles east of
   Hudson's river, and about 35 miles south east from Albany: a place
   exposed in this time of war. Four persons were killed here, in the
   beginning of September, 1754, by Canada Indians; which occasioned a
   great alarm to us, and to a great part of New England. Since then we
   have had many alarms; but God has preserved us.

   I desire your prayers that we may still be preserved, and that God
   would be with me and my family, and people, and bless us in all
   respects. My wife and family join with me, in their respects to you and
   yours.

   I am, dear Sir,

   Your affectionate brother and servant,

   jonathan edwards."

   In consequence of the ill success attending the British arms, during
   the campaign of 1756, the danger of the frontiers became extreme, and
   the friends of Mr. Edwards were, for a time, exceedingly anxious for
   his personal safety. Mr. Bellamy, at this period, sent him the
   following kind invitation, to look to Bethlem, as the place of retreat,
   for himself and his family.

   "Bethlem, May 31, 1756

   dear sir,

   I am in pain, fearing our army against Crown Point will be defeated.
   God only knows how it will be. Your own discretion will make you
   sufficiently speedy, to secure yourself and family. We stand as ready
   to receive you, and any of your family, to all the comforts our house
   affords, as if you were our children. I am greatly interested in your
   safety.--I am concerned for Mr. Hawley. I fear he will be too
   venturesome, and fling away his life for nothing.--I wish, if you know
   how to get one along, you would send him a letter.--Our youngest child
   still remains somewhat unwell. The Indian boys grow more and more easy
   and content, but they love play too well--are very ignorant--and very
   stupid, as to the things of religion--and in arithmetic, when I would
   teach them any thing that is a little difficult, they are soon
   discouraged, and don't love to try. So I take them off, and put them to
   writing again--designing, by little and little, to get them along. They
   will not endure hardship, and bend their minds to business, like
   English boys. It seems they were never taught their catechism. Shall I
   teach it? I have got three Bibles; but have not yet given them to the
   boys, they are so ignorant. I expect you will give me any instructions
   you think proper; and remain, Rev. Sir,

   J. BELLAMY"

   It is probable that Mr. Edwards began his Treatise on Original Sin
   about this period, and that he devoted the leisure hours of the summer,
   autumn, and winter, to the preparation of that work. The date of the
   author's preface, May 26, 1757, shows the time when it was finished for
   the press.

   The views of Mr. Edwards, in this treatise, are these: that there is a
   tendency in human nature, prevailing and effectual, to that sin, which
   implies the utter ruin of all; that this tendency originates in the sin
   of Adam, of which the whole race are imputed the partakers; and that
   this tendency consists, in their being left of God, at their original,
   in the possession of merely human appetites and passions, in themselves
   "innocent," and without the influx of those superior principles, which
   come from divine influences. The only guilt, attributed by him to
   mankind, before they come to the exercise of moral agency themselves,
   is that of participating in the apostasy of Adam, in consequence of the
   original constitution of God, which made him and his race "one."

   He supposes this tendency to sin, pertaining to men, at their original,
   to constitute the subject of it a sinner, only, because he regards him
   as a participator in that sin, by which Adam apostatized, with his
   whole race. This tendency he calls "sinful," "corrupt," "odious," &c.,
   because it is a tendency "to that moral evil, by which the subject of
   it becomes odious in the sight of God." (Part 1. Chap. II. Sect. III.)
   He supposes that infants, who have this tendency in their nature, are,
   as yet, "sinners, only by the one act or offence of Adam"; and, that
   "they have not renewed the act of sin themselves." (Part I. Chap. IV.)
   He utterly denies any positive agency of God, in producing sin; and
   resolves the tendency to sin, into the "innocent principles" of human
   nature; (which God might create, without sin;) and the withholding of
   that positive influence, from which spring superior and divine
   principles:--which act of withholding, is not infusing, or positively
   creating, any thing. These "innocent principles"--such as hunger and
   thirst, love and hatred, desire and fear, joy and sorrow, and
   self-love, as distinguished from selfishness,--which are necessary to
   the nature of man, and belong to him, whether holy or sinful, are not,
   in his view, sin. They barely constitute the ground of certainty, that
   the being, who has them, will sin, as soon as he is capable of sinning,
   if that positive influence, from which spring superior and divine
   principles, is withheld; and, in this relation, they are spoken of,
   under the general designation, "a tendency," "a propensity," &c. to
   sin.

   The views of Imputation, contained in this work, are such, as had been
   long and extensively entertained; yet some of them, certainly, are not
   generally received, at present. With this exception, the Treatise on
   Original Sin is regarded as the standard work, on the subject of which
   it treats; and is doubtless the ablest defence of the doctrine of human
   depravity, and of the doctrine that that depravity is the consequence
   of the sin of Adam, which has hitherto appeared.

   The father of Mr. Edwards, as the reader may remember, on account of
   the increasing infirmities of age, had requested his people to settle a
   colleague in the ministry in 1752, but continued to preach to them
   regularly until the summer of 1755, when he was in his eighty-seventh
   year. The following letter, probably the last ever written to him by
   his son, shows the gradual decline of his health and strength, during
   the two following years.

   "To the Rev Timothy Edwards, East Windsor.

   Stockbridge, March 24, 1757.

   honoured sir,

   I take this opportunity just to inform you, that, through the goodness
   of God, we are all in a comfortable state of health, and that we have
   heard, not long since, of the welfare of our children in New Jersey and
   Northampton. I intend, God willing, to be at Windsor some time near the
   beginning of June; proposing then to go a journey to Boston. I intended
   to have gone sooner; but I foresee such hindrances, as will probably
   prevent my going till that time. We rejoice much to hear, by Mr.
   Andrewson, of your being so well as to be able to baptize a child at
   your own house the sabbath before last. We all unite in duty to you and
   my honoured mother, and in respectful and affectionate salutations to
   sisters and cousins; and in a request of a constant remembrance in your
   prayers.

   I am, honoured Sir,

   Your dutiful son,

   jonathan edwards."

   Not long after Mr. Edwards had forwarded to Mr. Erskine his vindication
   of himself, [67] against the charge of having advanced, in the Freedom
   of the Will, the same views of liberty and necessity, with those
   exhibited by Lord Kaimes; he received from his friend a pamphlet,
   entitled "Objections to the Essays on the Principles of Morality and
   Natural Religion examined;" in which the opinion was directly advanced,
   that, if it were really true, (as Mr. Edwards had insisted and
   demonstrated in the Freedom of the Will,) that there is no liberty of
   contingence, nor self-determining power in the will, as opposed to
   moral necessity, or the certain connexion between motives and
   volitions; yet it was best for mankind, that the truth, in this
   respect, should not be known, because, in that case, they would not
   regard either themselves, or others, as deserving of praise or blame
   for their conduct. In the following letter, Mr. Edwards exposes the
   folly and absurdity of this opinion; and explains, in a remarkably
   clear and convincing manner, the practical bearing of the great
   principles advanced in the Freedom of the Will, on the subject of
   salvation. This letter might well have been published at the time, and
   circulated through the church at large. And we recommend it to the
   frequent and prayerful perusal both of those ministers, who cannot
   clearly comprehend the distinction between physical and moral
   inability, and of those who do not perceive the importance of
   explaining and enforcing this distinction from the pulpit; as
   exhibiting the consequences of representing impenitent sinners, to be
   possessed of any other inability to repent and believe, than mere
   unwillingness, in a manner too awful to be resisted, by a conscientious
   mind.

   "To Mr. Erskine.

   Stockbridge, August 3, 1757.

   rev. and dear sir,

   In June last, I received a letter from you, dated January 22, 1757,
   with Mr. Anderson's Complaint verified,' and Objections to the Essays
   [68] examined.' For these things, I now return my hearty thanks.

   The conduct of the vindicator of the Essays,' from objections made
   against them, seems to be very odd. Many things are produced from
   Calvin, and several Calvinistic writers, to defend what is not objected
   against. His book is almost wholly taken up about that which is nothing
   to the purpose; perhaps only to amuse and blind the common people.
   According to your proposal, I have drawn up something, stating the
   difference between my hypothesis, and that of the Essays; which I have
   sent to you, to be printed in Scotland, if it be thought best; or to be
   disposed of as you think proper. Essays on the principles of Morality
   and Natural Religion, by Lord Kaimes [69] I have written it in a letter
   to you; and if it be published, it may be as A letter from me to a
   minister in Scotland.' Lord Kaimes's notion of God's deceiving mankind,
   by a kind of invincible or natural instinct or feeling, leading them to
   suppose, that they have a liberty of contingence and self-determination
   of will, in order to make them believe themselves and others worthy to
   be blamed or praised for what they do, is a strange notion indeed; and
   it is hard for me to conjecture, what his views could be, in publishing
   such things to the world.

   However, by what I have heard, some others seem to be so far of the
   same mind, that they think, that if it be really true, that there is no
   self-determining power in the will, as opposed to any such moral
   necessity, as I speak of, consisting in a certain connexion between
   motives and volitions, it is of a mischievous tendency to say any thing
   of it; and that it is best that the truth in this matter should not be
   known by any means. I cannot but be of an extremely different mind. On
   the contrary, I think that the notion of liberty, consisting in a
   contingent self-determination of the will, as necessary to the morality
   of men's dispositions and actions, is almost inconceivably pernicious;
   and that the contrary truth is one of the most important truths of
   moral philosophy, that ever was discussed, and most necessary to be
   known; and that for want of it, those schemes of morality and religion,
   which are a kind of infidel schemes, entirely diverse from the virtue
   and religion of the Bible, and wholly inconsistent with, and subversive
   of, the main things belonging to the gospel scheme, have so vastly and
   so long prevailed, and have stood in such strength. And I think,
   whoever imagines that he, or any body else, shall ever see the
   doctrines of grace effectually maintained against these adversaries,
   till the truth in this matter be settled, imagines a vain thing. For,
   allow these adversaries what they maintain in this point, and I think
   they have strict demonstration against us. And not only have these
   errors a most pernicious influence, in the public religious
   controversies that are maintained in the world; but such sort of
   notions have a more fatal influence many ways, on the minds of all
   ranks, in all transactions between God and their souls. The longer I
   live, and the more I have to do with the souls of men, in the work of
   the ministry, the more I see of this. Notions of this sort are one of
   the main hinderances of the success of the preaching of the word, and
   other means of grace, in the conversion of sinners. This especially
   appears, when the minds of sinners are affected with some concern for
   their souls, and they are stirred up to seek their salvation. Nothing
   is more necessary for men, in such circumstances, than thorough
   conviction and humiliation; than that their consciences should be
   properly convinced of their real guilt and sinfulness in the sight of
   God, and their deserving of his wrath. But who is there, that has had
   experience of the work of a minister, in dealing with souls in such
   circumstances, that does not find that the thing, that mainly prevents
   this, is men's excusing themselves with their own inability, and the
   moral necessity of those things, wherein their exceeding guilt and
   sinfulness in the sight of God most fundamentally and mainly consist:
   such as, living from day to day without one spark of true love to the
   God of infinite glory, and the fountain of all good; their having
   greater complacency in the little vile things of this world, than in
   him; their living in a rejection of Christ, with all his glorious
   benefits and dying love; and after all the exhibition of his glory and
   grace, having their hearts still as cold as a stone towards him; and
   their living in such ingratitude, for that infinite mercy of his laying
   down his life for sinners They, it may be, think of some instances of
   lewd behaviour, lying, dishonesty, intemperance, profaneness, &c. But
   the grand principles of iniquity, constantly abiding and reigning, from
   whence all proceeds, are all overlooked. Conscience does not condemn
   them for those things, because they cannot love God of themselves, they
   cannot believe of themselves, and the like. They rather lay the blame
   of these things, and their other reigning wicked dispositions of heart,
   to God, and secretly charge him with all the blame. These things are
   very much for want of being thoroughly instructed in that great and
   important truth, that a bad will, or an evil disposition of heart,
   itself, is wickedness. It is wickedness, in its very being, nature, and
   essence, and not merely the occasion of it, or the determining
   influence, that it was at first owing to. Some, it may be, will say,
   they own it is their fault that they have so bad a heart, that they
   have no love to God, no true faith in Christ, no gratitude to him,
   because they have been careless and slothful in times past, and have
   not used means to obtain a better heart, as they should have done.' And
   it may be, they are taught, that they are to blame for their wickedness
   of heart, because they, as it were, brought it on themselves, in Adam,
   by the sin which he voluntarily committed, which sin is justly charged
   to their account;' which perhaps they do not deny. But how far are
   these things from being a proper conviction of their wickedness, in
   their enmity to God and Christ. To be convinced of the sin of something
   that, long ago, was the occasion of their enmity to God; and to be
   convinced of the wickedness of the enmity itself; are quite two things.
   And if sinners, under some awakening, find the exercise of corruption
   of heart, as it appears in a great many ways; in their meditations,
   prayers, and other religious duties, and on occasion of their fears of
   hell, &c. &c.; still, this notion of their inability to help it,
   excusing them, will keep them from proper conviction of sin herein.
   Fears of hell tend to convince men of the hardness of their hearts. But
   then, when they find how hard their hearts are, and how far from a
   proper sensibility and affection in things of religion; they are kept
   from properly condemning themselves for it, from the moral necessity,
   or inability, which attends it. For the very notion of hardness of
   heart implies moral inability. The harder the heart is, the more dead
   is it in sin, and the more unable to exert good affections and acts.
   Thus the strength of sin is made the excuse for sin. And thus I have
   known many under fears of hell, justifying, or excusing, themselves, at
   least implicitly, in horrid workings of enmity against God, in
   blasphemous thoughts, &c.

   It is of great importance, that they that are seeking their salvation,
   should be brought off from all dependence on their own righteousness;
   but these notions above all things prevent it. They justify themselves
   in the sincerity of their endeavours. They say to themselves, that they
   do what they can; they take great pains; and though there be great
   imperfection in what they do, and many evil workings of heart arise,
   yet these they cannot help: here moral necessity, or inability, comes
   in as an excuse. Things of this kind have visibly been the main
   hinderance of the true humiliation and conversion of sinners, in the
   times of awakening that have been in this land, every where, in all
   parts, as I have had opportunity to observe, in very many places. When
   the gospel is preached, and its offers and invitations and motives most
   powerfully urged, and some hearts stand out, here is their strong hold,
   their sheet-anchor. Were it not for this, they would either comply, or
   their hearts would condemn them for their horrid guilt in not
   complying. And if the law of God be preached in its strictness and
   spirituality, yet conscience is not properly convinced by it. They
   justify themselves with their inability; and the design and end of the
   law, as a school-master to fit them for Christ, is defeated. Thus both
   the law and the gospel are prevented from having their proper effect.

   The doctrine of a self-determining will, as the ground of all moral
   good and evil, tends to prevent any proper exercises of faith in God
   and Christ, in the affair of our salvation, as it tends to prevent all
   dependence upon them. For, instead of this, it teaches a kind of
   absolute independence on all those things, that are of chief importance
   in this affair; our righteousness depending originally on our own acts,
   as self-determined. Thus our own holiness is from ourselves, as its
   determining cause, and its original and highest source. And as for
   imputed righteousness, that should have any merit at all in it, to be
   sure there can be no such thing. For self-determination is necessary to
   praise and merit. But what is imputed from another is not from our
   self-determination or action. And truly, in this scheme, man is not
   dependent on God; but God is rather dependent on man in this affair:
   for he only operates consequentially in acts, in which he depends on
   what he sees we determine and do first.

   The nature of true faith implies a disposition to give all the glory of
   our salvation to God and Christ. But this notion is inconsistent with
   it, for it in effect gives the glory wholly to man. For that is the
   very doctrine that is taught, that the merit and praise is his, whose
   is the original and effectual determination of the praiseworthy deed.
   So that, on the whole, I think it must be a miracle, if ever men are
   converted that have imbibed such notions as these, and are under their
   influence in their religious concerns.

   Yea, these notions tend effectually to prevent men's ever seeking after
   conversion, with any earnestness. It is manifest that men never will be
   in earnest in this matter, till their consciences are awakened, and
   they are made sensible of God's anger, and their danger of suffering
   the terrible effects of it. But that stupidity, which is opposed to
   this awakening, is upheld chiefly by these two things: their
   insensibility of their guilt, in what is past and present; and their
   flattering themselves, as to what is future. These notions of liberty
   of indifference, contingence, and self-determination, as essential to
   guilt or merit, tend to preclude all sense of any great guilt for past
   or present wickedness. As has been observed already, all wickedness of
   heart is excused, as what, in itself considered, brings no guilt. And
   all that the conscience has to recur to, to find any guilt, is the
   first wrong determination of the will, in some bad conduct, before that
   wickedness of heart existed, that was the occasion of introducing or
   confirming it. Which determination arose contingently from a state of
   indifference. And how small a matter does this at once bring men's
   guilt to, when all the main things, wherein their wickedness consists,
   are passed over. And indeed the more these principles are pursued, the
   more and more must guilt vanish, till at last it comes to nothing, as
   may easily be shown.

   And with respect to self-flattery and presumption, as to what is
   future, nothing can possibly be conceived more directly tending to it,
   than a notion of liberty, at all times possessed, consisting in a power
   to determine one's own will to good or evil; which implies a power men
   have, at all times, to determine them to repent and turn to God. And
   what can more effectually encourage the sinner, in present delays and
   neglects, and imbolden him to go on in sin, in a presumption of having
   his own salvation at all times at his command? And this notion of
   self-determination and self-dependence, tends to prevent, or enervate,
   all prayer to God for converting grace; for why should men earnestly
   cry to God for his grace, to determine their hearts to that which they
   must be determined to of themselves. And indeed it destroys the very
   notion of conversion itself. There can properly be no such thing, or
   any thing akin to what the Scripture speaks of conversion, renovation
   of the heart, regeneration, &c. if growing good, by a number of
   self-determined acts, are all that is required, or to be expected.

   Excuse me, Sir, for troubling you with so much on this head. I speak
   from the fulness of my heart. What I have long seen of the dreadful
   consequences of these prevalent notions every where, and what I am
   convinced will still be their consequences so long as they continue to
   prevail, fills me with concern. I therefore wish that the affair were
   more thoroughly looked into, and searched to the very bottom.

   I have reserved a copy of this letter, and also of my other to you,
   dated July 25, intending to send them to Mr. Burr, to be by him
   conveyed, by the way of New York or Philadelphia. Looking on these
   letters as of special importance, I send duplicates, lest one copy
   should fail. The packet, in which I enclose this, I cover to Mr.
   Gillies, and send to Boston, to the care of Mr. Hyslop, to be conveyed
   to Mr. Gillies. But yet have desired him, if he has a more direct
   opportunity, to convey the packet to Edinburgh, by the way of London,
   then to put a wrapper over the whole, inscribed to you; and to write to
   you, desiring you to break open the packet, and take out the letters
   which belong to you.

   You will see, Sir, something of our sorrowful state, on this side of
   the water, by my letter to Mr. M'Culloch. O, Sir, pray for us; and pray
   in particular, for

   Your affectionate and obliged

   Friend and brother,

   Jonathan Edwards."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [61] See appendix IV. In several of the articles under the head of
   Excellency, the reader will find, if I may mistake not, as striking
   specimens of powerful metaphysical reasoning, as any to be found in the
   essay on the Freedom of the Will.

   [62] Bishop Butler has left a "Dissertation on the Nature of Virtue,"
   which the curious reader will do well to examine in connexion with Mr.
   Edwards's "Dissertation on the Nature of True Virtue:" if he wishes to
   compare the powers of these twp distinguished men, when endeavouring to
   grasp the same subject.

   [63] Afterwards the Rev. Jonathan Edwards, D. D. President of Union
   College, Schenectady. He was familiarly acquainted with the
   Housatonnuck and the Iroquois; in early life, more so than with the
   English.

   [64] The subjects treated in this volume were, Attachments to objects
   of Distress. Law of Nature. Law of Necessity. Belief. Personal
   Identity. Authority of our Senses. Idea of Power, Knowledge of Future
   Events. Dread of Supernatural Powers in the Dark. Our Knowledge of the
   Deity.

   [65] Soon after created a lord of session, with the title of Lord
   Kaimes.

   [66] See vol. I. pp. 89-98. Lord Kaimes had a much higher reputation,
   as a writer, fifty years ago than at present. The perusal of his Essay
   on Liberty and Necessity, and of the remarks upon it, in the letter of
   Mr. Edwards, here referred to, will inevitably lead to the conviction,
   that, as a metaphysician, he was neither accurate nor profound.

   [67] See Vol. 1. pp. 89-98

   [68] Essays on the principles of Morality and Natural Religion, by Lord
   Kaimes

   [69] See the letter in Vol.1. pp. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XXIV.

   DEATH OF PRESIDENT BURR--HIS CHARACTER--MR. EDWARDS CHOSEN HIS
   SUCCESSOR--LETTERS OF MRS. BURR--TO A GENTLEMAN IN SCOTLAND--TO A
   GENTLEMAN IN BOSTON--TO HER MOTHER--LETTER OF MR. EDWARDS, TO THE
   TRUSTEES OF THE COLLEGE--LETTER OF MRS. BURR, TO HER FATHER--LETTER TO
   DR. BELLAMY--COUNCIL DISMISS MR. EDWARDS--INAUGURATION AS
   PRESIDENT--FIRST SERMON AT PRINCETON--SICKNESS--DEATH--LETTER OF DR.
   SHIPPEN--LETTERS OF MRS. EDWARDS. AND OF HER DAUGHTER, TO MRS.
   BURR--DEATH OF MRS. BURR--DEATH OF MRS. EDWARDS.

   The Rev. Aaron Burr, president of the college at Princeton, and the
   son-in-law of Mr. Edwards, died, on the 24th of September, 1757, two
   days before the public commencement. He was a native of Fairfield,
   Connecticut, was born in 1716, and was graduated at Yale college in
   1735. In 1738, he was ordained, as pastor of the Presbyterian church at
   Newark. In 1748, he was unanimously elected president of the college,
   as successor to Mr. Dickinson. Though possessed of a slender and
   delicate constitution, he joined, to uncommon talents for the despatch
   of business, a constancy of mind, that commonly secured to him success.
   The flourishing state of the college, at the time of has death, was
   chiefly owing to his great and assiduous exertions. Until the autumn of
   1755, he discharged the duties, both of president and pastor of the
   church. [70] Mr. Burr was greatly respected, in every station and
   relation of life. He was a man of acknowledged talents, of sound,
   practical good sense, of unimpeachable integrity, and of ardent piety.
   Polished in his manners, he had uncommon powers in conversation, and
   possessed the happy art of inspiring all around him with cheerfulness
   As a reasoner, he was clear and solid: and as a preacher, animated,
   judicious, fervent, and successful. He had warm affections, was greatly
   endeared to his family and friends, and was open, fair, and honourable
   in all his intercourse with mankind. During the period of his
   presidency, he secured the high esteem and confidence of all who were
   interested in the college.--In the latter part of July, or the
   beginning of August, being in a low state of health, he made a rapid
   and exhausting visit to Stockbridge, in a very hot, sultry season. He
   soon returned to Princeton, and went immediately to Elizabethtown;
   where, on the 19th of August, he made an attempt, before the
   legislature, to procure the legal exemption of the students from
   military duty. On the 21st, at Newark, being much indisposed, he
   preached an extemporaneous funeral sermon, in consequence of a death in
   the family of his successor. He then returned to Princeton, and, in a
   few days, went to Philadelphia, on the business of the college. On the
   way, his disorder took the form of an intermittent fever. On his
   return, he learned that his friend, Governor Belcher, died at
   Elizabeth-town, on the 31st of August, and that he had been designated
   to preach the funeral sermon. His wife, perceiving his increasing
   illness, besought him to spare himself, and decline the undertaking;
   but he felt himself bound, if possible, to perform it. Having devoted
   the afternoon of Sept 2d, to the task of preparing the sermon, in the
   midst of a high fever, which was succeeded by delirium in the night, he
   rode the next day to Elizabeth-town, about forty miles, and, on the
   4th, in a state of extreme languor and exhaustion, when it was obvious
   to every one, that he ought to have been confined to a sick bed, he
   with great difficulty preached the sermon. He returned to Princeton the
   following day; and his disorder immediately assumed the character of a
   fixed and violent fever, seated on the nerves. At the approach of
   death, that gospel, which he had preached to others, gave him unfailing
   support. He was patient and resigned, and cheered with the liveliest
   hope at a happy immortality.

   The corporation of the college met, two days after his death, and on
   the same day made choice of Mr. Edwards as his successor.

   Some of the circumstances, connected with the sickness and death of her
   husband, are alluded to in the following letter from Mrs. Burr, to a
   gentleman in Scotland, written soon after Mr. Burr's decease.

   "honoured sir,

   I flatter myself I shall not be thought intrusive, if I acknowledge, in
   a few lines, the receipt of your letter, dated in August, to my late
   dear husband, which reached me after he was beyond the reach of all
   mortal things The affectionate regard that you express for one, who was
   dearer to me than my own life, was extremely affecting to me; nor can I
   forgive myself, if I neglect to acknowledge it, in terms of lively
   gratitude. You, Sir, had a large share, with me, in that dear good
   man's heart, which he often expressed, with the warmest affection. I
   thought it might not be improper, to lay your letter before the
   trustees, as they were then convened, and it chiefly concerned the
   college; and then I sent it to my honoured father, the Rev. Mr.
   Edwards, who is chosen to succeed my dear husband; which, I hope, will
   be grateful to the friends of the college, in Scotland. I here enclose
   you, Sir, the last attempt my dear husband made to serve God in public,
   and to do good to his fellow-creatures--a Sermon, that he preached at
   the funeral of our late excellent governor. You will not think it
   strange, if it has imperfections; when I tell you, that all he wrote on
   the subject, was done in a part of one afternoon and evening, when he
   had a violent fever on him, and the whole night after, he was
   irrational.

   Give me leave to beg an interest in your prayers, at the throne of
   grace, for a poor, disconsolate widow, and two fatherless orphans.
   Please to present, with great respect, my kindest regard to your lady
   and daughters.

   I am, honoured Sir,

   Your most obliged and humble servant,

   esther burr."

   The two following extracts from letters, written soon after the death
   of Mr. Burr, will show the strength of her own feelings, as well as her
   religious sentiments, and the exercises of her heart. The first is from
   a letter to a near friend of the family, in Boston.

   "Your most kind letter of condolence gave me inexpressible delight, and
   at the same time set open afresh all the avenues of grief, and again
   probed the deep wound death has given me. My loss--Shall I attempt to
   say how great my loss is--God only can know--And to him alone would I
   carry my complaint.--Indeed, Sir, I have lost all that was or could be
   desirable in a creature.--I have lost all that ever I set my heart on
   in this world.--I need not enlarge on the innumerable amiable qualities
   of my late dear husband, to one that was so well acquainted with him,
   as you were; however pleasing it is to me to dwell on them.--Had not
   God supported me by these two considerations; first, by showing the
   right he has to his own creatures, to dispose of them when and in what
   manner he pleases; and secondly, by enabling me to follow him beyond
   the grave, into the eternal world, and there to view him in unspeakable
   glory and happiness, freed from all sin and sorrow; I should, long
   before this, have been sunk among the dead, and been covered with the
   clods of the valley.--God has wise ends in all that he doth. This thing
   did not come upon me by chance; and I rejoice that I am in the hands of
   such a God."

   The other is from a letter to her mother, dated at Princeton, Oct. 7,
   1757. After giving some account of Mr. Burr's death, and representing
   the sense she had of the greatness of the loss, which she and her
   children had sustained; she writes in the following words:

   "No doubt, dear Madam, it will be some comfort to you to hear, that God
   has not utterly forsaken, although he has cast down. I would speak it
   to the glory of God's name, that I think he has, in an uncommon degree,
   discovered himself to be an all-sufficient God, a full fountain of all
   good. Although all streams were cut off, yet the fountain is left
   full.--I think I have been enabled to cast my care upon him, and have
   found great peace and calmness in my mind, such as this world cannot
   give nor take.--I have had uncommon freedom and nearness to the throne
   of grace. God has seemed sensibly near in such a supporting and
   comfortable manner, that I think I have never experienced the like. God
   has helped me to review my past and present mercies, with some
   heart-affecting degree of thankfulness.

   I think God has given me such a sense of the vanity of the world, and
   uncertainty of all sublunary enjoyments, as I never had before. The
   world vanishes out at my sight! Heavenly and eternal things appear much
   more real and important than ever before. I feel myself to be under
   much greater obligations to be the Lord's, than before this sore
   affliction.--The way of salvation by faith in Jesus Christ, has
   appeared more clear and excellent; and I have been constrained to
   venture my all upon him; and have found great peace of soul in what I
   hope have been the actings of faith. Some parts of the Psalms have been
   very comforting and refreshing to my soul.--I hope God has helped me to
   eye his hand, in this awful dispensation; and to see the infinite right
   he has to his own, and to dispose of them as he pleases.

   Thus, dear Madam, I have given you some broken hints of the exercises
   and supports of my mind, since the death of him, whose memory and
   example will ever be precious to me as my own life. O, dear Madam! I
   doubt not but I have your and my honoured father's prayers daily for
   me; but give me leave to entreat you both, to request earnestly of the
   Lord, that I may never despise his chastenings, nor faint under this
   his severe stroke; of which I am sensible there is great danger, if God
   should only deny me the supports that he has hitherto graciously
   granted.

   O, I am afraid I shall conduct myself so, as to bring dishonour on my
   God, and the religion which I profess! No, rather let me die this
   moment, than be left to bring dishonour on God's holy name.--I am
   overcome--I must conclude, with once more begging, that, as my dear
   parents remember themselves, they would not forget their greatly
   afflicted daughter, (now a lonely widow,) nor her fatherless
   children.--My duty to my ever dear and honoured parents, and love to my
   brothers and sisters.

   From, dear madam,

   Your dutiful and affectionate daughter,

   esther burr."

   "The news of his appointment to the presidency," says Dr. Hopkins, "was
   quite unexpected, and not a little surprising, to Mr. Edwards. He
   looked on himself in many respects, so unqualified for that business,
   that he wondered that gentlemen of so good judgment, and so well
   acquainted with him, as he knew some of the trustees were, should think
   of him for that place. He had many objections in his own mind, against
   undertaking the business, both from his unfitness and his particular
   circumstances; yet could not certainly determine that it was not his
   duty to accept it. The following extract of a letter which he wrote to
   the trustees, will give the reader a view of his sentiments and
   exercises on this occasion, as well as of the great designs he was
   deeply engaged in and zealously prosecuting"

   Stockbridge, Oct 19, 1757.

   rev. and hon. gentlemen,

   I was not a little surprised on receiving the unexpected notice of your
   having made choice of me to succeed the late President Burr, as the
   Head of Nassau Hall.--I am much in doubt, whether I am called to
   undertake the business which you have done me the unmerited honour to
   choose me for.--If some regard may be had to my outward comfort, I
   might mention the many inconveniences and great detriment, which may be
   sustained by my removing with my numerous family, so far from all the
   estate I have in the world, (without any prospect of disposing of it,
   under present circumstances, but with great loss,) now when we have
   scarcely got over the trouble and damage sustained by our removal from
   Northampton, and have but just begun to have our affairs in a
   comfortable situation, for a subsistence in this place; and the expense
   I must immediately be at to put myself into circumstances tolerably
   comporting with the needful support of the honours of the office I am
   invited to; which will not well consist with my ability.

   But this is not my main objection. The chief difficulties in my mind,
   in the way of accepting this important and arduous office, are these
   two: First, my own defects unfitting me for such an undertaking, many
   of which are generally known; beside others of which my own heart is
   conscious.--I have a constitution, in many respects, peculiarly
   unhappy, attended with flaccid solids, vapid, sizy, and scarce fluids,
   and a low tide of spirits; often occasioning a kind of childish
   weakness and contemptibleness of speech, presence, and demeanour, with
   a disagreeable dulness and stiffness, much unfitting me for
   conversation, but more especially for the government of a
   college.--This makes me shrink at the thoughts of taking upon me, in
   the decline of life, such a new and great business, attended with such
   a multiplicity of cares, and requiring such a degree of activity,
   alertness, and spirit of government; especially as succeeding one so
   remarkably well qualified in these respects, giving occasion to every
   one to remark the wide difference. I am also deficient in some parts of
   learning, particularly in algebra, and the higher parts of mathematics,
   and the Greek classics; my Greek leaning having been chiefly in the New
   Testament.--The other thing is this; that my engaging in this business
   will not well consist with those views, and that course of employ in my
   study, which have long engaged and swallowed up my mind, and been the
   chief entertainment and delight of my life.

   And here, honoured Sirs, (imboldened by the testimony I have now
   received of your unmerited esteem, to rely on your candour,) I will
   with freedom open myself to you.

   My method of study, I from my first beginning the work of the ministry,
   has been very much by writing; applying myself, in this way, to improve
   every important hint; pursuing the clue to my utmost, when any thing in
   reading, meditation, or conversation, has been suggested to my mind,
   that seemed to promise light in any weighty point; thus penning what
   appeared to me my best thoughts, on innumerable subjects, for my own
   benefit.--The longer I prosecuted my studies in this method, the more
   habitual it became, and the more pleasant and profitable I found
   it.--The farther I travelled in this way, the more and wider the field
   opened, which has occasioned my laying out many things in my mind, to
   do this in manner, if God should spare my life, which my heart hath
   been much upon; particularly many things against most of the prevailing
   errors of the present day, which I cannot with any patience see
   maintained, (to the utter subverting of the gospel of Christ,) with so
   high a hand, and so long continued a triumph, with so little control,
   when it appears so evident to me, that there is truly no foundation for
   any of this glorying and insult. I have already published something on
   one of the main points in dispute between the Arminians and Calvinists;
   and have it in view, God willing, (as I have already signified to the
   public,) in like manner to consider all the other controverted points,
   and have done much towards a preparation for it.--But beside these, I
   have had on my mind and heart (which I long ago began, not with any
   view to publication) a great work, which I call a History of the Work
   of Redemption, a body of divinity in an entire new method, being thrown
   into the form of a history; considering the affair of Christian
   theology, as the whole of it, in each part, stands in reference to the
   great work of redemption by Jesus Christ; which I suppose to be, of all
   others, the grand design of God, and the summum and ultimum of all the
   divine operations and decrees; particularly considering all parts of
   the grand scheme, in their historical order.--The order of their
   existence, or their being brought forth to view, in the course of
   divine dispensations, or the wonderful series of successive acts and
   events; beginning from eternity, and descending from thence to the
   great work and successive dispensations of the infinitely wise God, in
   time; considering the chief events coming to pass in the church of God,
   and revolutions in the world of mankind, affecting the state of the
   church and the affair of redemption, which we have an account of in
   history or prophecy; till, at last, we come to the general
   resurrection, last judgment, and consummation of all things; when it
   shall be said, It as done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
   end.--Concluding my work, with the consideration of that perfect state
   of things, which shall be finally settled, to last for eternity.--This
   history will be carried on with regard to all three worlds, heaven,
   earth, and hell; considering the connected, successive events and
   alterations in each, so far as the Scriptures give any light;
   introducing all parts of divinity in that order which is most
   scriptural and most natural; a method which appears to me the most
   beautiful and entertaining, wherein every divine doctrine will appear
   to the greatest advantage, in the brightest light, in the most striking
   manner, showing the admirable contexture and harmony of the whole.

   I have also, for my own profit and entertainment, done much towards
   another great work, which I call the Harmony of the Old and New
   Testament, in three parts. The first, considering the prophecies of the
   Messiah, his redemption and kingdom; the evidences of their references
   to the Messiah, &c. comparing them all one with another, demonstrating
   their agreement, true scope, and sense; also considering all the
   various particulars wherein those prophecies have their exact
   fulfilment; showing the universal, precise, and admirable
   correspondence between predictions and events. The second part,
   considering the types of the Old Testament, showing the evidence of
   their being intended as representations of the great things or the
   gospel of Christ; and the agreement of the type with the antitype. The
   third and great part, considering the harmony of the Old and New
   Testament, as to doctrine and precept. In the course of this work, I
   find there will be occasion for an explanation of a very great part of
   the Holy Scriptures; which may, in such a view, be explained in a
   method, which to me seems the most entertaining and profitable, best
   tending to lead the mind to a view of the true spirit, design, life,
   and soul of the Scriptures, as well as their proper use and
   improvement.--I have also many other things in hand, in some of which I
   have made great progress, which I will not trouble you with an account
   of. Some of these things, if Divine Providence favour, I should be
   willing to attempt a publication of. So far as I myself am able to
   judge of what talents I have, for benefiting my fellow-creatures by
   word, I think I can write better than I can speak.

   My heart is so much in these studies, that I cannot find it in my heart
   to be willing to put myself into an incapacity to pursue them any more
   in the future part of my life, to such a degree as I must, if I
   undertake to go through the same coarse of employ, in the office of
   president, that Mr. Burr did, instructing in all the languages, and
   taking the whole care of the instruction of one of the classes, in all
   parts of learning, besides his other labours. If I should see light to
   determine me to accept the place offered me, I should be willing to
   take upon me the work of a president, so far as it consists in the
   general inspection of the whole society; and to be subservient to the
   school, as to their order and methods or study and instruction,
   assisting, myself, in the immediate instruction in the arts and
   sciences, (as discretion should direct, and occasion serve, and the
   state of things require,) especially of the senior class; and added to
   all, should be willing to do the whole work of a professor of divinity,
   in public and private lectures, proposing questions to be answered, and
   some to be discussed in writing and free conversation, in meetings of
   graduates, and others, appointed in proper seasons, for these ends. It
   would be now out of my way, to spend time in a constant teaching of the
   languages; unless it be the Hebrew tongue; which I should be willing to
   improve myself in, by instructing others.

   On the whole, I am much at a loss, with respect to the way of duty, in
   this important affair: I am in doubt, whether, if I should engage in
   it, I should not do what both you and I would be sorry for afterwards.
   Nevertheless, I think the greatness of the affair, and the regard due
   to so worthy and venerable a body, as that of the trustees of Nassau
   Hall, requires my taking the matter into serious consideration, And
   unless you should appear to be discouraged, by the things which I have
   now represented, as to any further expectation from me, I shall proceed
   to ask advice, of such as I esteem most wise, friendly, and faithful;
   if, after the mind of the commissioners in Boston is known, it appears
   that they consent to leave me at liberty, with respect to the business
   they have employed me in here."

   Soon after the death of President Burr, Mr. Edwards addressed a letter
   to his greatly afflicted daughter, fraught with all the affectionate
   instruction and consolation which such a father could impart. [71] To
   this she returned the following answer:

   "To the Rev. Jonathan Edwards, Stockbridge

   Princeton, Nov 2, 1757.

   To my ever honoured father.

   Honoured sir,

   Your most affectionate, comforting letter, by my brother Parsons, was
   exceeding refreshing to me; although I was somewhat damped by hearing,
   that I should not see you until spring. [72] But it is my comfort in
   this disappointment, as well us under all my affliction, that God knows
   what is best for me, and for his own glory. Perhaps I counted too much
   on the company, and conversation, of such a near and dear affectionate
   father and guide. I cannot doubt but all is for the best; and I am
   satisfied that God should order the affair of your removal, as shall be
   for his glory, whatever becomes of me.

   Since I wrote my mother a letter, God has carried me through new
   trials, and given me new supports. My little son has been sick with a
   slow fever, ever since my brother left us, and has been brought to the
   brink of the grave; but, I hope in mercy, God is bringing him back
   again. I was enabled after a severe struggle with nature, to resign the
   child with the greatest freedom. God showed me that the children were
   not my own, but his, and that he had a right to recall what he had
   lent, whenever he thought fit; and that I had no reason to complain, or
   say that God was hard with me. This silenced me. But O how good is God.
   He not only kept me from complaining, but comforted me, by enabling me
   to offer up my child by faith, if ever I acted faith. I saw the fulness
   there was in Christ for little infants, and his willingness to accept
   of such as were offered to him. Suffer little children to come unto me,
   and forbid them not,' were comforting words. God also showed me, in
   such a lively manner, the fulness there was in himself of all spiritual
   blessings, that I said, Although all streams were cut off, yet so long
   as my God lives, I have enough.' He enabled me to say, Although thou
   slay me, yet will I trust in thee.' In this time of trial, I was led to
   enter into a renewed and explicit covenant with God, in a more solemn
   manner than ever before; and with the greatest freedom and delight,
   after much self-examination and prayer, I did give myself and my
   children to God, with my whole heart. Never, until then, had I an
   adequate sense of the privilege we are allowed in covenanting with God.
   This act of soul left my mind in a great calm, and steady trust in God.
   A few days after this, one evening, in talking of the glorious state my
   dear departed husband must be in, my soul was carried out in such large
   desires after that glorious state, that I was forced to retire from the
   family to conceal my joy. When alone I was so transported, and my soul
   carried out in such eager desires after perfection and the full
   enjoyment of God, and to serve him uninterruptedly, that I think my
   nature would not have borne much more. I think, dear Sir, I had that
   night a foretaste of heaven. This frame continued, in some good degree,
   the whole night. I slept but little, and when I did, my dreams were all
   of heavenly and divine things. Frequently since, I have felt the same
   in kind, though not in degree. This was about the time that God called
   me to give up my child. Thus a kind and gracious God has been with me,
   in six troubles and in seven.

   But O, Sir, what cause of deep humiliation and abasement of soul have
   I, on account of remaining corruption, which I see working continually
   in me, especially pride. O, how many shapes does pride cloak itself in.
   Satan is also busy, shooting his darts. But blessed be God, those
   temptations of his, that used to overthrow me, as yet have not touched
   me. I will just hint at one or two, if I am not tedious as to
   length.--When I was about to renew my covenant with God, the suggestion
   seemed to arise in my mind, It is better you should not renew it, than
   break it when you have: what a dreadful thing it will be, if you do not
   keep it!' My reply was, I did not do it in my own strength.' Then the
   suggestion would return, How do you know that God will help you to keep
   it.' But it did not shake me in the least.--Oh, to be delivered from
   the power of Satan, as well as sin! I cannot help hoping the time is
   near. God is certainly fitting me for himself; and when I think that it
   will be soon that I shall be called hence, the thought is transporting.

   I am afraid I have tired out your patience, and will beg leave only to
   add my need of the earnest prayers of my dear and honoured parents, and
   all good people, that I may not at last be a castaway; but that God
   would constantly grant me new supplies of divine grace. I am tenderly
   concerned for my dear brother Timothy, but I hope his sickness will not
   be unto death, but for the glory of God.--Please to give my duty to my
   honoured mother, and my love to all my brothers and sisters

   I am, honoured and dear Sir,

   With the greatest respect,

   With the greatest respect,

   Your affectionate and dutiful daughter,

   esther burr."

   While Mr. Edwards was in a state of suspense alluded to in his letter
   to the trustees of the college, he determined to ask the advice of a
   number of gentlemen in the ministry, on whose judgment and friendship
   he could rely, and to act accordingly. One of those invited, on this
   occasion, was his old and faithful friend, and former pupil, Mr.
   Bellamy, of Bethlem: to whom, having received from him, on the last day
   of November, two letters, dated on the 12th and 17th of that month, he
   returned, on the next day, the following answer; which, while it refers
   to the subject of the council, shows also, in a very striking manner,
   with what ease and readiness he could throw a clear and certain light
   on any dark and difficult passage of the word of God.

   "Stockbridge, Dec. 1, 1757.

   rev. and dear sir,

   Yesterday I received your two letters, of the 12th and 17th of Nov.;
   but I saw and heard nothing of Mr. Hill. I thank you for your concern,
   that I may be useful in the world.--I lately wrote you a letter,
   informing you of our choice of a council, to sit here on the 21st of
   this month; and enclosed in it a letter missive to Mr. Brinsmade, who
   as one of the council. I hope, before this time, you have received it.
   Don't fail of letting me see you here; for I never wanted to see you
   more.

   As to the question you ask, about Christ's argument, in John x. 34-36..
   I observe,

   First, That it is not all princes of the earth, who are called gods, in
   the Old Testament; but only the princes of Israel, who ruled over God's
   people. The princes, who are called gods, in Psalm lxxxii. here
   referred to, are, in the same sentence, distinguished from the princes
   of the nations of the world. I have said, Ye are gods; but ye shall die
   like men, and fall like one of the princes.'

   Secondly, That the reason why these princes of Israel were called gods,
   was, that they, as the rulers and judges of God's Israel, were types
   and figures of Him, who is the true King of the Jews, and the Prince of
   God's people, who is to rule over the house of Jacob for ever, the
   Prince and Saviour of God's church, or spiritual Israel, gathered from
   all nations of the earth; who is God indeed. The throne of Israel, or
   of God's people, properly belonged to Christ. He only was the proper
   Heir to that throne; and therefore, the princes of Israel are said to
   sit upon the throne of the Lord, I Chron. xxix. 23.; and the kingdom of
   Israel, under the kings of the house of David, is called the kingdom of
   the Lord, 2 Chron. xiii. 8. And because Christ took the throne, as the
   Antitype of those kings, therefore he is said, Luke i. 32. to sit upon
   their throne.--Thus, the princes of Israel, in the Psal. 82 ., are
   called gods, and sons of God, or all of them children of the Most
   High;' being appointed types and remarkable representations of the true
   Son of God, and in him of the true God. They were called gods, and sons
   of God, in the same manner as the Levitical sacrifices were called an
   atonement for sin, and in the same manner as the manna was called the
   bread of heaven, and angels' food. These things represented, and, by
   special divine designation, were figures of, the true Atonement, and of
   Him who was the true Bread of heaven, and the true angels food; in the
   same sense as Saul, the person especially pointed out in the Psal. 82.,
   is called the Lord's anointed,' or (as in the original) Messiah, or
   Christ, which are the same. And it is to be observed, that these
   typical gods, and judges of Israel, are particularly distinguished from
   the true God, and true Judge, in the next sentence. Psal. lxxxii. 8
   Arise, o god, thou judge of the earth; for thou shalt inherit all
   nations.' --This is a wish for the coming of that King, that should
   reign in righteousness, and judge righteously; who was to inherit the
   Gentiles, as well as the Jews; and the words, as they stand in
   connexion with the two preceding verses, import thus much--As to you,
   the temporal princes and judges of Israel, you are called gods, and
   sons of God, being exalted to the place of kings, judges, and saviours
   of God's people, the kingdom and heritage of Christ; but you shall die
   like men, and fall like other princes; whereby it appears that you are
   truly no gods, nor any one of you the true Son of God, which your
   injustice and oppression also shows. But oh, that He who is truly God,
   the Judge of the earth, the true and just Judge and Saviour, who is to
   be King over Gentiles as well as Jews, would come and reign! '--It is
   to be observed, that when it is said in this verse--Arise, O God'--the
   word rendered God, is Elohim--the same used in . I have said, Ye are
   gods,'--I have said, Ye are elohim.

   Thirdly, As to the words of Christ, in If he called them gods, unto
   whom the word of God came,' I suppose that, by the word of God coming
   to these princes of Israel, is meant, their being set forth by special
   and express divine designation, to be types or figurative
   significations of God's mind. Those things which God had appointed to
   be types, to signify the mind of God, were a visible word. Types are
   called the word of the Lord--as in Zech. xi. 10, 11.. and in Zech. iv.
   4-6.--The word of God came to the princes of Israel, both as they, by
   God's ordering, became subjects of a typical representation of a divine
   thing, which was a visible word of God; and also, as this was done by
   express divine designation, as they were marked out to this end, by an
   express, audible, and legible word, as in Exod. xxii. 28. and Psal.
   lxxxii 1.; and besides, the thing, of which they were appointed types,
   was Christ, who is called the word of God'--Thus, the word of God came
   to Jacob, as a type of Christ, 1 Kings xviii.31.And Elijah took twelve
   stones, according to the number of the tribes of Jacob, unto whom the
   word of the lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy name--The word
   Israel is prince of god:--Jacob being, by that express divine
   designation, appointed as a type of Christ, the true Prince of God,
   (who is called, in Isa. xlix 3. by the name of Israel,) in his
   prevailing in his wrestling with God, to save himself and his family
   from destruction by Esau, who was then coming against him, and
   obtaining the blessing for himself and his seed.--Now,

   Fourthly, Christ's argument lies in these words, The Scripture cannot
   be broken That word of God, by which they are called gods, as types of
   Him who is truly God, must be verified, which they cannot be, unless
   the Antitype be truly God.--They are so called, as types of the
   Messiah, or of the Anointed One, (which is the same,) or the Sanctified
   or Holy One, or Him that was to be sent; which were all known names
   among the Jews for the Messiah. (See Dan. Ix. 24, 5. Psal. lxxxix. 19,
   20,. Psal. xvi. 10. John ix. 7.) But it was on this account, that those
   types or images of the Messiah were called gods, because He, whom they
   represented, was God indeed. If he were not God, the word by which they
   were called gods could not be verified, and must be broken. As the
   word, by which the legal sacrifices were called an atonement, and are
   said to atone for sin, was true in no other sense, than as they had
   relation to the sacrifice of Christ the true atonement. If Christ's
   sacrifice had not truly atoned for sin; the word, which called the
   types or representations of it an atonement, could not be verified. So,
   if Jesus Christ had not been the true Bread from heaven, and angels'
   food indeed; the scripture which called the type of him, the bread from
   heaven, and angels' food, would not have been verified, but would have
   been broken.

   These, Sir, are my thoughts on John x. 34., &c.

   I am yours, most affectionately,

   j. edwards."

   "P. S. Dec. 5.--The opportunity for the conveyance of my letters to the
   ministers chosen to be of the council, your way, not being very good, I
   here send other letters, desiring you to take the charge of conveying
   them with all possible care and speed."

   The gentlemen invited to the council, at his desire, and that of his
   people, met at Stockbridge, January 4, 1758; [73] and, having heard the
   application of the agents of the college, and their reasons in support
   of it; [74] Mr. Edwards's own representation of the matter; and what
   his people had to say, by way of objection, against his removal;
   determined that it was his duty to accept of the invitation to the
   presidency of the college. When they published their judgment and
   advice to Mr. Edwards and his people, he appeared uncommonly moved and
   affected with it, and fell into tears on the occasion, which was very
   unusual for him, in the presence of others; and soon after, he said to
   the gentlemen who had given their advice, that it was matter of wonder
   to him, that they could so easily, as they appeared to do, get over the
   objections he had made against his removal. [75] But, as he thought it
   his duty to be directed by their advice, he should now endeavour
   cheerfully to undertake it, believing he was in the way of his duty.

   "Accordingly, having had, by the application of the trustees of the
   college, the consent of the commissioners of the Society in London, for
   Propagating the Gospel, in New England and the Parts adjacent,' to
   resign their mission; he girded up his loins, and set off from
   Stockbridge for Princeton, in January. He left his family at
   Stockbridge, not to be removed till the spring. He had two daughters at
   Princeton; Mrs. Burr, and Lucy, his eldest daughter that was unmarried.
   His arrival at Princeton was to the great satisfaction and joy of the
   college. And indeed all the greatest friends of the college, and to the
   interests of religion, were highly satisfied and pleased with the
   appointment."

   It was a singular fact, that, soon after his arrival at Princeton, he
   heard the melancholy tidings of the death of his father. It occurred on
   the 27th of January, 1758, in the 89th year of his age.

   "The corporation met as soon as could be with convenience, after his
   arrival at the college, when he was by them fixed in the president's
   chair. While at Princeton, before his sickness, he preached in the
   college-hall, sabbath after sabbath, to the great acceptance of the
   hearers; [76] but did nothing as president, unless it was to give out
   some questions in divinity to the senior class, to be answered before
   him; each one having opportunity to study and write what he thought
   proper upon them. When they came together to answer them, they found so
   much entertainment and profit by it, especially by the light and
   instruction Mr. Edwards communicated, in what he said upon the
   questions, when they had delivered what they had to say, that they
   spoke of it with the greatest satisfaction and wonder.

   "During this time, Mr. Edwards seemed to enjoy an uncommon degree of
   the presence of God. He told his daughters he once had great exercise,
   concern, and fear, relative to his engaging in that business; but since
   it now appeared, so far as he could see, that he was called of God to
   that place and work, he did cheerfully devote himself to it, leaving
   himself and the event with God to order what seemed to him good.

   "The small-pox had now become very common in the country, and was then
   at Princeton, and likely to spread. And as Mr. Edwards had never had
   it, and inoculation was then practised with great success in those
   parts, he proposed to be inoculated, if the physician should advise to
   it, and the corporation would give their consent. Accordingly, by the
   advice of the physician, and the consent of the corporation, he was
   inoculated February 13th. He had it favourably, and it was thought all
   danger was over; but a secondary fever set in and, by reason of a
   number of pustules in his throat, the obstruction was such, that the
   medicines necessary to check the fever could not be administered. It
   therefore raged till it put an end to his life, on the 22d of March,
   1758, in the 55th year of his age.

   "After he was sensible that he could not survive that sickness, a
   little before his death, he called his daughter to him, who attended
   him in his sickness, and addressed her in a few words, which were
   immediately taken down in writing, as near as could be recollected, and
   are as follows:--Dear Lucy, It seems to me to be the will of God, that
   I must shortly leave you; therefore give my kindest love to my dear
   wife, and tell her, that the uncommon union, which has so long
   subsisted between us, has been of such a nature, as I trust is
   spiritual, and therefore will continue for ever: and I hope she will be
   supported under so great a trial, and submit cheerfully to the will of
   God. And as to my children, you are now like to be left fatherless;
   which I hope will be an inducement to you all, to seek a Father who
   will never fail you. And as to my funeral, I would have it to be like
   Mr. Burr's; and any additional sum of money, that might be expected to
   be laid out that way, I would have it disposed of to charitable uses.'
   [77]

   "He said but very little in his sickness; but was an admirable instance
   of patience and resignation, to the last. Just at the close of his
   life, as some persons, who stood by, expecting he would breathe his
   last in a few minutes, were lamenting his death, not only as a great
   frown on the college, but as having a dark aspect on the interest of
   religion in general; to their surprise, not imagining that he heard, or
   ever would speak another word, he said, Trust in God, and ye need not
   fear.' These were his last words. What could have been more suitable to
   the occasion? And what need of more? In these there is as much matter
   of instruction and support, as if he had written a volume. This was the
   only consolation to his bereaved friends, deeply sensible as they were
   of the loss which they and the church of Christ had sustained in his
   death: god is all sufficient, and still has the care of his church.?

   "He appeared to have the uninterrupted use of his reason to the last,
   and died with as much calmness and composure, to all appearance, as
   that with which one goes to sleep."

   The physician, who inoculated and constantly attended him, in his
   sickness, addressed the following letter to Mrs. Edwards, on this
   occasion:

   "To Mrs. Sarah Edwards, Stockbridge.

   Princeton, March 22, 1758.

   most dear and very worthy madam,

   I am heartily sorry for the occasion of writing to you, by this
   express, but I know you have been informed, by a line from your
   excellent, lovely, and pious husband, that I was brought here to
   inoculate him, and your dear daughter Esther, and her children, for the
   small-pox, which was then spreading fast in Princeton; and that, after
   the most deliberate and serious consultation, with his nearest and most
   religious friends, he was accordingly inoculated with them, the 23rd of
   last month; and although he had the smallpox favourably, yet, having a
   number of them in the roof of his mouth and throat, he could not
   possibly swallow a sufficient quantity of drink, to keep off a
   secondary fever, which has proved too strong for his feeble frame; and
   this afternoon, between two and three o'clock, it pleased God to let
   him sleep in that dear Lord Jesus, whose kingdom and interest he has
   been faithfully and painfully serving all his life. And never did any
   mortal man more fully and clearly evidence the sincerity of all his
   professions, by one continued, universal, calm, cheerful resignation,
   and patient submission to the Divine will, through every stage of his
   disease, than he; not so much as one discontented expression, nor the
   least appearance of murmuring, through the whole. And never did any
   person expire with more perfect freedom from pain;--not so much as one
   distorted hair--but in the most proper sense of the word; he fell
   asleep. Death had certainly lost its sting, as to him.

   Your daughter, Mrs. Burr, and her children, through the mercy of God,
   are safely over the disease, and she desires me to send her duty to
   you, the best of mothers. She has had the small-pox the heaviest of all
   whom I have inoculated, and little Sally far the lightest; she has but
   three in her face. I am sure it will prove serviceable to her future
   health.

   I conclude, with my hearty prayer, dear Madam, that you may be enabled
   to look to that God, whose love and goodness you have experienced a
   thousand times, for direction and help, under this most afflictive
   dispensation of his providence, and under every other difficulty, you
   may meet with here, in order to your being more perfectly fitted for
   the joys of heaven hereafter.

   I am, dear Madam,

   Your most sympathizing

   And affectionate friend,

   And very humble servant,

   william shippen."

   This letter reached Mrs. Edwards while in a feeble state of health,
   when she was preparing to pay a visit, first to her sister, Mrs.
   Hopkins, at West Springfield, and then to her mother, Mrs. Edwards, of
   Windsor, in consequence of the death of Mr. Edwards's father. What her
   feelings were, and those of her family, under this unexpected and
   overwhelming dispensation, can be more easily conceived than described.

   "She had long told her intimate friends, that she had, after long
   struggles and exercises, obtained, by God's grace, an habitual
   willingness to die herself, or part with any of her most near
   relatives. That she was willing to bring forth children for death; and
   to resign up him, whom she esteemed so great a blessing to her and her
   family, her nearest partner, to the stroke of death, whenever God
   should see fit to take him. And when she had the greatest trial, in the
   death of Mr. Edwards, she found the help and comfort of such a
   disposition. Her conduct on this occasion was such as to excite the
   admiration of her friends; it discovered that she was sensible of the
   great loss, which she and her children had sustained in his death; and,
   at the same time, showed that she was quiet and resigned, and had those
   invisible supports, which enabled her to trust in God with quietness,
   hope, and humble joy."

   A few days afterwards, she addressed the following letter to Mrs. Burr.

   "Stockbridge, April 3, 1758.

   My very dear child,

   What shall I say? A holy and good God has covered us with a dark cloud.
   O that we may kiss the rod, and lay our hands on our mouths! The Lord
   has done it. He has made me adore his goodness, that we had him so
   long. But my God lives: and he has my heart. O what a legacy my
   husband, and your father, has left us! We are all given to God; and
   there I am, and love to be.

   Your ever affectionate mother,

   sarah edwards"

   On the same sheet was the following letter from one of her daughters.

   "my dear sister, william shippen."

   My mother wrote this with a great deal of pain in her neck, which
   disabled her from writing any more. She thought you would be glad of
   these few lines from her own hand.

   O, sister, how many calls have we, one upon the back of another? O, I
   beg your prayers, that we, who are young in this family, may be
   awakened and excited to call more earnestly on God, that he would be
   our Father, and Friend for ever.

   My father took leave of all his people and family as affectionately as
   if he knew he should not come again. On the sabbath afternoon he
   preached from these words,--We have no continuing city, therefore let
   us seek one to come. The chapter that he read was Acts the 20th. O, how
   proper; what could he have done more? When he had got out of doors he
   turned about,--I commit you to God,'--said he.--I doubt not but God
   will take a fatherly care of us, if we do not forget him.

   I am your affectionate sister,

   Susannah edwards.

   Stockbridge, April 3, 1758."

   "Mrs. Burr and her children were inoculated at the same time that her
   father was, and had recovered when he died. But after she was perfectly
   recovered, to all appearance, she was suddenly seized with a violent
   disorder, which carried her off in a few days; and which, the physician
   said, he could call by no name, but that of a messenger, sent suddenly,
   to call her out of the world. She died April 7, 1758, sixteen days
   after her father, in the 27th year of her age. She was married to Mr.
   Burr June 29, 1752. They had two children, a son and a daughter.

   "Mrs. Burr exceeded most of her sex in the beauty of her person, as
   well as in her behaviour and conversation. She discovered an
   unaffected, natural freedom, towards persons of all ranks, with whom
   she conversed. Her genius was much more than common. She had a lively,
   sprightly imagination, a quick and penetrating discernment, and a good
   judgment. She possessed an uncommon degree of wit and vivacity; which
   yet was consistent with pleasantness and good nature; and she knew how
   to be facetious and sportive, without trespassing on the bounds of
   decorum, or of strict and serious religion. In short, she seemed formed
   to please, and especially to please one of Mr. Burr's taste and
   character, in whom he was exceedingly happy. But what crowned all her
   excellencies, and was her chief glory, was RELIGION. She appeared to be
   the subject of divine impressions, when seven or eight years old; and
   she made a public profession of religion, when about fifteen. Her
   conversation, until her death, was exemplary, as becometh
   godliness"--She was, in every respect, an ornament to her sex, being
   equally distinguished for the suavity of her manners, her literary
   accomplishments, and her unfeigned regard to religion. Her religion did
   not cast a gloom over her mind, but made her cheerful and happy, and
   rendered the thought of death transporting. She left a number of
   manuscripts, on interesting subjects, and it was hoped they would have
   been made public; but they are now lost.

   Mrs. Edwards did not long survive her husband. In September she set
   out, in good health, on a journey to Philadelphia, to take care of her
   two orphan grand-children, which were now in that city; and had been,
   since the death of Mrs. Burr. As they had no relations in those parts,
   Mrs. Edwards proposed to take them into her own family. She arrived
   there, by the way of Princeton, Sept 21, in good health, having had a
   comfortable journey. But, in a few days, she was seized with a violent
   dysentery, which, on the fifth day, put an end to her life, October 2d
   1738, in the 49th year of her age. She said not much in her sickness;
   being exercised, most of the time, with violent pain. On the morning of
   the day she died, she apprehended her death was near, when she
   expressed her entire resignation to God, and her desire that he might
   be glorified in all things; and that she might be enabled to glorify
   him to the last: and continued in such a temper, calm and resigned,
   till she died.

   Her remains were carried to Princeton, and deposited with those of Mr.
   Edwards. Thus they who were in their lives remarkably lovely and
   pleasant, in their death were not much divided. Here, the father and
   mother, the son and daughter, were laid together in the grave, within
   the space of a little more than a year; though a few months before
   their dwelling was more than 150 miles apart:--two presidents of the
   same college, and their consorts, than whom it will doubtless be hard
   to find four persons more valuable and useful!

   By these repeated strokes, following in quick succession, the American
   church, within a few months, sustained a loss, which probably, in so
   short a space of time, will never be equalled.

   Mr. and Mrs. Edwards lived together, in the married state, above thirty
   years; in which time they had eleven children, three sons and eight
   daughters. The second daughter died Feb. 14, 1748. The third daughter
   was Mrs. Burr. The youngest daughter, Elizabeth, died soon after her
   parents. [78]

   The trustees of the college erected a marble monument over the grave of
   Mr. Edwards, which has the following inscription:

   M. S. REVERENDI ADMODUM VIRI, JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. COLLEGII NOVÆ
   CÆSARIÆ PRÆSIDIS. NATUSAPUD WINDSOR CONNECTICUTENSIUM V. OCTOBRIS. A.
   D. MDCCIII, S. V. PATRE REVERENDO TIMOTHEO EDWARDS ORIUNDUS, COLLEGIO
   YALENSI EDUCATUS;

   APUD NORTHAMPTON SACRIS INITIATUS, XV FEBRUARII, MDCCXXVI-VII. ILLINC
   DIMISSUS XXII JUNII, MDCCL ET MUNUS BARBAROS INSTITUENDI ACCEPIT.
   PRÆSES AULÆ NASSOVICÆ CREATUS XVI FEBRUARII. MDCCLVIII. DEFUNCTUS IN
   HOC VICO XXII MARTII SEQUENTIS, S.N. AETATIS LV, HEU NIMIS BREVIS! HIC
   JACET MORTALIS PARS. QUALIS PERSONA QUÆRIS, VIATOR? VIR CORPORE
   PROCERO, SED GRACILI, STUDIIS INTENSISSIMUS, ABSTINENTIA, ET
   SEDULITATE, ATTENTIATO. INGENII ACUMINE, JUDICIO ACRI, ET PRUDENTIÝ,
   SECUNDUS NEMINI MORTALIUM. ARTIUM LIBERALIUM ET SCIENTIARUM PERITIA
   INSIGNIS, CRITACORUM SACRORUM OPTIMUS, THEOLOGUS EXIMIUS, UT VIX ALTER
   ÆQUALIS; DISPUTATOR CANDIDUS; FIDEI CHRISTIANÆ PROPUGNATOR VALIDUS ET
   INVICTUS; CONCONIATOR GRAVIS, SERIUS, DISCRIMINANS; ET, DEO FERENTE,
   SUCCESSU FELICISSIMUS. PIETATE PRÆCLARUS, MORIBUS SUIS SEVERUS, AST
   ALIIS ÆQUUS ET BENIGNUS. VIXIT DILECTUS, VENERATUS-- SED, AH! LUGENDUS
   MORIEBATUR. QUANTOS GEMITUS DISCEDENS CIEBAT! HEU SAPIENTIA TANTA! HEU
   DOCTRINA ET RELIGIO! AMISSUM PLORAT COLLEGIUM, PLORAT ET ECCLESIA: AT,
   EO RECEPTO, GAUDET

   COELUM. ABI, VIATOR, ET PIA SEQUERE VESTIGIA.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [70] In the autumn of 1756, or early in 1757, the college was removed
   to Princeton.

   [71] Unfortunately this letter is lost.

   [72] When Mr. Edwards wrote the letter to which she refers, he did not
   think of going to Princeton till spring: but afterward he determined
   otherwise.

   [73] I have ascertained the names of only three of the members of the
   council---Mr. Bellamy, Mr. Brinsmade, and Mr. Hopkins. This date is
   right, though it differs from that mentioned in the letter to Mr.
   Bellamy.

   [74] The agents of the college were Rev. Messrs. Caleb Smith and John
   Brainerd.

   [75] The council, at the request both the English and Indian
   congregation at Stockbridge, addressed a letter to the commissioners in
   Boston, requesting that Mr. John Brainerd might be appointed Mr.
   Edward's successor;---the Housatonnucks offering land for a settlement
   to the Indian congregation at Cranberry, New Jersey, if they would
   remove to Stockbridge.---and another letter to the trustees of the
   college, requesting that they would use their collective and individual
   influence, to procure the appointment of Mr. Brainerd, and his removal
   to Stockbridge.

   [76] The first sermon, which he preached at Princeton, was on the
   Unchangeableness of Christ, in Vol. II. p. 9-19. It was upwards of two
   hours in the delivery; but is said to have been listened to with such
   profound attention, and deep interest, by the audience, that they were
   unconscious of the lapse of time, and surprised that it closed so soon.

   [77] President Burr ordered, on his death-bed, should not be attended
   with pomp and cost; that nothing should be expended but what was
   agreeable to the dictates of christian decency; and that the sum which
   must be expended at a fashionable funeral, above the necessary cost of
   a decent one, should be given to the poor, out of his estate.

   [78] See Appendix, No. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAPTER XXV.

   CONCLUDING REMARKS.

   the writer of the preceding pages regrets, at least as sincerely as any
   of his readers, that the collection of facts, which they contain, is
   not more full and complete; yet, in consequence of the long interval
   which has elapsed since the death of President Edwards, they are all,
   which after much time, and labour, and travel, he has been able to
   discover. Such as they are, they constitute, with his writings body of
   materials from which we are to form our estimate of his character, as
   an intelligent and moral being.

   In reviewing them, it is delightful to remember, in the outset, that so
   far as the human eye could judge, the individuals of both the families
   from which he derived his descent, were, as far back as we can trace
   them, distinguished for their piety. Each married pair, in both lines,
   with that care and conscientiousness which so generally marked the
   pilgrims of New England, and their puritan ancestors, trained up their
   children in the fear of God, and continued through life to supplicate
   daily the divine favour on them and their descendants, in all
   succeeding generations. Their prayers, ascending separately and
   successively indeed, were yet embodied in their influence, and from
   Him, who "showeth mercy to thousands of generations of them that love
   him, and keep his commandments," called down concentrated blessings on
   their common offspring. So full, so rich were these blessings, as
   bestowed on the subject of this Memoir, that, perhaps, no one example
   on record furnishes a stronger encouragement to parents, to wrestle
   with God for the holiness and the salvation of their posterity.

   It was owing to the moral influence thus exerted, and to the divine
   favour thus secured, that when we review the childhood and youth of Mr.
   Edwards, we find them not only passing without a stain upon his memory,
   but marked by a purity and excellence rarely witnessed at so early a
   period of life. The religious impressions made upon his mind in
   childhood, were certainly frequent, deep, and of long continuance, and
   had a powerful effect upon his ultimate character; yet the estimate
   formed of their real nature by different persons will probably be
   different. His own estimate of them was, unquestionably, that they were
   not the result of real religion.

   The circumstances which led him to this conclusion, were these
   two:--First, That, after he had cherished the hope of his own
   conversion, for a considerable period, and had experienced a high
   degree of joy, in what he regarded as communion with God, he lost
   imperceptibly this spirituality of mind, relinquished for a season the
   "constant performance" of the practice of secret prayer, and cherished
   many affections of a worldly and sinful character:--Secondly, That when
   he recovered from this state of declension, his views of divine truth,
   particularly those connected with the sovereignty of God, were in many
   respects new, and far more clear and delightful than any which he had
   previously formed.

   Without calling in question the fact, that a given individual has, on
   some accounts, decidedly superior advantages for judging of his own
   Christian character, than others enjoy; and without presuming to decide
   on the correctness of the estimate, thus formed by Mr. Edwards; it may
   not be improper to state various circumstances, which lead me to
   suspect, that it may perhaps have been erroneous. 1. The declension, of
   which he complains, appears to have been chiefly, or wholly, a
   declension in the state of the affections. 2. Those impressions began
   when he was seven or eight years of age, and were so powerful and
   lasting, as to render religion the great object of attention, for a
   number of years. As made on the mind of such a child, they were very
   remarkable, even if we suppose them to have resulted in piety. 3. The
   season of his declension commenced soon after his admission to college,
   when be was twelve years of age. That a truly pious child, in
   consequence of leaving his early religious connexions and associations,
   and especially the altar and the incense of the parental sanctuary; of
   removing to a new place of residence, of entering on a new course of
   life, of forming new acquaintances and attachments, of feeling the
   strong attractions of study, and the powerful incentives of ambition,
   and of being exposed to the new and untried temptations of a public
   seminary; should, for a season, so far decline from his previous
   spirituality, as to lose all hope of his own conversion, is so far from
   being a surprising event, that, in ordinary cases, it is perhaps to be
   expected. Piety, at its commencement in the mind, is usually feeble;
   and especially is it so, in the mind of a child. How often are similar
   declensions witnessed, even at a later age. Yet the subject of such
   backsliding, though, during its continuance, he may well renounce the
   hope of his conversion, does not usually regard the period of his
   recovery as the commencement of his Christian life.--4. He had not, at
   this period, made a public profession of religion; and, of course, was
   not restrained from such declension by his own covenant, by communion
   with Christians, or by the consciousness, that, as a visible Christian,
   his faults were subjected to the inspection and the censure of the
   surrounding world. 5. Though charitable in judging others, he was at
   least equally severe in judging himself. 6. He appears, at a very early
   period, to have formed views of the purity of the Christian
   character--of the degree of freedom from sin, and of the degree of
   actual holiness, requisite to justify the hope of
   conversion--altogether more elevated in their nature, than the truth
   will warrant. 7. That his views of divine truth--particularly of the
   sovereignty of God--should have opened, after the age of twelve, with
   so much greater clearness and beauty, as to appear wholly new, was to
   have been expected from the nature of the case. 8. At a subsequent
   period, when his mind was incessantly occupied by the unusual
   perplexities of his tutorship, he complained of a similar declension.
   9. The purity, strength, and comprehensiveness of his piety, as
   exhibited immediately after his public profession of Christianity, was
   so much superior to what is frequently witnessed, in Christians of an
   advanced standing, as almost to force upon us the conviction that it
   commenced--not a few months before, at the time of his supposed
   conversion, but--at a much earlier period of life. Rare indeed is the
   fact, that holiness is not, at its commencement in the soul, "as a
   grain of mustard-seed, which is the least of all seeds;" and though in
   the rapidity of its growth, it differs widely in different soils, yet
   time is indispensably necessary, before its fruits can cover the
   full-grown plant, like the clusters on the vine.--These considerations,
   and particularly the last, have led me to believe, that the early
   religious impressions of Mr. Edwards are to be regarded, as having been
   the result of a gracious operation of the Spirit of God upon his heart.

   Under this happy influence, exerted in childhood, his character was
   formed. It prompted him then to study the Scriptures, to love payer, to
   sanctify the sabbath, and to pay an unusual attention to the duties or
   religion. It inspired him with reverence towards God, and made him
   afraid to sin. It rendered him conscientious in the performance of
   every relative duty, in manifesting love and gratitude, honour and
   obedience, towards his parents, kindness and courteousness towards his
   sisters, and the other companions of his childhood, respect and
   deference to his superiors, and good will to all around him. It led him
   also, at a very early period, to overcome that aversion to mental
   labour, which is so natural to man, and to devote himself with
   exemplary assiduity to the great duty, daily assigned him, of storing
   his mind with useful knowledge. Some of our readers, we are aware, may
   perhaps regard the recollections of his earlier years, as of little
   importance; but those, who cherish common sympathies, with the whole
   body of evangelical Christians, in the deep interest which they feel in
   his character and efforts, and who reflect, that the foundation of that
   character and of those efforts was then laid, will requite of us no
   apology for thus exhibiting the comparative innocence and purity, the
   docility and amiableness, the tenderness of conscience, the exemplary
   industry, and the ardent thirst for knowledge, which characterized this
   vernal season of his life.

   The development of mental superiority, in the childhood and youth of
   Mr. Edwards, was certainly uncommon, if not singular. Boys of the age
   of eleven and twelve, even when receiving every aid from their parents
   and instructors, and when feeling the influence of all the motives,
   which they can present, are usually unwilling, in any branch of natural
   science, to examine, so as thoroughly to comprehend, the discoveries
   and investigations of others. Still more unwilling are they to make
   this examination, when no such aid is furnished, and no such
   inducements are presented. But rare indeed is the instance, in which
   the attention of such a boy has been so far arrested, by any of the
   interesting phenomena, in either of the kingdoms of nature, that he has
   been led, without prompting, and without aid, to pursue a series of
   exact observations and discoveries, as to the facts themselves; to
   search out their causes; and, as the result of the whole, to draw up
   and present a lucid, systematic, and well digested report of his
   investigations.

   After the lapse of a little more than a year, just as he attained the
   age of fourteen, we find him entering on pursuits of a still higher
   character. Few boys of that age have sufficient strength of intellect
   to comprehend the Essay on the Human Understanding. Of those who have,
   but a small proportion can be persuaded to read it; and a much smaller,
   still, are found to read it voluntarily, and of choice. We find
   Edwards, however, at this period of life, not only entering on this
   work of his own accord, and with deep interest, but at once
   relinquishing every other pursuit, that he may devote himself wholly to
   the philosophy of the mind; and, to use his own language, "enjoying a
   far higher pleasure in the perusal of its pages, than the most greedy
   miser finds, when gathering up handfuls of silver and gold, from some
   newly discovered treasure." Nor is this all. While reading the work of
   Locke, he presents himself before us, not as a pupil, nor simply as a
   critic; but in the higher character of an investigator, exploring for
   himself the universe of minds, and making new and interesting
   discoveries. Fortunately his investigations are preserved, and may be
   compared with the efforts of other distinguished men, at the same
   period of life, in other countries and in other ages. And if any one of
   all those efforts discovers greater perspicacity and mental energy,
   than the "Notes on the Mind;" particularly, the articles entitled,
   Being, Space, Motion, Genus, the Will, and Excellency we are yet to
   learn where it is to be found, and who was its author. The discussion
   of the very important and difficult question, in the last of these
   articles, What is the foundation of excellency,--of excellency in its
   most enlarged acceptation, in things material and spiritual, in things
   intellectual, imaginative, and moral,--is not only original, as to its
   youthful author, and profound, but is even now, we believe, in various
   respects, new to the investigations of philosophy. [79] The Notes on
   Natural Science, furnish similar proof of high mental superiority; and,
   by their variety of topics, their general accuracy, and their
   originality, evince a power and comprehension, discovered by only here
   and there an individual, when possessed of the full maturity of his
   faculties. His habits of thinking and reasoning, at this time of life,
   appear to have been as severe, as exact, and as successful, as those of
   the most accomplished scholars usually are, in the vigour of manhood.
   The plan of study, itself, which he then formed,--of studying with his
   pen; and of immediately, and of course, employing the principles of the
   science he was examining, which had been already detailed and
   demonstrated by others, in the discovery of new principles,--is at
   least equal evidence of the same superiority. So vigorous was the
   mental soil, that the seeds of thought could not be implanted therein,
   without being quickened at once, and made to grow into a rich and
   abundant harvest. Looking at these two series of notes in connexion
   with the plan of study under which they grew, and then comparing them,
   by the aid of recollection, with the efforts of other children and
   youths of uncommon promise; we instinctively ask, When, and where, has
   the individual lived, who has left behind him substantial proofs, that
   he has possessed, at the same age, a mind more powerful, comprehensive,
   or creative?

   These conclusions are only confirmed by the survey of his succeeding
   years. Though drawn away from the entire devotion of his mind to his
   collegiate studies, by (what were to him) the alluring blandishments of
   mental philosophy, he yet sustained in his class the first standing as
   a scholar; and, though leaving college when sixteen, be was not too
   young to receive its highest honours. Having entered the pulpit at
   eighteen, he was, after a few trials, designated by a number of
   gentlemen of a superior character, for a very important and difficult
   station; to which, as well as to various other interesting fields of
   labour, he received most pressing invitations.

   The extraordinary difficulties and perplexities of the college, while
   he was one of its officers, sufficient as they were to have overwhelmed
   a common mind, only served to furnish him and his colleagues a fairer
   opportunity, to show forth the superiority of their own character. By
   their wisdom and fidelity, the college was preserved and enlarged, when
   in imminent danger of ruin; and the period of their administration will
   ever be regarded as one of the most important eras in its history.

   While the review of the childhood and youth of Mr. Edwards thus forces
   upon us the conviction, that, in the early development of extraordinary
   mental powers, he has had few equals; and enables us to reflect, with
   pleasure, that these powers were never prostituted to folly, or to
   vice, but from the beginning were faithfully devoted to the great end
   for which they were given; it also leads us to remark, that his
   character, as a moral being, was thoroughly formed and established, at
   a very early period of life. Like a dutiful child, he listened, indeed,
   to the counsels of his parents, as to the principles by which his
   conduct should be regulated; but he also examined for himself the
   foundations of those principles, and, having discovered that they were
   firm and immovable, formed out of them a series of rules, for the
   systematic regulation of his own conduct. These rules, particularly as
   exemplified in the journal of his daily life, evince not only a pure
   and transparent sincerity, and the greatest openness of soul towards
   God; as well as an inspection, metaphysically accurate, of his own
   mind, and a thorough acquaintance with his own heart; but a knowledge
   of his duty,--to God, his fellow-men, and himself,--and a
   conscientiousness in performing it, which are usually the result of
   great wisdom and piety, combined with long experience. They grew,
   obviously, out of a disposition to turn every occurrence of life to a
   religious use, and thus to grow wiser and better, continually, under
   the course of discipline to which the providence of God subjected him.
   They appear to have been made under the immediate inspection of the
   Omniscient eye, with a solemn conviction that he was an immortal being,
   formed to act on the same theatre with God, and angels, and the just
   made perfect, in carrying forward the kingdom of holiness and joy, in
   its ever enlarging progress. Viewing himself as just entering on this
   career of glory, he adopted, for the permanent direction of his course,
   the best and noblest resolution, that an intelligent being can
   form:--"Resolved, That I will do whatsoever I think to be most to the
   glory of God, and my own good, profit, and pleasure, in the whole of my
   duration; without any consideration of the time, whether now, or never
   so many myriads of ages hence: resolved, to do whatsoever I think to be
   my duty, and most for the good and advantage of mankind in general:
   resolved, so to do, whatever difficulties I meet with, how many soever,
   and how great soever." In the spirit of this resolution, we find him,
   with all the earnestness of which he was capable, giving up himself to
   God,--all that he was, and all that he possessed,--so as habitually to
   feel that he was in no respect his own, and could challenge no right to
   the faculties of his body, to the powers of his mind, or the affections
   of his heart; receiving Christ as a Prince and a Saviour, under a
   solemn covenant to adhere to the faith and obedience of the gospel,
   however hazardous and difficult the profession and practice of it might
   be; and taking the Holy Spirit as his Teacher, Sanctifier, and only
   Comforter. And, in accordance with both, we find him, at this time,
   regularly making the glory of God the great end for which he lived;
   habitually trusting in God, to such a degree, as to feel no uneasiness
   about his worldly condition; maintaining the most open and confidential
   intercourse with his Maker; cherishing exalted thoughts of Christ and
   his salvation; feeling himself to be a part of Christ, and to have no
   separate interest from his; exercising a filial and delightful sense of
   dependence on the Holy Spirit, for the daily communication of his
   grace; regarding communion with God as the very life and sustenance of
   the soul; delighting in praising God, and in singing his praises, and
   as much when alone, as in the company of others; often observing days
   of secret fasting, that he might discover, and repent of, and renounce
   every sin; maintaining a constant warfare against sin and temptation;
   frequently renewing his dedication of himself to God; conversing daily
   and familiarly with his own death and his own final trial; rejoicing
   habitually in the divine perfections and the divine government;
   reverentially acknowledging the divine hand in all the works of nature,
   and in all the events of providence; exhibiting a calm and sweet
   submission to the divine will under all the afflictions of life, so
   that he could regard afflictions as real and great blessings; and
   enabled so to live with God, from day to day, and from hour to hour, as
   to be delightfully conscious of his presence, to refer his inmost mind
   to the inspection of his eye, to value his approbation above all things
   else, to cherish a joyful sense of union to him, to converse with him,
   as a father, concerning his wants, infirmities, and sins, his dangers,
   duties, and trials, his joys and sorrows, his fears and desires, his
   hopes and prospects, and to commune with him in all his works and
   dispensations, in his perfections and his glory. And, as the result of
   this, we find the Spirit of God unfolding to him the wonders of divine
   truth; vouchsafing to him joyful and glorious discoveries of the
   perfections of God, as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
   enabling him to live, as in the immediate presence and vision of the
   things that are unseen and eternal; and communicating to him a joyful
   assurance of the favour of God, and of a title to future glory.

   This state of his heart towards God, prepared him for a just estimate
   of his own character, for the formation of the best habits, and for a
   conscientious and faithful government over himself. The daily and
   careful survey of his sins, by the light of the divine holiness,
   enabled him to discover the deceitfulness of his own heart, and led him
   habitually to abhor himself, to form none but humbling and abasing
   views of his own attainments in piety, and to esteem others better than
   himself. There was something extremely delicate in his constitution;
   which always obliged him to the exactest rules of temperance, and every
   method of cautious and prudent living. His temperance was the result of
   principle. It was not the mere ordinary care and watchfulness of
   temperate people, but such a degree of self-denial, both as to the
   quantity and quality of his food, as left his mind, in every part of
   the day, alike unclouded in its views, and unembarrassed in its
   movements. We have seen, from his diary, that he rose at a very early
   hour, throughout the year; that, in the morning, he considered well the
   business and studies of the day, resolved to pursue that which was the
   most important; that his habits of punctuality were exact and thorough;
   that he husbanded his time, as the miser guards his choicest treasures;
   not losing it even in his walks, his rides, or his journeys; and not
   allowing himself to leave his study for the table, if his mind would
   thereby lose its brighter moments, and its happier sequences of thought
   and discovery; and that, in consequence of this regularity of life, and
   an exact and punctilious regard to bodily exercise, he was enabled to
   spend an unusual portion of every day, in severe and laborious mental
   application. [80] Let it also be remembered, by every minister, that
   notwithstanding the exact discipline to which his mind had been
   subjected, by the course of his education, and by his long devotion to
   metaphysical pursuits, he continued his attention to mathematical
   studies, as a source, alike, of recreation and improvement, throughout
   the whole of his ministerial life.

   The habits of his religious life, which he formed in his youth, were
   not less thorough and exact. His observation of the sabbath was such as
   to make it, throughout, a day of real religion; so that not only were
   his conversation and reading conformed to the great design of the day,
   but he allowed himself in no thoughts or meditations, which were not
   decidedly of a religious character. It was his rule, not only to search
   the Scriptures daily, but to study them so steadily, constantly, and
   frequently, as that he might perceive a regular and obvious growth in
   his knowledge of them. By prayer and self-application, he took constant
   care to render them the means of progressive sanctification. He made a
   secret of his private devotions, observes Dr. Hopkins, and therefore
   they cannot be particularly known; though there is much evidence that
   he was punctual, constant, and frequent in secret prayer, and often
   kept days of fasting and prayer in secret, and set apart time for
   serious, devout meditations on spiritual and eternal things, as part of
   his religious exercises in secret. It appears from his diary, that his
   stated seasons of secret prayer were, from his youth, three times a
   day,--in his journeys, as well as at home. He was, so far as can be
   known, much on his knees in secret, and in devout reading of God's
   word, and meditation upon it. And his constant, solemn converse with
   God, in these exercises of secret religion, made his face, as it were,
   to shine before others. His appearance, his countenance, his words, and
   whole demeanour, were attended with a seriousness, gravity and
   solemnity, which was the natural, genuine, indication and expression,
   of a deep abiding sense of divine things on his mind, and of his living
   constantly in the fear of God. His watchfulness over himself--over his
   external conduct and over his secret thoughts and purposes--was most
   thorough and exemplary. The fear of God, and a consciousness of his own
   weakness, made him habitually apprehensive of sin, and led him most
   carefully to avoid every temptation. His self-examination was regular,
   universal, and in a sense constant. Every morning he endeavoured to
   foresee, and to guard against, the dangers of the day. Every night he
   carefully reviewed the conduct of his mind, during its progress, and
   inquired, wherein he had been negligent; what sin he had committed;
   wherein he had denied himself; and regularly kept an account of every
   thing which he found to be wrong. This record he reviewed at the close
   of the week, of the month, and of the year, and on the occurrence of
   every important change in life; that he might know his own condition,
   and that he might carry his sins in humble confession before God.
   Whenever he so much questioned whether he had done his duty, as that
   the quiet of his mind was thereby disturbed, he regularly set it down,
   that he might examine its real nature; and, if found in any respect to
   be wrong, might put it away. Every course of conduct, which led him in
   the least to doubt of the love of God; every action of his mind, the
   review of which would give him uneasiness in the hour of death, and on
   his final trial; he endeavoured, with all his strength, to avoid. Every
   obvious sin he traced back to its original, that he might afterward
   know where his danger lay. Every desire, which might prove the occasion
   of sin,--the desire of wealth, of ease, of pleasure, of influence, of
   fame, of popularity,--as well as every bodily appetite, he strove not
   only to watch against, but habitually and unceasingly to mortify;
   regarding occasions of great self-denial as glorious opportunities of
   destroying sin, and of confirming himself in holiness; and uniformly
   finding that his greatest mortifications were succeeded by the greatest
   comforts. On the approach of affliction he searched out the sin, which
   he ought especially to regard, as calling for such a testimony of the
   divine displeasure, that he might receive the chastisement with entire
   submission, and be concerned about nothing but his duty and his sin.
   The virtues and sins of others led him to examine himself, whether he
   possessed the former, and whether he did not practise the latter. Thus
   his whole life was a continued course of self-examination; and in the
   duty of secret fasting, and humiliation, which he very frequently
   observed,--a duty enjoined by Christ, on his followers, as explicitly,
   and in the same terms, as the duty of secret prayer; enjoined too, for
   the very purpose of discovery, confession, and purification,--he was
   accustomed, with the greatest unreservedness of which he was capable,
   to declare his ways to God, and to lay open his soul before him, all
   his sins, temptations, difficulties, sorrows, and fears, as well as his
   desires and hopes; that the light of God's countenance might shine upon
   him without obstruction.

   The fear of God had a controlling influence, also, in regulating his
   intercourse with mankind. The basis of that intercourse, in all the
   relations of life, and indeed of his whole character, was evangelical
   integrity,--a settled unbending resolution to do what he thought right,
   whatever self-denial or sacrifices it might cost him. This trait of
   character he early discovered, in the unfavourable estimate, which he
   formed, of his youthful attainments in religion; and in the severe
   judgment, which he passed upon the period of his official connexion
   with college, as a period of marked declension in his Christian life.
   He discovered it, during that connexion, in his most conscientious and
   honourable efforts to promote the welfare of that institution, under
   uncommon difficulties and trials. He discovered it during his ministry
   at Northampton, in the very laborious performance of every ministerial
   duty, and in his firm and fearless defence of the truth, in opposition
   to numbers, power, and influence. He discovered it eminently in the
   affair of his dismission. His conscience at first hesitated, as to the
   lawfulness of the prevailing mode of admission to the church. Still, he
   regarded the question as altogether doubtful. It had been once publicly
   discussed; his own colleague and grandfather, who had introduced it at
   Northampton, being one of the combatants; and the victory had been
   supposed to be on his side, and in favour of the existing mode. The
   churches of the county had adopted it; and the whole current of public
   opinion,--the united voice of wealth, fashion, numbers, learning, and
   influence,--was in its favour. If he decided against continuing the
   practice, all these would certainly be combined against him; his people
   would demand his dismission, before a tribunal which had prejudged the
   case; his only means of supporting a young and numerous family would be
   taken away, at a time of life, when an adequate provision for their
   wants would probably involve him in extreme embarrassment. Yet none of
   these things moved him; and his only anxiety was, to ascertain and to
   perform his duty. He discovered it, in the same manner, in the
   controversy at Stockbridge. There, the same influence, which, in the
   former case, had effected his dismission, he knew would be combined
   against him, with increased hostility, and in all probability would
   deprive his family a second time of their support; unless he sat
   quietly, and saw the charities of Christian philanthropy perverted to
   sources of private emolument. But in such a crisis he could not
   deliberate for a moment.

   "He had a strict and inviolable regard to justice, in all his dealings
   with his neighbors, and was very careful to provide things honest in
   the sight of all men; so that scarcely a man had any dealings with him,
   who was not conscious of his uprightness.

   "His great benevolence to mankind discovered itself, among other ways,
   by the uncommon regard he showed to liberality, and charity to the poor
   and distressed. He was much in recommending this, both in his public
   discourses, and in private conversation. He often declared it to be his
   opinion, that professed Christians were greatly deficient in this duty,
   and much more so than in most other parts of external Christianity. He
   often observed how much this is spoken of, recommended, and encouraged,
   in the Holy Scriptures, especially in the New Testament. And it was his
   opinion, that every particular church ought, by frequent and liberal
   contributions, to maintain a public stock, that might be ready for the
   poor and necessitous members of that church; and that the principal
   business of deacons is, to take care of the poor, in the faithful and
   judicious improvement and distribution of the church's contributions,
   lodged in their hands. And he did not content himself with merely
   recommending charity to others, but practised it much himself; though,
   according to his Master's advice, he took great care to conceal his
   acts of charity; by which means, doubtless, most of his alms-deeds will
   be unknown till the resurrection, but which, if known, would prove him
   to have been as honourable an example of charity, as almost any that
   can be produced. This is not mere conjecture, but is evident many ways.
   He was forward to give, on all public occasions of charity; though,
   when it could properly be done, he always concealed the sum given. And
   some instances of his giving more privately have accidentally come to
   the knowledge of others, in which his liberality appeared in a very
   extraordinary degree. One of the instances was this: upon his hearing
   that a poor obscure man, whom he never saw, or any of his kindred, was,
   by an extraordinary bodily disorder, brought to great straits; he,
   unasked, gave a considerable sum to a friend, to be delivered to the
   distressed person; having first required a promise of him, that he
   would let neither the person, who was the object of his charity, nor
   any one else, know by whom it was given. This may serve both as an
   instance of his extraordinary charity, and of his great care to conceal
   it." [81]

   Not less exemplary was his practice of the kindred virtue of
   hospitality, so much enjoined on all Christians, in the sacred
   Scriptures. As his acquaintance was very extensive, his house was the
   frequent resort of gentlemen from all parts of the colonies; and the
   friend, and the stranger of worth, ever found a kind and cordial
   welcome at his table, and in the midst of his family.

   "He was thought by some to be distant and unsociable in his manners;
   but this was owing to the want of a better acquaintance. He was not,
   indeed, a man of many words, and was somewhat reserved in the company
   of strangers, and of those, on whose candour and friendship he did not
   know that he could rely. And this was probably owing to two causes.
   First, the strict guard he set over his tongue, from his youth. From
   experience and observation he early discovered, that the sins of the
   tongue make up a very formidable proportion of all the sins committed
   by men, and lead to a very large proportion of their remaining sins. He
   therefore resolved to take the utmost care, never to sin with his
   tongue; to avoid not only uttering reproaches himself, but receiving
   them, and listening to them from others; to say nothing for the sake of
   giving pain, or wounding the feelings or reputation of others; to say
   nothing evil concerning them, except when an obvious duty required him
   to do it, and then to speak, as if nobody had been as vile as himself,
   and as if he had committed the same sins, or had the same infirmities
   or failings, as others; never to employ himself in idle, trivial, and
   impertinent talk, which generally makes up a great part of the
   conversation of those, who are full of words, in all companies; and to
   make sure of that mark of a perfect man, given by James, if any man
   offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able, also, to
   bridle the whole body.' He was sensible, that in the multitude of words
   there wanteth not sin,' and therefore refrained his lips, and
   habituated himself to think before he spoke, and to propose some good
   end in all his words; which led him, conformably to an apostolic
   precept, to be, above many others, slow to speak.--Secondly, this was
   in part the effect of his bodily constitution. He possessed but a
   comparatively small stock of animal life: his spirits were low, and he
   had neither the vivacity nor strength of lungs to spare, that would
   have been requisite in order to render him what might be called an
   affable, sprightly companion, in all circles. They who have a great
   flow of animal spirits, and so can speak with more ease, and less
   expense and exhaustion, than others, may doubtless lawfully engage in
   free conversation, in all companies, for a lower end than that which he
   proposed: e. g. to please, or to render themselves agreeable to others.
   But not so he who has not such an abundant supply: it becomes him to
   reserve what he has for higher and more important service. Besides, the
   want of animal spirit lays a man under a natural inability of
   exercising that freedom of conversation, at all times, and in whatever
   company he is, which those possessed of more vivacity naturally and
   easily glide into; and the greatest degree of humility and benevolence,
   of good sense and social feeling, will not remove this obstacle.

   "He was not forward to enter into any dispute before strangers, and in
   companies where there might be persons of different sentiments; being
   sensible that such disputes are generally unprofitable, and often
   sinful, and of bad consequence. He thought he could dispute to the best
   advantage with his pen; yet he was always free to give his sentiments,
   on any subject proposed to him, and to remove any difficulties or
   objections offered by way of inquiry, as lying in the way of what he
   looked upon to be the truth. But how groundless, with regard to him,
   the imputation of being distant and unsociable was, his known and tried
   friends best knew. They always found him easy of access, kind and
   condescending; and though not talkative, yet affable and free. Among
   those, whose candour and friendship he had experienced, he threw off
   all that, which to others had the appearance of reserve, and was most
   open and communicative; and was always patient of contradiction, while
   the utmost opposition was made to his sentiments, that could be made by
   any arguments or objections, whether plausible or solid. And indeed he
   was, on all occasions, quite sociable and free with all who had any
   special business with him.

   "His conversation with his friends was always savoury and profitable:
   in this he was remarkable, and almost singular. He was not accustomed
   to spend his time with them in evil speaking, or foolish jesting, idle
   chit-chat, and telling stories; but his mouth was that of the just,
   which bringeth forth wisdom, and whose lips dispense knowledge. His
   tongue was as the pen of a ready writer, while he conversed about
   important heavenly and divine things, of which his heart was so full,
   in a manner so new and original, so natural and familiar, as to be most
   entertaining and instructive; so that none of his friends could enjoy
   his company without instruction and profit unless it was by their own
   fault.

   "He was cautious in choosing his intimate friends, and therefore had
   not many that might properly he called such; but to them he showed
   himself friendly in a peculiar manner. He was, indeed, a faithful
   friend, and able above most others to keep a secret. To them he
   discovered himself, more than to others, and led them into his views
   and ends in his conduct in particular instances: by which they had
   abundant evidence that he well understood human nature, and that his
   general reservedness, and many particular instances of his conduct,
   which a stranger might impute to ignorance of men, were really owing to
   his uncommon knowledge of mankind.

   "In his family, he practised that conscientious exactness, which was
   conspicuous in all his ways. He maintained a great esteem and regard
   for his amiable and excellent consort. Much of the tender and
   affectionate was expressed in his conversation with her, and in all his
   conduct towards her. He was often visited by her in his study, and
   conversed freely with her on matters of religion; and he used commonly
   to pray with her in his study, at least once a day, unless something
   extraordinary prevented. The season for this, commonly, was in the
   evening, after prayers in the family, just before going to bed. As he
   rose very early himself, he was wont to have his family up betimes in
   the morning; after which, before they entered on the business of the
   day, he attended on family prayers; when a chapter in the Bible was
   read, commonly by candle-light in the winter; upon which he asked his
   children questions, according to their age and capacity; and took
   occasion to explain some passages in it, or enforce any duty
   recommended, as he thought most proper.

   He was careful and thorough in the government of his children; and, as
   a consequence of this, they reverenced, esteemed, and loved him. He
   took the utmost care to begin his government of them, when they were
   very young. When they first discovered any degree of self-will and
   stubbornness, he would attend to them, until he had thoroughly subdued
   them, and brought them to submit. Such prudent discipline, exercised
   with the greatest calmness, being repeated once or twice, was generally
   sufficient for that child; and effectually established his parental
   authority, and produced a cheerful obedience ever after.

   "He kept a watchful eye over his children, that he might admonish them
   of the first wrong step, and direct them in the right way. He took
   opportunities to converse with them singly and closely, about the
   concerns of their souls, and to give them warnings, exhortations, and
   directions, as he saw them severally need." The salvation of his
   children was his chief and constant desire, and aim, and effort
   concerning them. In the evening, after tea, he customarily sat in the
   parlour, with his family, for an hour, unbending from the severity of
   study, entering freely into the feelings and concerns of his children,
   and relaxing into cheerful and animated conversation, accompanied
   frequently with sprightly remarks, and sallies of wit and humour. But,
   before retiring to his study, he usually gave the conversation, by
   degrees, a more serious turn, addressing his children, with great
   tenderness and earnestness, on the subject of their salvation; when the
   thought that they were still strangers to religion would often affect
   him so powerfully, as to oblige him to withdraw, in order to conceal
   his emotions.--"He took much pains to instruct his children in the
   principles and duties of religion, in which he made use of the
   Assembly's Shorter Catechism: not merely by taking care that they
   learned it by heart, but by leading them into an understanding of the
   doctrines therein taught, by asking them questions on each answer, and
   explaining it to them. His usual time to attend to this was on the
   evening before the sabbath. And, as he believed that the sabbath, or
   holy time, began at sunset, on the evening preceding the first day of
   the week, he ordered his family to finish all their secular business by
   that time, or before; when all were called together, a psalm was sung,
   and prayer offered, as an introduction to the sanctification of the
   sabbath. This care and exactness effectually prevented that intruding
   on holy time, by attending to secular business, which is too common
   even in families where the evening before the sabbath is professedly
   observed.

   "He was utterly opposed to every thing like unseasonable hours, on the
   part of young people, in their visiting and amusements; which he
   regarded as a dangerous step towards corrupting them, and bringing them
   to ruin. And he thought the excuse offered by many parents, for
   tolerating this practice in their children,--that it is the custom, and
   that the children of other people are allowed thus to practise, and
   therefore it is difficult, and even impossible, to restrain
   theirs,--was insufficient and frivolous, and manifested a great degree
   of stupidity, on the supposition that the practice was hurtful and
   pernicious to their souls. And when his children grew up, he found no
   difficulty in restraining them from this improper and mischievous
   practice; but they cheerfully complied with the will of their parents.
   He allowed none of his children to be absent from home after nine
   o'clock at night, when they went abroad to see their friends and
   companions; neither were they allowed to sit up much after that time,
   in his own house, when any of their friends came to visit them. If any
   gentleman desired to address either of his daughters, after the
   requisite introduction and preliminaries, he was allowed all proper
   opportunities of becoming thoroughly acquainted with the manners and
   disposition of the young lady, but must not intrude on the customary
   hours of rest and sleep, nor on the religion and order of the family."

   Perhaps there never was a man more constantly retired from the world,
   giving himself to reading and contemplation; and it was a wonder that
   his feeble frame could subsist under such fatigues, daily repeated, and
   so long continued. Yet, upon this being alluded to by one of his
   friends, only a few months before his death, he said to him, "I do not
   find but that I now am as well able to bear the closest study, as I was
   thirty years ago; and can go through the exercises of the pulpit with
   as little uneasiness or difficulty."--In his youth he appeared healthy,
   and with a good degree of vivacity, but was never robust. In middle
   life he appeared very much emaciated, by severe study, and intense
   mental application. In his person he was tall of stature, and of a
   slender form. [82] He had a high, broad, bold forehead, and an eye
   unusually piercing and luminous; and on his whole countenance the
   features of his mind--perspicacity, sincerity, and benevolence--were so
   strongly impressed, that no one could behold it without at once
   discovering the clearest indications of great intellectual and moral
   elevation. His manners were those of the Christian gentleman, easy,
   tranquil, modest, and dignified; yet they were the manners of the
   student, grave, sedate, and contemplative; and evinced an exact sense
   of propriety, and an undeviating attention to the rules of decorum. "He
   had," observes one of his contemporaries, "a natural steadiness of
   temper, and fortitude of mind; which, being sanctified by the Spirit of
   God, was ever of vast advantage to him, to carry him through difficult
   services, and to support him under trying afflictions in the course of
   his life.--Personal injuries he bore with a becoming meekness and
   patience, and a disposition to forgiveness." According to Dr. Hopkins
   himself an eye-witness, these traits of character were eminently
   discovered, throughout the whole of his long-continued trials at
   Northampton. His own narrative of that transaction, his remarks before
   the council, his letters relating to it, and his farewell sermon, all
   written in the midst of the passing occurrences, bespeak as calm, and
   meek, and unperturbed a state of mind, as they would have done, had
   they been written by a third person, long after the events took
   place.--"The humility, modesty, and serenity of his behaviour, much
   endeared him to his acquaintance, and made him appear amiable in the
   eyes of such as had the privilege of conversing with them.--The several
   relations sustained by him, he adorned with exemplary fidelity; and was
   solicitous to fill every station with its proper duty.--In his private
   walk as a Christian, he appeared an example of truly rational,
   consistent, uniform religion and virtue; a shining instance of the
   power and efficacy of that holy faith, to which he was so firmly
   attached, and of which he was so zealous a defender. He exhibited much
   of spirituality, and a heavenly bent of soul. In him one saw the
   loveliest appearance--a rare assemblage of christian graces, united
   with the richest gifts, and mutually subserving and recommending one
   another."

   "He had an uncommon thirst for knowledge, in the pursuit of which he
   spared no cost nor pains. He read all the books, especially books
   treating of theology, that he could procure, from which he could hope
   to derive any assistance in the discovery of truth. And in this, he did
   not confine himself to authors of any particular sect or denomination;
   but even took much pains to procure the works of the most distinguished
   writers, who advanced views of religion or morals most contrary to his
   own principles; particularly the ablest Arminian, Socinian, and infidel
   writers. But he studied the Bible more than all other books, and more
   than most other divines do." He studied the Bible, to receive
   implicitly what it teaches; but he read other books to examine their
   soundness, and to employ them as helps in the investigation of
   principles, and the discovery of truth. His uncommon acquaintance with
   the Bible, appears in his sermons, in his treatises,--particularly in
   the treatises on the Affections, on the History of Redemption, on
   United and Extraordinary Prayer, on the Types of the Messiah, on the
   Qualifications for Communion, and on God's Last End in the
   Creation,--in his Notes on the Scriptures, and in his Miscellaneous
   Observations and Remarks. Any person who will read his works with close
   attention, and then will compare them with those of other theological
   writers, since the days of the apostles, will easily be satisfied that
   no other divine has as yet appeared, who has studied the Scriptures
   more thoroughly, or who has been more successful in discovering the
   mind of the Holy Spirit. He took his religious principles from the
   Bible, and not from treatises, or systems of theology, or any work of
   man. On the maturest examination of the different schemes of faith,
   prevailing in the world, and on comparing them with the sacred
   Scriptures, he adhered to the main articles of the reformed religion,
   with an unshaken firmness and with a fervent zeal, yet tempered with
   charity and candour, and governed by discretion. Few men are less under
   the bias of education, or the influence of bigotry: few receive the
   articles of their creed so little upon trust, or discover so much
   liberality or thoroughness in examining their foundation. His
   principles have been extensively styled Calvinistic, yet they differ
   widely from what has usually been denominated Calvinism, in various
   important points; particularly, in all immediately connected with moral
   agency; and he followed implicitly, if any man ever followed, the
   apostolic injunction, to call no man, Father, by receiving nothing on
   human authority, and examining scrupulously every principle which he
   adopted. He thought, and investigated, and judged for himself; and from
   the strength of his reasoning powers, as well as from his very plan of
   study, he became truly an original writer. As we have already
   sufficiently seen, reading was not the only, nor the chief, method
   which he took of improving his mind; but he devoted the strength of his
   time and of his faculties to writing, without which no student, and, be
   it remembered, no minister, can make improvements to the best
   advantage. He preached extensively on subjects, continued through a
   series of discourses;--many of his treatises having been a course of
   sermons actually delivered from the desk. In this practice, every
   minister who has a mind fitted for investigation, would do well to
   follow him. "Agreeably to the 11th Resolution, he applied himself, with
   all his might, to find out truth: he searched for it as for silver, and
   digged for it as for hidden treasures. Every thought, on any subject,
   which appeared to him worth pursuing and preserving, he pursued as far
   as he then could, with a pen in his hand. Thus he was, all his days,
   like the industrious bee, collecting honey from every opening flower,
   and storing up a stock of knowledge, which was indeed sweet to him, as
   honey and the honey-comb."

   As a scholar, his intellectual furniture exceeded what was common,
   under the disadvantages experienced at that time, in these remote
   colonies. He had an extensive acquaintance with the arts and
   sciences--with classical and Hebrew literature, with physics,
   mathematics, history, chronology, ethics, and mental philosophy. By the
   blessing of God on his indefatigable labours, to the last, he was
   constantly treasuring up useful knowledge, both human and divine.

   "Thus he appears to have been uncommonly accomplished for the arduous
   and momentous province to which he was finally called. And had his
   precious life been spared, there is every reason to believe, that he
   would have graced the station on which he had but entered, and proved a
   signal blessing to the college of New Jersey, and therein extensively
   served his generation according to the will of God"

   His inattention to his style is certainly to be regretted. In earlier
   life, he appears to have thought neatness and correctness in writing of
   little consequence, [83] and to have sent his works to the press very
   much in the state in which they were first written. Let it here be
   remembered, that the cultivation of style was not then attended to in
   the colonies; that the people at large were accustomed to discourses
   written in the plainest manner; and that it is extremely doubtful,
   whether, in the then existing state of the country, it would have been
   possible for him to have devoted much attention to the style of his
   sermons, without greatly diminishing their amount of impression. About
   the time of his leaving Northampton, he received one of the works of
   Richardson, [84] which he read with deep interest, and regarded as
   wholly favourable to good morals and purity of character. The perusal
   of it led him to attempt the formation of a more correct style, his
   previous inattention to which he then deeply regretted; and in this
   attempt he had much success. The style of the Freedom of the Will,
   though obviously that of a student, and not of a man of the world, is
   otherwise as correct as that of most of the metaphysical treatises to
   be found in the language. The same is true, generally, of the Treatise
   on Original Sin; although it was in the press when he died, and never
   received his last corrections. [85] In the two highest excellences of
   style, perspicuity and precision, he was probably never excelled.

   Of the powers of his mind, enough, perhaps, has been said already. They
   were certainly very varied, and fitted him for high distinction in any
   of the pursuits of learning or science.--His memory was strong, exact,
   uniform, and comprehensive.--His imagination was rich and powerful. I
   know that the contrary opinion has extensively prevailed, and that for
   three reasons. First, he paid little or no attention to his style of
   writing. Secondly, he never cultivated his imagination, and never
   indulged it but sparingly, and probably in no instance, for mere
   ornament. Thirdly, his great works are treatises on metaphysical
   subjects. A writer without imagination, always thinks and writes in a
   dry manner; and, if his powers are great, like those of Aristotle, he
   writes like a pure intelligence. Those who are conversant with the
   writings of Edwards, need not be informed that all his works, even the
   most metaphysical, are rich in illustration, or that his sermons abound
   with imagery of every kind, adapted to make a powerful and lasting
   impression. In his earlier writings, this faculty of his mind was
   suffered to act with less restraint. The first production of his pen,
   on the materiality of the soul, is a constant play of imagination and
   wit. The boy who could speak of the spiders of the forest, as "those
   wondrous animals, from whose glistening web so much of the wisdom of
   the Creator shines,"--who, in describing their operations, could say,
   "I have seen a vast multitude of little shining webs, and glistening
   strings, brightly reflecting the sun-beams, and some of them of great
   length, and of such a height, that one would think they were tacked to
   the vault of the heavens, and would be burnt like tow in the sun;"--and
   who, in exposing the absurdity of the supposition, that there can be
   absolutely nothing, observes, "When we go to form an idea of perfect
   nothing, we must not suffer our thoughts to take sanctuary in a
   mathematical point, but we must think of the same, that the sleeping
   rocks do dream of;"--possessed an imagination at once rich, brilliant,
   and creative.--His taste, if we do not refer to style of writing, but
   merely to the judgment of the mind, concerning all the varieties of
   sublimity and beauty, was at once delicate and correct.--Few of
   mankind, hitherto, have possessed either invention, ratiocination, or
   judgment in so high a degree; and it is difficult to say for which of
   these he is most distinguished. In comparing him with the
   metaphysicians of the old world, we must not forget his and their
   respective advantages for the culture of the mind. He was born in an
   obscure village, in which the ancient reign of barbarism was only
   beginning to yield to the inroads of culture and civilization; in a
   colony comprising but here and there a settlement; and in a country
   literally in its infancy, constituting with the exception of now and
   then a white plantation, one vast continuous forest, and distant three
   thousand miles from Europe, the seat of arts, refinement, and
   knowledge. He was educated at a seminary but three years older than
   himself; which had as yet no domical, and which furnished advantages
   totally inferior to those now enjoyed at the respectable academies of
   New England. The rest of his life was passed amid the cares of a most
   laborious profession, and on the very frontiers (and the latter part of
   it in the very midst) of savage life; with no libraries to explore, and
   with no men of eminence with whose minds his could come into daily
   contact. His greatest work was written in four months and a half while
   each sabbath he delivered two sermons to his English flock, and two
   others by interpreters, to two distinct auditories of Indians, and
   catechised the children of both tribes, and carried on all the
   correspondence of the mission, and was forced to guard against the
   measures of a powerful combination, busily occupied in endeavouring to
   drive him from his office, and thus to deprive his family of their
   daily bread.--With these things in view, instead of drawing any such
   comparison myself, I will refer my readers to the opinion of a writer
   of no light authority on such a subject,--I mean Dugald Stewart;--who,
   after having detailed tie systems of Locke, and Leibnitz, and Berkeley,
   and Condillac, speaks thus of the subject of this Memoir:--"There is,
   however, one metaphysician, of whom America has to boast, who, in
   logical acuteness and subtilty, does not yield to any disputant bred in
   the universities of Europe. I need not say that I allude to Jonathan
   Edwards."

   Mr. Edwards acquired a very high character, as a divine and as a
   preacher, during his life. "Among the luminaries of the church, in
   these American regions," says one of his contemporaries, [86] "he was
   justly reputed a star of the first magnitude; thoroughly versed in all
   the branches of theology, didactic, polemic, casuistic, experimental,
   and practical. In point of divine knowledge and skill, he had few
   equals, and perhaps no superior; at least in those foreign
   parts."--"Mr. Edwards," says Dr. Hopkins, "had the most universal
   character of a good preacher, of almost any minister in America. There
   were but few that heard him, who did not call him a good preacher,
   however they might dislike his religious principles, and be much
   offended at the same truths when delivered by others; and most people
   admired him above all the preachers that ever they heard." His
   character as a laborious and faithful minister, and especially as a
   powerful and successful preacher, if we may judge from the history of
   his life, and of the time in which he lived, was such for many years
   before his death, as to leave him here without a competitor. [87] This
   was owing chiefly to his preaching and pastoral labours; for most of
   his laboured productions were published either a little before, or
   after, his death; yet, long ere this, his fame as a preacher and
   minister of Christ, had pervaded the colonies, and was extensively
   known in Great Britain. Until within these few years, there were many
   living witnesses, who had heard him in their youth, and who distinctly
   remembered the powerful impressions left on their minds by his
   preaching, and particularly described his appearance in the pulpit, the
   still, unmoved solemnity of his manner, the weight of his sentiments
   first fixing the attention, and then overwhelming the feelings, of his
   audience. One of his youthful auditors, afterwards a gentleman of great
   respectability, informed my father that he was present, when he
   delivered the sermon in the History of Redemption, in which he
   describes the day of judgment; and that so vivid and solemn was the
   impression made on his own mind, that he fully supposed, that as soon
   as Mr. Edwards should close his discourse, the Judge would descend, and
   the final separation take place. The late Dr. West, of Stockbridge, who
   heard him in his childhood, in that village, gave me an account
   generally similar of the effects of his preaching. On one occasion,
   when the sermon exceeded two hours in its length, he told me that from
   the time that Mr. Edwards had fairly unfolded his subject, the
   attention of the audience was fixed and motionless, until its close;
   when they seemed disappointed that it should terminate so soon. There
   was such a bearing down of truth upon the mind, he observed, that there
   was no resisting it.--In his own congregation, the visible effects of
   his preaching were such as were never paralleled an New England. Often,
   also, he was invited to great distances to preach; and these occasional
   sermons sometimes produced a wonderful effect. One of these instances,
   which occurred at Enfield, at a time of great religious indifference
   there, is thus mentioned by the Rev. Dr. Trumbull. "When they went into
   the meeting-house, the appearance of the assembly was thoughtless and
   vain. The people hardly conducted themselves with common decency. The
   Rev Mr. Edwards, of Northampton, preached; and before the sermon was
   ended, the assembly appeared deeply impressed, and bowed down with an
   awful conviction of their sin and danger. There was such a breathing of
   distress and weeping, that the preacher was obliged to speak to the
   people and desire silence, that he might be heard." This was the
   commencement of a general and powerful revival of religion.

   To what, it may not improperly be asked, are this reputation and this
   success to be ascribed? It was not to his style of writing: that had no
   claims to elegance, or even to neatness.--It was not to his voice;
   that, far from being strong and full, was, in consequence of his feeble
   health, a little languid, and too low for a large assembly; though
   relieved and aided by a proper emphasis, just cadence, well placed
   pauses, and great clearness, distinctness, and precision of
   enunciation.--It was not owing to attitude or gesture, to his
   appearance in the pulpit, or to any of the customary arts of eloquence.
   His appearance in the pulpit was with a good grace, and his delivery
   easy, perfectly natural, and very solemn. He wrote his sermons; and in
   so fine and so illegible a hand, that they could be read only by being
   brought near to the eye. "He carried his notes with him into the
   pulpit, and read most that he wrote: still, he was not confined to
   them; and if some thoughts were suggested to him while he was
   preaching, which did not occur to him when writing, and appeared
   pertinent, he would deliver them with as great propriety and fluency,
   and often with greater pathos, and attended with a more sensibly good
   effect on his hearers, than what he had written." [88] While preaching,
   he customarily stood, holding his small manuscript volume in his left
   hand, the elbow resting on the cushion or the Bible, his right hand
   rarely raised but to turn the leaves, and his person almost
   motionless--It was not owing to the pictures of fancy, or to any
   ostentation of learning, or of talents. In his preaching, usually all
   was plain, familiar, sententious, and practical.

   One of the positive causes of his high character, and great success, as
   a preacher, was the deep and pervading solemnity of his mind. He had,
   at all times, a solemn consciousness of the presence of God. This was
   visible in his looks arid general demeanour. It obviously had a
   controlling influence over all his preparations for the pulpit; and was
   most manifest in all his public services. Its effect on an audience is
   immediate, and not to be resisted. "He appeared," says Dr. Hopkins,
   "with such gravity and solemnity, and his words were so full of ideas,
   that few speakers have been able to command the attention of an
   audience as he did."--His knowledge of the Bible, evinced in his
   sermons--in the number of relevant passages which he brings to enforce
   every position, in his exact discernment of the true scope of each, in
   his familiar acquaintance with the drift of the whole Scriptures on the
   subject, and in the logical precision with which he derives his
   principles from them--is probably unrivalled.--His knowledge of the
   human heart, and its operations, has scarcely been equalled by that of
   any uninspired preacher. He derived this knowledge from his familiarity
   with the testimony of God concerning it in the Bible; from his thorough
   acquaintance with his own heart; and from his profound knowledge of
   mental philosophy. The effect of it was, to enable him to speak to the
   consciousness of every one who heard him; so that each one was
   compelled to reflect, in language like that of the woman of Sychar,
   "Here is a man, who is revealing to me the secrets of my own heart and
   life: is not this man from God?"--His knowledge of theology was so
   exact and universal, and the extensiveness of his views and of his
   information was so great, that while he could shed unusual variety and
   richness of thought over every discourse, he could also bring the most
   striking and impressive truths, facts, and circumstances, to bear upon
   the point, which he was endeavouring to illustrate or enforce.--His
   aim, in preparing and delivering his sermons, was single. This is so
   obvious, that no man probably ever suspected him of writing or
   delivering a sermon, for the sake of display, or reputation. From the
   first step to the last, he aimed at nothing but the salvation of his
   hearers, and at the glory of God as revealed in it. This enabled him to
   bring all his powers of mind and heart to bear on this one object.--His
   feelings on this subject were most intense. The love of Christ
   constrained him; and the strong desire of his soul was, that they for
   whom Christ died might live for Him who died for them. "His words,"
   says Dr. Hopkins, "often discovered a great degree of inward fervour,
   without much noise or external emotion, and fell with great weight on
   the minds of his hearers; and he spake so as to reveal the strong
   emotions of his own heart, which tended, in the most natural and
   effectual manner, to move and affect others"--The plan of his sermons
   is most excellent. In his introduction, which is always an explanation
   of the passage, he exhibits uncommon skill, and the sagacity with which
   he discovers, and the power with which he seizes at once, the whole
   drift and weaning of the passage in all its bearings, has rarely if
   ever been equalled. In the body of the discourse, he never attempts an
   elaborate proof of his doctrine, from revelation and reason; but rather
   gives an explanation of the doctrine, or places the truth on which he
   is discoursing directly before the mind, as a fact, and paints it to
   the imagination of his hearers. In the application, where he usually
   lays out his strength, he addresses himself with peculiar plainness to
   the consciences of his hearers, takes up and applies to them minutely
   all the important ideas contained in the body of the discourse, and
   appropriates them to persons of different characters and situations in
   life, by a particular explanation of their duties and their dangers:
   and lastly, by a solemn, earnest, and impressive appeal to every
   feeling and active principle of our nature, he counsels, exhorts,
   warns, expostulates, as if he were determined not to suffer his hearers
   to depart, until they were convinced of their duty, and persuaded to
   choose and to perform it.--His graphic manner of exhibiting truth, is,
   perhaps, his peculiar excellence. The doctrines of the gospel, in his
   hands, are not mere abstract propositions, but living realities,
   distinctly seen by the author's faith, and painted with so much truth
   and life, and warmth of colouring, as cannot fail to give his hearers
   the same strong impression of them, which already exists in his own
   mind. With all this, he preached the real truth of God, in its
   simplicity and purity, keeping nothing back, with so much weight of
   thought and argument, so much strength of feeling, and such sincerity
   of purpose, as must enlighten every understanding, convince every
   conscience, and almost convert every heart.--I inquired of Dr West,
   Whether Mr. Edwards was an eloquent preacher. He replied, "If you mean,
   by eloquence, what is usually intended by it in our cities; he had no
   pretensions to it. He had no studied varieties of the voice, and no
   strong emphasis. He scarcely gestured, or even moved; and he made no
   attempt, by the elegance of his style, or the beauty of his pictures,
   to gratify the taste, and fascinate the imagination. But, if you mean
   by eloquence, the power of presenting an important truth before an
   audience, with overwhelming weight of argument, and with such
   intenseness of feeling, that the whole soul of the speaker is thrown
   into every part of the conception and delivery; so that the solemn
   attention of the whole audience is rivetted, from the beginning to the
   close, and impressions are left that cannot be effaced; Mr. Edwards was
   the most eloquent man I ever heard speak."--As the result of the whole,
   we are led to regard him as, beyond most others, an instructive
   preacher, a solemn and faithful preacher, an animated and earnest
   preacher, a most powerful and impressive preacher in the sense
   explained, and the only true sense, a singularly eloquent preacher,
   and, through the blessing of God, one of the most successful preachers
   since the days of the apostles. It ought here to be added, that the
   sermons of Mr. Edwards have been, to his immediate pupils, and to his
   followers, the models of a style of preaching, which has been most
   signally blessed by God to the conversion of sinners, and which should
   be looked to as a standard, by those who wish, like him, to turn many
   to righteousness, that with him they may shine, as the stars, for ever
   and ever.

   His prayers," says Dr. Hopkins, "were indeed extempore. He was the
   farthest from any appearance of a form, as to his words and manner of
   expression, of almost any man. He was quite singular and inimitable in
   this, by any, who have not a spirit of real and undissembled devotion;
   yet he always expressed himself with decency and propriety. He appeared
   to have much of the grace and spirit of prayer; to pray with the spirit
   and with the understanding; and he performed this part of duty much to
   the acceptance and edification of those who joined with him. He was not
   wont, in ordinary cases, to be long in his prayers: an error which, he
   observed, was often hurtful to public and social prayer, as it tends
   rather to damp, than to promote, true devotion."

   His practice, not to visit his people in their own houses, except in
   cases of sickness or affliction, is an example, not of course to be
   imitated by all. That, on this subject, ministers ought to consult
   their own talents and circumstances, and visit more or less, according
   to the degree in which they can thereby promote the great ends of their
   ministry, cannot be doubted. That his time was too precious to the
   church at large, to have been devoted, in any considerable degree, to
   visiting, all will admit. Yet it is highly probable, that, if he had
   been somewhat less in his study, and seen his people occasionally in
   the midst of their families, and known more of their circumstances and
   wants, and entered more into their feelings, his hold on their
   affections would have been stronger, and more permanent. Certainly this
   will be true with ministers at large.--In other pastoral duties, in
   preaching public and private lectures, in extraordinary labours during
   seasons of attention to religion, and in conversing with the anxious
   and inquiring, he was an uncommon example of faithfulness and success.
   "At such seasons, his study was thronged with persons, who came to lay
   open their spiritual concerns to him, and seek his advice and
   direction. He was a peculiarly skilful guide to those who were under
   spiritual difficulties; and was therefore sought unto, not only by his
   own people, but by many at a great distance." For this duty he was
   eminently fitted, from his own deep personal experience of religion,
   from his unwearied study of the word of God, from his having had so
   much intercourse with those who were in spiritual troubles, from his
   uncommon acquaintance with the human heart, with the nature of
   conversion, and with revivals of religion, and from his skill in
   detecting and exposing every thing like enthusiasm and counterfeit
   religion How great a blessing was it to a church, to a people, and to
   every anxious inquirer, to enjoy the counsels and the prayers of such a
   minister!

   But it is the theological treatises of Mr. Edwards, especially, by
   which he is most extensively known, to which he owes his commanding
   influence, and on which his highest reputation will ultimately depend.
   It is proper, therefore, before we conclude, to sketch his character as
   a theologian and controversialist, and to state the actual effects of
   his writings.

   As a theologian, he is distinguished for his scriptural views of divine
   truth. Even the casual reader of his works can scarcely fail to
   perceive that, with great labour, patience, and skill, he derived his
   principles from an extensive and most accurate observation of the word
   of God. The number of passages which he adduces from the Scriptures, on
   every important doctrine, the critical attention he has evidently given
   them, the labour in arranging them, and the skill and integrity with
   which he derives his general conclusions from them, is truly
   astonishing. We see no intermixture of his own hypotheses; no
   confidence in his own reason, except as applied to the interpretation
   of the oracles of God; nor even that disposition to make extended and
   momentous inferences, which characterizes some of his successors and
   admirers.

   Another characteristic of his theology, is the extensiveness of his
   views. In his theology, as in his mind, there was nothing narrow, no
   partial, contracted views of a subject: all was simple, great, and
   sublime. His mind was too expanded to regard the distinctions of sects
   and churches. He belonged, in his feelings, to no church but the church
   of Christ, he contended for nothing but the truth; he aimed at nothing
   but to promote holiness and salvation. The effect of his labours so
   exactly coincides with the effects of the gospel, that no denomination
   can ever appropriate his name to itself, or claim him as its own.

   Viewing Mr. Edwards as a controversialist, the most excellent, if not
   the most striking, trait in his character, is his integrity. Those who
   have been most opposed to his conclusions, and have most powerfully
   felt the force of his arguments, have acknowledged that he is a
   perfectly fair disputant. He saw so certainly the truth of his
   positions, and had such confidence in his ability to defend them by
   fair means, that the thought of employing sophistry in their defence
   never occurred to him. But, if he had felt the want of sound arguments,
   he would not have employed it. His conscience was too enlightened, and
   his mind too sincere. His aim, in all his investigations, was the
   discovery and the defence of truth. He valued his positions, only
   because they were true; and he gave them up at once, when he found that
   they were not supported by argument and evidence.

   Another trait in his character, as a reasoner, is originality, or
   invention. Before his time, the theological writers of each given class
   or party, had, with scarcely an exception, followed on, one after
   another, in the same beaten path, and, whenever any one had deviated
   from it, he had soon lost himself in the mazes of error. Mr. Edwards
   had a mind too creative to be thus dependent on others. If the reader
   will examine carefully his controversial and other theological works,
   and compare them with those of his predecessors on the same subjects;
   he will find that his positions are new, that his definitions are new,
   that his plans are new, that his arguments are new, that his
   conclusions are new, that his mode of reasoning and his methods of
   discovering truth are perfectly his own; and that he has done more to
   render theology a new science, than, with perhaps one or two
   exceptions, all the writers who have lived since the days of the
   fathers.

   Another characteristic of his controversial writings, is the excellent
   spirit which every where pervades them. So strikingly is this true,
   that we cannot but urge every one, who peruses them, to examine for
   himself, whether he can discover, in them all, a solitary deviation
   from Christian kindness and sincerity. By such an examination he will
   discover in them, if I mistake not, a fairness in proposing the real
   point in dispute, a candour in examining the arguments of his
   opponents, in stating their objections, and in suggesting others in
   which had escaped them, and a care in avoiding every thing like
   personality, and the imputation of unworthy motives, rarely paralleled
   in the annals of controversy. It should here be remembered, that he
   wrote his treatise on the Affections, and his several works on revivals
   of religion, in the very heat of a violent contest, which divided and
   agitated this whole country; that in his treatises on the Freedom of
   the Will, on Original Sin, and on Justification, he handles subjects,
   which unavoidably awaken the most bitter opposition in the human heart,
   and opposes those, who had boasted of their victories over what he
   believed to be the cause of truth, "with no little glorying and
   insult;" that his treatise on the Qualifications for Communion, was
   written amid all the violence, and abuse, and injury of a furious
   parochial controversy; and that, in the Answer to Williams, he was
   called to reply to the most gross personalities, and to the most
   palpable misrepresentations of his arguments, his principles, and his
   motives.

   He has, I know, been charged sometimes with handling his antagonists
   with needless severity. But let it be remembered, that his severity is
   never directed against their personal character, but merely against
   their principles and arguments; that his wit is only an irresistible
   exposition of the absurdity which he is opposing; [89] that he stood
   forth as the champion of truth, and the opponent of error; and that, in
   this character, it was his duty not merely to prostrate error, but to
   give it a death-blow, that it might never rise again.

   But the characteristic of his controversial, and indeed of all his
   theological, writings, which gives them their chief value and effect,
   is the unanswerableness of his arguments. He not only drives his enemy
   from the field, but he erects a rampart, so strong and impregnable,
   that no one afterwards has any courage to assail it; and his companions
   in arms find the great work of defending the positions, which he has
   occupied, already done to their hands.

   This impossibility of answering his arguments, arises, in the first
   place, from the strength and conclusiveness of his reasoning. By first
   fixing in his own mind, and then exactly defining, the meaning of his
   terms, by stating his propositions with logical precision, and by
   clearly discerning and stating the connexion between his premises and
   conclusions, he has given to metaphysical reasoning very much of the
   exactness and certainty of mathematical demonstration.

   Another cause of the unanswerable character of his reasonings, is, that
   he usually follows several distinct trains of argument, which all
   terminate in the same conclusion. Each of them is satisfactory; but the
   union of all, commencing at different points, and arriving at the same
   identical result, cannot fail to convince the mind, that that result is
   not to he shaken.

   A third cause of this is, that he himself anticipates, and effectually
   answers, not only all the objections that have been made, but all that
   apparently can be made, to the points for which he contends. These he
   places in the strongest light and examines under every shape which they
   can assume in the hands of an evasive antagonist, and shows that, in
   every possible form, they are wholly inconclusive.

   A fourth cause is his method of treating the opinions of his opponents.
   It is the identical method of Euclid. Assuming them as premises, he
   with great ingenuity shows, that they lead to palpable absurdity. He
   demonstrates that his opponents are inconsistent with themselves, as
   well as with truth and common sense;--and rarely stops, until he has
   exposed their error to contempt and ridicule.

   This unanswerableness of Mr. Edwards's reasonings, in his controversial
   works, has been most publicly confessed. The Essay on the Will treats
   of subjects the most contested within the limits of theology; and,
   unless it can be answered, prostrates in the dust the scheme of
   doctrines, for which his antagonists so earnestly contend. Yet,
   hitherto, it stands unmoved and unassailed; and the waves of
   controversy break harmless at its base. [90] The treatise on Original
   Sin, though written chiefly to overthrow the hypothesis of an
   individual, is perhaps not less conclusive in its reasonings. That he
   succeeded in that design, as well as in establishing the great
   principles for which he contends will not be doubted by any one who
   examines the controversy; and is said to have been virtually confessed,
   in a melancholy manner, by Taylor himself. He had indiscreetly boasted,
   in his larger work, that it never would be answered. The answer was so
   complete, that it admitted of no reply. His consequent mortification is
   said to have shortened his days. Whether it was true, or not, that the
   grasp of his antagonist was literally death, it was at least death to
   the controversy. The treatise on the Qualifications for Communion,
   attacked the most favourite scheme of all the lax religionists of this
   country, the only plausible scheme, ever yet devised, of establishing a
   communion between light and darkness, between Christ and Belial. They
   regarded this attack with indignation, from one end of the country to
   the other. One solitary combatant appeared in the field; and, being
   left in a state of irrecoverable prostration, he has hitherto found no
   one adventurous enough to come to his aid. The Treatise, and Reply, of
   Mr. Edwards, by the conclusiveness of their reasonings, have so changed
   the opinion and practice of the ministers, and the churches, of New
   England, that a mode of admission, once almost universal, now scarcely
   finds a solitary advocate.

   But it may not unnaturally be asked, What are the changes in theology,
   which have been affected by the writings of President Edwards. It gives
   me peculiar pleasure that I can answer this question, in the words of
   his son, the late Dr. Edwards, President of Union College, Schenectady.

    "CLEARER STATEMENTS

  OF THEOLOGICAL TRUTH,

   MADE BY PRESIDENT EDWARDS, AND THOSE WHO HAVE FOLLOWED HIS COURSE OF
   THOUGHT.

   "1. The important question, concerning the ultimate end of the
   creation, is a question, upon which Mr. Edwards has shed much light.
   For ages it had been disputed, whether the end of creation was the
   happiness of creatures themselves, or the declarative glory of the
   Creator. Nor did it appear that the dispute was likely to be brought to
   an issue. On the one hand, it was urged, that reason declared in favour
   of the former hypothesis. It was said that, as God is a benevolent
   being, he doubtless acted under the influence of his own infinite
   benevolence in the creation; and that he could not but form creatures
   for the purpose of making them happy. Many passages of Scripture also
   were quoted in support of this opinion. On the other hand, numerous and
   very explicit declarations of Scripture were produced to prove that God
   made all things for his own glory. Mr. Edwards was the first, who
   clearly showed, that both these were the ultimate end of the creation,
   that they are only one end, and that they are really one and the same
   thing. According to him, the declarative glory of God is the creation,
   taken, not distributively, but collectively, as a system raised to a
   high degree of happiness. The creation, thus raised and preserved, is
   the declarative glory of God. In other words, it is the exhibition of
   his essential glory.

   "2. On the great subject of Liberty and Necessity, Mr. Edwards made
   very important improvements. Before him, the Calvinists were nearly
   driven out of the field, by the Arminians, Pelagians and Socinians. The
   Calvinists, it is true, appealed to Scripture, the best of all
   authority, in support of their peculiar tenets. But how was the
   Scripture to be understood. They were pressed and embarrassed by the
   objection,--That the sense, in which they interpreted the sacred
   writings, was inconsistent with human liberty, moral agency,
   accountableness, praise and blame. It was consequently inconsistent
   with all command and exhortation, with all reward and punishment. Their
   interpretation must of course be erroneous, and an entire perversion of
   Scripture. How absurd, it was urged, that a man totally dead, should be
   called upon to arise and perform the duties of the living and
   sound--that we should need a divine influence to give us a new heart,
   and yet be commanded to make us a new heart, and a right spirit--that a
   man has no power to come to Christ, and yet be commanded to come to him
   on pain of damnation! The Calvinists themselves began to be ashamed of
   their own cause and to give it up, so far at least as relates to
   liberty and necessity. This was true especially of Dr. Watts and
   Doddridge, who, in their day, were accounted leaders of the Calvinists.
   They must needs bow in the house of Rimmon, and admit the
   self-determining power; which, once admitted and pursued to its
   ultimate results, entirely overthrows the doctrines of regeneration, of
   our dependence for renewing and sanctifying grace, of absolute decrees,
   of the saints perseverance, and the whole system of doctrines, usually
   denominated the doctrines of grace.--But Mr. Edwards put an end to this
   seeming triumph of those, who were thus hostile to that system of
   doctrines. This he accomplished, by pointing out the difference between
   natural and moral, necessity and inability, by showing the absurdity,
   the manifold contradictions, the inconceivableness, and the
   impossibility, of a self-determining power, and by proving that the
   essence of the virtue and vice, existing in the disposition of the
   heart and the acts of the will, lies not in their cause, but in their
   nature. Therefore, though we are not the efficient causes of our own
   acts of will, yet they may be either virtuous or vicious; and also that
   liberty of contingence, as it is an exemption from all previous
   certainty, implies that free actions have no cause, and come into
   existence by mere chance. But if we admit that any event may come into
   existence by chance, and without a cause, the existence of the world
   may be accounted for in this same way; and atheism is established.--Mr.
   Edwards and his followers have further illustrated this subject by
   showing, that free action consists in volition itself, and that liberty
   consists in spontaneity. Wherever, therefore, there is volition, there
   is free action; wherever there is spontaneity there is liberty; however
   and by whomsoever that liberty and spontaneity are caused. Beasts,
   therefore, according to their measure of intelligence, are as free as
   men. Intelligence, therefore, and not liberty, is the only thing
   wanting, to constitute them moral agents.--The power of
   self-determination, alone, cannot answer the purpose of them who
   undertake its defence; for self-determination must be free from all
   control and previous certainty, as to its operations, otherwise it must
   be subject to what its advocates denominate a fatal necessity, and
   therefore must act by contingence and mere chance. But even the
   defenders of self-determination themselves, are not willing to allow
   the principle, that our actions, in order to be free, must happen by
   chance.--Thus Mr. Edwards and his followers understand, that the whole
   controversy concerning liberty and necessity, depends on the
   explanation of the word liberty, or the sense in which that word is
   used. They find that all the senses in which the word has been used,
   with respect to the mind and its acts, may be reduced to these two: 1.
   Either an entire exemption from previous certainty, or the certain
   futurity of the acts which it will perform: or, 2. Spontaneity.--Those,
   who use it in the former sense, cannot avoid the consequence, that, in
   order to act freely, we must act by chance, which is absurd, and what
   no man will dare to avow. If then liberty means an exemption from an
   influence, to which the will is or can be opposed, every volition is
   free, whatever may be the manner of its coming into existence. If,
   furthermore, God, by his grace, create in man a clean heart and holy
   volitions, such volitions being, by the very signification of the term
   itself, voluntary, and in no sense opposed to the divine influence
   which causes them, they are evidently as free as they could have been,
   if they had come into existence by mere chance and without cause. We
   have, of course no need of being the efficient causes of those acts,
   which our wills perform, to render them either virtuous or vicious. As
   to the liberty, then, of self-determination or contingence, it implies,
   as already observed, that actions, in order to be free, must have no
   cause; but are brought into existence by chance. Thus have they
   illustrated the real and wide difference between natural and moral
   necessity. They have proved that this difference consists, not in the
   degree of previous certainty that an action will be performed--but in
   the fact, that natural necessity admits an entire opposition of the
   will, while moral necessity implies, and, in all cases, secures, the
   consent of the will. It follows that all necessity of the will, and of
   its acts, is of the moral kind; and that natural necessity cannot
   possibly affect the will or any of its exercises. It likewise follows,
   that if liberty, as applied to a moral agent, mean an exemption from
   all previous certainty that an action will be performed, then no action
   of man or any other creature can be free; for on this supposition,
   every action must come to pass without divine prescience, by mere
   chance, and consequently without a cause.--Now, therefore, the
   Calvinists find themselves placed upon firm and high ground. They fear
   not the attacks of their opponents. They face them on the ground of
   reason, as well as of Scripture. They act not merely on the defensive.
   Rather they have carried the war into Italy, and to the very gates of
   Rome.--But all this is peculiar to America; except that a few European
   writers have adopted, from American authors, the sentiments here
   stated. Even the famous Assembly of Divines had very imperfect views of
   this subject. This they prove, when they say, "Our first parents, being
   left to the freedom of their own will, fell from the state wherein they
   were created;"--and "God foreordained whatsoever comes to pass, so as
   the contingency of second causes is not taken away, but rather
   established."--These divines unquestionably meant, that our first
   parents, in the instance, at least, of their fall, acted from
   self-determination, and by mere contingence or chance. But there is no
   more reason to believe or even suppose this, than there is to suppose
   it true of every sinner, in every sin which he commits.

   "3. Mr. Edwards very happily illustrated and explained The nature of
   True Virtue, or Holiness.--What is the nature of true virtue, or
   holiness?--In what does it consist?--and, Whence arises our obligation
   to be truly virtuous or holy?--are questions which moral writers have
   agitated in all past ages. Some have placed virtue in self-love;--some
   in acting agreeably to the fitness of things;--some in following
   conscience, or moral sense;--some in following truth;--and some in
   acting agreeably to the will of God. Those who place or found virtue in
   fitness, and those who found it in truth, do but use one synonymous
   word for another. For they doubtless mean moral fitness, and moral
   truth; these are no other than virtuous fitness, and virtuous truth. No
   one would pretend that it is a virtuous action to give a man poison,
   because it is fit or direct mode of destroying his life. No person will
   pretend that the crucifying of Christ was virtuous, because it was
   true, compared with the ancient prophecies.--To found virtue in acting
   agreeably to conscience, or moral sense, justifies the persecutions of
   Christians by Saul of Tarsus, as well as a great proportion of
   heathenish idolatry.--If we found virtue in the will of God, the
   question arises, Whether the will of God be our rule, because it is in
   fact what it is, wise, good and benevolent; or whether it be our rule,
   merely because it is his will, without any consideration of its nature
   and tendency; and whether it would be a rule equally binding, as to
   observance, if it were foolish and malicious?--Mr. Edwards teaches,
   that virtue consists in benevolence. He proves that every voluntary
   action, which, in its general tendency and ultimate consequences, leads
   to happiness, is virtuous, and that every such action, which has not
   this tendency, and does not lead to this consequence, is vicious. By
   happiness, in this case, he does not mean the happiness of the agent
   only, or principally, but happiness in general, happiness on the large
   scale. Virtuous or holy benevolence embraces both the agent himself and
   others--all intelligences, wherever found, who are capable of a
   rational and moral blessedness. All actions, proceeding from such a
   principle, he holds to be fit, or agreeable to the fitness of
   things--agreeable equally to reason, and, to a well-informed
   conscience, or moral sense, and to moral truth;--and agreeable
   especially to the will of God, who "is love," or benevolence.--In this
   scheme of virtue or holiness, Mr. Edwards appears to have been
   original. Much indeed has been said, by most moral writers, in favour
   of benevolence. Many things they had published, which imply, in their
   consequences, Mr. Edward's scheme of virtue. But no one before him had
   traced these consequences to their proper issue. No one had formed a
   system of virtue, and of morals, built on that foundation.

   "4. Mr. Edwards has thrown much light on the inquiry concerning The
   Origin of Moral Evil. This question, comprehending the influence which
   the Deity had in the event of moral evil, has always been esteemed most
   difficult and intricate. That God is the author of sin, has been
   constantly objected to the Calvinists, as the consequence of their
   principles, by their opponents. To avoid this objection, some have
   holden that God is the author of the sinful act, which the sinner
   commits, but that the sinner himself is the author of its sinfulness.
   But how we shall abstract the sinfulness of a malicious act from the
   malicious act itself; and how God can be the author of a malicious act,
   and not be the author of the malice, which is the sinfulness of that
   act; is hard to be conceived. Mr. Edwards rejects, with abhorrence, the
   idea that God either is, or can be, the agent, or actor, of sin. He
   illustrates and explains this difficult subject, by showing that God
   may dispose things in such a manner, that sin will certainly take place
   in consequence of such a disposal. In maintaining this, he only adheres
   to his own important doctrine of moral necessity. The divine disposal,
   by which sin certainly comes into existence, is only establishing a
   certainty of its future existence. If that certainty, which is no other
   than moral necessity, be not inconsistent with human liberty; then
   surely the cause of that certainty, which is no other than the divine
   disposal, cannot be inconsistent with such liberty.

   "5. The followers of Mr. Edwards have thrown new and important light
   upon The Doctrine of Atonement. It has been commonly represented, that
   the atonement, which Christ made, was the payment of a debt, due from
   his people. By this payment, they were purchased from slavery and
   condemnation. Hence arose this question,--If the sinner's debt be paid,
   how does it appear that there is any pardon or grace in his
   deliverance?--The followers of Mr. Edwards have proved, that the
   atonement does not consist in the payment of a debt, properly so
   called. It consists rather in doing that, which, for the purpose of
   establishing the authority of the divine law, and of supporting in due
   time the divine government, is equivalent to the punishment of the
   sinner according to the letter of the law. Now, therefore, God, without
   the prostration of his authority and government, can pardon and save
   those who believe. As what was done to support the divine government,
   was not done by the sinner, so it does not at all diminish the free
   grace of his pardon and salvation. [91]

   "6. With respect to The Imputation of Adam's Sin, and The Imputation of
   Christ's Righteousness, their statements also have been more accurate.
   The common doctrine had been, that Adam's sin is so transferred to his
   posterity, that it properly becomes their sin. The righteousness of
   Christ, likewise, is so transferred or made over to the believer, that
   it properly becomes his righteousness. To the believer it is reckoned
   in the divine account.--On this the question arises, How can the
   righteousness or good conduct of one person be the righteousness or
   good conduct of another? If, in truth, it cannot be the conduct of that
   other; how can God, who is omniscient, and cannot mistake, reckon,
   judge, or think it to be the conduct of that other?--The followers of
   Mr. Edwards find relief from this difficulty, by proving that to impute
   righteousness, is, in the language of Scripture, to justify; and that,
   to impute the righteousness of Christ, is to justify on account of
   Christ's righteousness. The imputation of righteousness can, therefore,
   be no transfer of righteousness. They are the beneficial consequences
   of righteousness, which are transferred. Not therefore the
   righteousness of Christ itself, but its beneficial consequences and
   advantages are transferred to the believer.--In the same manner they
   reason with respect to the imputation of Adam's sin. The baneful
   consequences of Adam's sin, which came upon himself, came also upon his
   posterity. These consequences were, that, after his first
   transgression, God left him to an habitual disposition to sin, to a
   series of actual transgressions, and to a liableness to the curse of
   the law, denounced against such transgression.--The same consequences
   took place with regard to Adam's posterity. By divine constitution,
   they, as descending from Adam, become, like himself, the subjects of an
   habitual disposition to sin. This disposition is commonly called
   original depravity. Under its influence they sin, as soon as, in a
   moral point of view, they act at all. This depravity, this disposition
   to sin, leads them naturally to a series of actual transgressions, and
   exposes them to the whole curse of the law.--On this subject two
   questions have been much agitated in the Christian world:--1. Do the
   posterity of Adam, unless saved by Christ, suffer final damnation on
   account of Adam's sin?--and, if this be asserted, how can it be
   reconciled with justice?--2. How shall we reconcile it with justice,
   that Adam's posterity should be doomed, in consequence of his sin, to
   come into the world, with an habitual disposition themselves to
   sin?--On the former of these questions, the common doctrine has been,
   that Adam's posterity, unless saved by Christ, are damned on account of
   Adam's sin, and that this is just, because his sin is imputed or
   transferred to them. By imputation, his sin becomes their sin. When the
   justice of such a transfer is demanded, it is said that the
   constitution, which God has established, makes the transfer just.--To
   this it may be replied, that in the same way it may be proved to be
   just, to damn a man without any sin at all, either personal or imputed.
   We need only to resolve it into a sovereign constitution of God. From
   this difficulty the followers of Mr. Edwards relieve themselves, by
   holding that, though Adam was so constituted the federal head of his
   posterity, that in consequence of his sin they all sin or become
   sinners, yet they are damned on account of their own personal sin
   merely, and not on account of Adam's sin, as though they were
   individually guilty of his identical transgression. This leads us to
   the second question stated above:--viz. How shall we reconcile it with
   perfect justice, that Adam's posterity should, by a divine
   constitution, be depraved and sinful, or become sinners, in consequence
   of Adam's apostacy?--But this question involves no difficulty, beside
   that, which attends the doctrine of divine decrees. And this is
   satisfactory; because for God to decree that an event shall take place,
   is, in other words, the same thing as if he make a constitution, under
   the operation of which that event shall take place. If God has decreed
   whatever comes to pass, he decreed the fall of Adam. It is obvious
   that, in equal consistency with justice, he may decree any other sin.
   Consequently he may decree that every man shall sin; and this too, as
   soon as he shall become capable of moral action. Now if God could,
   consistently with justice, establish, decree, or make a constitution,
   according to which this depravity, this sinfulness of disposition,
   should exist, without any respect to Adam's sin, he might evidently,
   with the same justice, decree that it should take place in consequence
   of Adam's sin. If God might consistently with justice decree, that the
   Jews should crucify Christ, without the treachery of Judas preceding,
   he might with the same justice decree, that they should do the same
   evil deed, in consequence of that treachery.--Thus the whole
   difficulty, attending the connexion between Adam and his posterity, is
   resolved into the doctrine of the divine decrees; and the followers of
   Mr. Edwards feel themselves placed upon strong ground--ground upon
   which they are willing, at any time, to meet their opponents.--They
   conceive, furthermore, that, by resolving several complicated
   difficulties into one simple vindicable principle, a very considerable
   improvement is made in the representations of theological truth. Since
   the discovery and elucidation of the distinction, between natural and
   moral necessity, and inability; and since the effectual confutation of
   that doctrine, which founds moral liberty on self-determination; they
   do not feel themselves pressed with the objections, which are made to
   divine and absolute decrees.

   "7. With respect to The State of the Unregenerate, The Use of Means,
   and The Exhortations, which ought to be addressed to the Impenitent,
   the disciples of Mr. Edwards, founding themselves on the great
   principles of moral agency, established in the Freedom of the Will,
   have since his day made considerable improvement upon former
   views.--This improvement was chiefly occasioned by the writings of
   Robert Sandeman, a Scotchman, which were published after the death of
   Mr. Edwards. Sandeman, in the most striking colours, pointed out the
   inconsistency of the popular preachers, as he called them; by whom he
   meant Calvinistic divines in general. He proved them inconsistent, in
   teaching that the unregenerate are, by total depravity, dead in
   trespasses and sins,'--and yet supposing that such sinners do often
   attain those sincere desires, make those sincere resolutions, and offer
   those sincere prayers, which are well pleasing in the sight of God, and
   which are the sure presages of renewing grace and salvation. He argued,
   that, if the unregenerate be dead in sin, then all that they do must be
   sin; and that sin can never be pleasing and acceptable to God. Hence he
   taught, not only that all the exercises and strivings of the
   unregenerate are abominable in the Divine view, but that there is no
   more likelihood, in consequence of their strictest attendance on the
   means of grace, that they will become partakers of salvation, than
   there would be in the total neglect of those means. These sentiments
   were entirely new. As soon as they were published, they gave a
   prodigious shock to all serious men, both ministers and others. The
   addresses to the unregenerate, which had hitherto consisted chiefly in
   exhortations to attend on the outward means of grace, and to form such
   resolutions, and put forth such desires, as all supposed consistent
   with unregeneracy, were examined. It appearing that such exhortations
   were addresses to no real spiritual good; many ministers refrained from
   all exhortations to the unregenerate. The perplexing inquiry with such
   sinners consequently was--What then have we to do? All we do is sin. To
   sin is certainly wrong. We ought therefore to remain still, doing
   nothing, until God bestow upon us renewing grace.' In this state of
   things, Dr. Hopkins took up the subject. He inquired particularly into
   the exhortations delivered by the inspired writers. He published
   several pieces on The character of the Unregenerate; on Using the Means
   of Grace; and on The Exhortations, which ought to be addressed to the
   Unregenerate. He clearly showed that, although they are dead in
   depravity and sin, yet, as this lays them under a mere moral inability
   to the exercise and practice of true holiness,--and as such exercise
   and practice are their unquestionable duty,--to this duty they are to
   be exhorted. To this duty only, and to those things which imply it, the
   inspired writers constantly exhort the unregenerate. Every thing short
   of this duty is sin. Nevertheless, as faith cometh by hearing,' those
   who hear,' and attend on the means of grace, even in their
   unregeneracy, and from natural principles, are more likely than others
   to become the subjects of divine grace. The Scriptures sufficiently
   prove, that this is the constitution which Christ has established. It
   likewise accords perfectly with experience and observation, both in
   apostolic and subsequent ages.

   "8. Mr. Edwards greatly illustrated The Nature of Experimental
   Religion. He pointed out, more clearly than had been done before, the
   distinguishing marks of genuine Christian experience, and those
   religious affections and exercises, which are peculiar to the true
   Christian. The accounts of Christian affection and experience, which
   had before been given, both by American and European writers, were
   general, indiscriminate, and confused. They seldom, if ever,
   distinguished the exercises of self-love, natural conscience, and other
   natural principles of the human mind under conviction of divine truth,
   from those of the new nature, given in regeneration. In other words,
   they seldom distinguished the exercises of the sinner under the law
   work, and the joys afterwards often derived from a groundless
   persuasion of his forgiveness, from those sincere and evangelical
   affections, which are peculiar to the real convert. They did not show
   how far the unregenerate sinner can proceed in religious exercises, and
   yet fall short of saving grace. But this whole subject, and the
   necessary distinction, with respect to it, are set in a striking light
   by Mr. Edwards, in his treatise concerning Religious Affections.

   "9. Mr. Edwards has thrown much light upon the subject of affection as
   disinterested. The word disinterested, is, indeed, capable of such a
   sense, as affords a ground of argument against disinterested
   affections; and scarcely perhaps is an instance of its use to be found,
   in which it does not admit of an equivocation. It seems to be a mere
   equivocation to say, that disinterested affection is an impossibility;
   and that, if we are not interested in favour of religion, we are
   indifferent with respect to it, and do not love it at all. But who ever
   thought that, when a person professes a disinterested regard for
   another, he has no regard for him at all. [92] The plain meaning is,
   that his regard for him is direct and benevolent, not selfish, nor
   arising from selfish motives. In this sense, Mr. Edwards maintained
   that our religious affections, if genuine, are disinterested; that our
   love to God arises chiefly--not from the motive that God has bestowed,
   or is about to bestow, on us favours, whether temporal or eternal,
   but--from his own infinite excellence and glory. The same explanation
   applies to the love which every truly pious person feels for the Lord
   Jesus Christ, for every truth of divine revelation, and for the whole
   scheme of the gospel. Very different from this is the representation
   given by most theological writers before Mr. Edwards. The motives
   presented by them, to persuade men to love and serve God, to come unto
   Christ, to repent of their sin; and to embrace and practise religion,
   are chiefly of the selfish kind. There is, in their works, no careful
   and exact discrimination upon this subject.

   "10. He has thrown great light on the important doctrine of
   Regeneration. Most writers before him treat this subject very loosely.
   They do indeed describe a variety of awakenings and convictions, fears
   and distresses, comforts and joys, as implied in it; and they call the
   whole, regeneration. They represent the man before regeneration as
   dead, and no more capable of spiritual action, than a man naturally
   dead is capable of performing those deeds, which require natural life
   and strength. From their description, a person is led to conceive, that
   the former is as excusable, in his omission of those holy exercises,
   which constitute the christian character and life, as the latter is, in
   the neglect of those labours, which cannot be performed without natural
   life. From their account, no one can determine in what the change,
   effected by regeneration, consists. They do not show the inquirer,
   whether every awakened and convinced sinner, who afterwards has lively
   gratitude and joy, is regenerated; or whether a gracious change of
   heart implies joys of a peculiar kind: neither, if the renewed have
   joys peculiar to themselves, do the teachers, now referred to, describe
   that peculiarity; nor do they tell from what motives the joys, that are
   evidence of regeneration, arise. They represent the whole man, his
   understanding, and his sensitive faculties, as renewed, no less than
   his heart and affections. According to them generally, this change is
   effected by light. As to this indeed they are not perfectly agreed.
   Some of them hold, that the change is produced by the bare light and
   motives exhibited in the gospel. Others pretend, that a man is
   persuaded to become a Christian, as he is persuaded to become a friend
   to republican government. Yet others there are, who hold that
   regeneration is caused by a supernatural and divine light immediately
   communicated. Their representation of this seems to imply, and their
   readers understand it as implying, an immediate and new revelation.
   But, according to Mr. Edwards, and those who adopt his views of the
   subject, regeneration consists in the communication of a new spiritual
   sense or taste. In other words, a new heart is given. This
   communication is made, this work is accomplished, by the Spirit of God.
   It is their opinion, that the intellect, and the sensitive faculties,
   are not the immediate subject of any change in regeneration. They
   believe, however, that, in consequence of the change which the renewed
   heart experiences, and of its reconciliation to God, light breaks in
   upon the understanding. The subject of regeneration sees, therefore,
   the glory of God's character, and the glory of all divine truth. This
   may be an illustration. A man becomes cordially reconciled to his
   neighbour, against whom he had previously felt a strong enmity. He now
   sees the real excellencies of his neighbour's character, to which he
   was blinded before by enmity and prejudice. These new views of his
   neighbour, and these different feelings towards him, are the
   consequence of the change: its evidence, but not the change itself.--At
   the same time, Mr. Edwards and others believe, that in saving
   experience, the sensitive faculties are brought under the due
   regulation by the new heart or holy temper. None of the awakenings,
   fears, and convictions, which precede the new heart, are, according to
   this scheme, any part of regeneration; though they are, in some sense,
   a preparation for it, as all doctrinal knowledge is. The sinner, before
   regeneration, is allowed to be totally dead to the exercises and duties
   of the spiritual life. He is nevertheless accounted a moral agent. He
   is therefore entirely blamable in his impenitence, his unbelief, and
   his alienation from God. He is therefore, with perfect propriety,
   exhorted to repent, to become reconciled to God in Christ, and to arise
   from his spiritual death, that "Christ may give him light."--According
   to this system, regeneration is produced, neither by moral suasion,
   i.e. by the arguments and motives of the gospel, nor by any
   supernatural, spiritual light; but by the immediate agency of the Holy
   Spirit. Yet the light and knowledge of the gospel are, by divine
   constitution, usually necessary to regeneration, as the blowing of the
   rams' horns was necessary to the falling of the walls of Jericho; and
   the moving of the stone from the mouth of the sepulchre, was necessary
   to the raising of Lazarus."

   Thus it appears, that Mr. Edwards taught us in his writings, in a
   manner so clear, that mankind have hitherto been satisfied with the
   instruction, Why God created this material and spiritual
   universe;--What is the nature of that government which he exercises
   over minds, and how it is consistent with their perfect freedom;--What
   is the nature of that virtue, which they must possess, if they are to
   secure his approbation;--What is the nature, the source, the extent,
   and the evidences of that depravity,. which characterizes man, as a
   fallen being;--What is the series of events by which his redemption is
   accomplished;--What are the qualifications for that church, to which
   the redeemed belong;--What are the grounds on which they are
   justified;--What are the nature and evidences of that religion, which
   is imparted to them by the Spirit of grace;--What are the nature and
   effects of that revival of religion which accompanies an effusion of
   his divine influences on a people;--And what are the inducements to
   united and extraordinary prayer, that such effusions may be abundantly
   enjoyed by the church of God. [93] --By what is thus said, we do not
   intend, that all his reasonings are solid, or all his opinions sound
   and scriptural; but we know of no writer, since the days of the
   apostles, who has better comprehended the word of God; who has more
   fully unfolded the nature and design of the revelation of his mind,
   which it contains; who has more ably explained and defended the great
   doctrines which it teaches; who has more clearly illustrated the
   religion which it requires; who has done more for the purification and
   enlargement of that church which it establishes; or who, in consequence
   of his unfoldings of divine truth, will find, when the work of every
   man is weighed in the balances of eternity, a larger number to be "his
   hope, and joy, and crown of rejoicing in that day."--And when we
   remember, in addition to all this, that we can probably select no
   individual, of all who have lived in that long period, who has
   manifested a more ardent or elevated piety towards God, a warmer or
   more expanded benevolence towards man, or greater purity, or
   disinterestedness, or integrity of character--one, who gave the
   concentrated strength of all his powers, more absolutely, to the one
   end of glorifying God in the salvation of man;--and then reflect that
   at the age of fifty-four, in the highest vigour of all his faculties,
   in the fulness of his usefulness, when he was just entering on the most
   important station of his life, he yielded to the stroke of death; we
   look towards his grave, in mute astonishment, unable to penetrate those
   clouds and darkness, which hover around it. One of his weeping friends
   [94] thus explained this most surprising dispensation:--"He was pouring
   in a flood of light upon mankind, which their eyes, as yet, were too
   feeble to bear."--If this was not the reason; we can only say--"Even
   so, Father! for so it seemed good in thy sight."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [79] The last article under this head, is obviously the foundation of
   the author's subsequent Treatise on the Nature of True Virtue.

   [80] On a preceding page it is stated, on the authority of Dr. Hopkins,
   that he regularly spent thirteen hours, every day, in close study,
   After receiving his invitation to Princeton, he told his eldest son,
   that he had for many years spent fourteen hours a day in study: and
   mentioned the necessity of giving up a part of this time to other
   pursuits, as one of his chief objections against accepting the office
   of president.

   [81] "As both the giver, and the object of his charity, are dead, and
   all the ends of the proposed secrecy are answered; it is thought not
   inconsistent with the above-mentioned promise, to make known the fact,
   as it is here related."

   [82] His height was about six feet one inch.

   [83] See Preface to Five Sermons, vol. i. p. 621.

   [84] Sir Charles Grandison. I had this anecdote through his eldest son.

   [85] The treatise on Affections, and on United Extraordinary Prayer,
   are the most incorrect of all his works, published by himself. In his
   sermons, published in his life-time, somewhat of the linae labor is
   discernable. The works published by his son, Dr. Edwards, in this
   country, are but little altered from the rough draught, but those first
   published in Edinburgh, are generally more so. The History of
   Redemption was considerably corrected by my father, and afterwards
   thrown in the form of a treatise by Dr. Erskine. The Sermons published
   by Dr. Hopkins, are the least correct of all his works.

   [86] I suppose the writer referred to here, and in various other
   places, to have been Dr. Finley.

   [87] For many of the remarks on the character of Mr. Edwards, as a
   preacher and writer, I am indebted to a well written review of the
   Worchester edition of his works, in the Christian Spectator; but they
   are usually so blended with my own, that it is impossible to designate
   the passages.

   [88] "Though, as has been observed," says Dr. Hopkins, "he was wont to
   read so considerable a part of what he delivered, yet was far from
   thinking this the best way of preaching in general; and looking up on
   using his notes, so much as he did, a deficiency and infirmity, and in
   the latter part of his life, he was inclined to think it had been
   better, if he had never been accustomed to use his notes at all. It
   appeared to him, that preaching wholly without notes, agreeable to the
   custom in most protestant countries, and in what seems evidently to
   have been the manner of the apostles and primitive ministers of the
   gospel, was by far the more natural way, and had the greatest tendency,
   on the whole, to answer the end of preaching; and supposed that no one,
   who had talents, equal to the work of the ministry, was incapable of
   speaking momoriter, if he took suitable pains for this attainment from
   his youth. He would have the young preacher write all his sermons, or
   at least most of them, out, at large; and, instead of reading them to
   his hearers, take pains to commit them to memory; which, though it
   would require a great deal of labour at first, yet would soon become
   easier by use, and help him to speak more correctly and freely, and be
   of great service to him all his days."

   [89] Few men have possessed a greater fund of genuine wit, than Mr.
   Edwards. In early life, he found it difficult to restrain it. The clear
   reductio ad absurdum, to which he subjects every scheme and argument of
   his antagonists, in the Freedom of the Will, is usually a brilliant
   example of true logical wit. The Answer to Williams abounds with it. I
   doubt whether the annals of metaphysics can show a finer specimen of
   it, than the following; which is the conclusion of his exposure of the
   metaphysical notion of an action or act, as defined by Chubb, and his
   associates: "So that, according to their notion of an act, considered
   with regard to its consequences, these following things are all
   essential to it: viz. That it should be necessary and yet not
   necessary; that it should be from a cause and yet from no cause; that
   it should be the fruit of choice and design, and yet not the fruit of
   choice and design; that it should be the beginning of motion or
   exertion, and yet consequent on previous exertion; that it should be
   before it is; that it should spring immediately out of indifference and
   equilibrium, and yet be the effect of preponderation; that it should be
   self-originated, and also have its original from something else; that
   it is what the mind causes itself of its own will, and can produce or
   prevent according to its choice or pleasure, and yet what the mind has
   no power to prevent, precluding all previous choice in the affair. "So
   that an act according to their metaphysical notion of it, is something
   of which there is no idea; it is nothing but a confusion of the mind,
   excited by words without any distinct meaning, and is an absolute
   nonentity; and that in two respects: 1 There is nothing in the world
   that ever was, is, or can be, to answer the things which must belong to
   its description, according to what they suppose to be essential to it.
   And, 2. There neither is, nor ever was, nor can be, any notion or idea
   to answer the word as they use and explain it. For if we should suppose
   any such notion, it would many ways destroy itself. But it is
   impossible that any idea or notion should subsist in the mind, whose
   very nature and essence, which constitutes it, destroys it. -- If some
   learned philosopher, who has been abroad, in giving an account of the
   curious observations he had made in his travels, should say, ' He has
   been in Terra del Fuego, and there had seen an animal, which he calls
   by a certain name, that begat and brought forth himself, and yet had a
   sire and dam distinct from himself: that he had an appetite, and was
   hungry, before he had a being: that his master, who led him, and
   governed him at his pleasure, was always governed by him, and driven by
   him where he pleased: that when he moved, he always took a step before
   the first step: that he went with his head first, and yet always went
   tail foremost, and this, though he had neither head nor tail:' it would
   be no impudence at all to tell such a traveller, though a man of
   profound learning, that he himself had no idea of such an animal as he
   gave an account of, and never had, nor ever would have."

   [90] Dugald Stewart, alluding to it in conversation, is said, on good
   authority, to have spoken of it thus:--"Edwards on the Will, a work
   which never was answered, and which never will be answered."

   [91] It is proper to remark, that the above statement is not altogether
   correct. The same views of the atonement appear in Bates on the Harmony
   of the Divine Attributes in Redemption; in the writings of Howe,
   Baxter, and some other eminent divines of the seventeenth century.

   [92] The whole difficulty is removed by reflecting that disinterested
   is the converse of selfish; and uninterested, the converse of
   interested.

   [93] For a Catalogue of the works of Mr. Edwards, published previous to
   this edition, see Appendix, No. VI.

   [94] Dr. Finley
     __________________________________________________________________

  A FAREWELL SERMON,

        PREACHED AT THE

    FIRST PRECINCT AT NORTHAMPTON

        AFTER THE PEOPLE'S PUBLIC REJECTION OF THEIR MINISTER, AND RENOUNCING
        THEIR RELATION TO HIM AS PASTOR OF THE CHURCH THERE.

      ON JUNE 32, 1750;

   OCCASIONED BY DIFFERENCE OF SENTIMENTS, CONCERNING THE REQUISITE
   QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH IN COMPLETE STANDING.

   Acts. xx. 18.Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after
   what manner I have been with you at all seasons Acts. xx. 20.And how I
   kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you,
   and have taught you publicly, and from house to house. Acts. xx. 26,
   27.Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the
   blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
   counsel of God. Gal. iv. 15, 16.Where is then the blessedness ye speak
   of? For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
   plucked out your own eyes, and haven given them to me. Am I therefore
   become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?

    PREFACE.

   It is not unlikely, that some of the readers of the following Sermon
   may be inquisitive concerning the circumstances of the difference
   between me and the people of Northampton, that issued in that
   separation between me and them, which occasioned the preaching of this
   Farewell Sermon.--There is, by no means, room here for a full account
   of that matter: but yet it seems to be proper, and even necessary, here
   to correct some gross misrepresentations, which have been abundantly,
   and (it is to be feared) by some affectedly and industriously made, of
   that difference. Such as, that I insisted on persons being assured of
   their being in a state of salvation, in order to my admitting them into
   the church; that I required a particular relation of the method and
   order of a person's inward experience, and of the time and manner of
   his conversion, as the test of his fitness for Christian communion;
   yea, that I have undertaken to set up a pure church, and to make an
   exact and certain distinction between saints and hypocrites, by a
   pretended infallible discerning the state of men's souls; that in these
   things I had fallen in with those wild people, who have lately appeared
   in New England, called Separatists: and that I myself was become a
   grand separatist; that I arrogated all the power of judging of the
   qualifications of candidates for communion wholly to myself, and
   insisted on acting by my sole authority, in the admission of members
   into the church, &c.

   In opposition to these slanderous representations, I shall at present
   only give my reader an account of some things which I laid before the
   council that separated between me and my people, in order to their
   having a just and full account of my principles, relating to the affair
   in controversy.--Long before the sitting of the council, my people had
   sent to the Reverend Mr. Clark of Salem Village, desiring him to write
   in opposition to my principles. Which gave me occasion to write to Mr.
   Clark, that he might have true information what my principles were. And
   in the time of the sitting of the council, I did, for their
   information, make a public declaration of my principles before them and
   the church, in the meeting-house, of the same import with that in my
   letter to Mr. Clark, and very much in the same words. And then,
   afterwards, sent in to the council in writing, an extract of that
   letter, containing the information I had given Mr. Clark, in the very
   words of my letter to him, that the council might read and consider it
   at their leisure, and have a more certain and satisfactory knowledge
   what my principles were. The extract which I sent in to them was in the
   following words:

   "I am often, and I do not know but pretty generally in the country,
   represented as of a new and odd opinion with respect to the terms of
   christian communion, and as being for introducing a peculiar way of my
   own.--Whereas, I do not perceive that I differ at all from the scheme
   of Dr. Watts, in his book entitled, The rational Foundation of a
   Christian Church, and the Terms of Christian Communion; which, he says,
   is the common sentiment and practice of all reformed churches. I had
   not seen this book of Dr. Watts's when I published what I have written
   on the subject. But yet, I think, my sentiments, as I have expressed
   them, are at exactly agreeable to what he lays down, at if I had been
   his pupil. Nor do I at all go beyond what Dr. Doddridge plainly shows
   to be his sentiments, in his Rise and Progress of Religion, and his
   Sermons on Regeneration, and his Paraphrase and Notes on the New
   Testament. Nor indeed, Sir, when I consider the sentiments you have
   expressed in your letters to Major Pomroy and Mr. Billing, can I
   perceive but that they come exactly to the same thing that I maintain.
   You suppose, the sacraments are not converting ordinances: but that, as
   seals of the covenant, they presuppose conversion especially in the
   adult; and that it is visible saintship, or, in other words, a credible
   profession of faith and repentance, a solemn consent to the gospel
   covenant, joined with a good conversation, and competent measure of
   christian knowledge, is what gives a gospel-right to all sacred
   ordinances: but that it is necessary to those that come to these
   ordinances, and in those that profess a consent to the gospel covenant,
   that they be sincere in their profession or at least should think
   themselves so.--The great thing which I have scrupled in the
   established method of this church's proceeding, and which I dare no
   longer go on in, is their publicly assenting to the form of words
   rehearsed on occasion of their admission to the communion, without
   pretending thereby to mean any such thing as a hearty consent to the
   terms of the gospel-covenant, or to mean any such faith or repentance
   as belong to the covenant of grace, and are the grand conditions of
   that covenant. It being, at the same time that the words are used,
   their known and established principle, which they openly profess and
   proceed, upon, that men may and ought to use these words, and mean no
   such thing, but something else of a nature far inferior; which I think
   they have no distinct determinate notion of; but something consistent
   with their knowing that they do not choose God as their chief good, but
   love the world more than him, and that they do not give themselves up
   entirely to God, but make reserves; and in short, knowing that they do
   not heartily consent to the gospel-covenant, but live still under the
   reigning power of the love of the world, and enmity to God and Christ.
   So that the words of their public profession, according to their openly
   established use, cease to be of the nature of any profession of gospel
   faith and repentance, or any proper compliance with the covenant. For
   it is their profession, that the words, as used, mean no such thing.
   The words used under these circumstances, do at least fail of being a
   credible profession of these things.--I can conceive of no such virtue
   in a certain set of words, that it is proper, merely on the making
   these sounds, to admit persons to christian sacraments, without any
   regard to any pretended meaning of these sounds. Nor can I think, that
   any institution of Christ has established any such terms of admission
   into the christian church.--It does not belong to the controversy
   between me and my people, how particular or large the profession should
   be that is required. I should not choose to be confined to exact limits
   as to that matter, but rather than contend, I should content myself
   with a few words, briefly expressing the cardinal virtues or acts
   implied in a hearty compliance with the covenant, made (as should
   appear by inquiry into the person's doctrinal knowledge) understanding;
   if there were an external conversation agreeable thereto. Yea, I should
   think, that such a person, solemnly making such a profession, had a
   right to be received as the object of a public charity, however he
   himself might scruple his own conversion, on account of his not
   remembering the time, not knowing the method, of his conversion, or
   finding so much remaining sin, &c. And (if his own scruples did not
   hinder him coming to the Lord's table) I should think the minister or
   church had no right to debar such a professor, though he should say he
   did not think himself converted. For I call that a profession of
   godliness, which is a profession of the great things wherein godliness
   consists, and not a profession of his own opinion of his good estate.

   "Northampton, May 7, 1750."

   The council having heard that I had made certain draughts of the
   covenant, or forms of a public profession of religion which I stood
   ready to accept of from the candidates for church communion, they, for
   their further information, sent for them. Accordingly I sent them four
   distinct draughts or forms, which I had drawn up about a twelvemonth
   before, as what I stood ready to accept of (any one of them) rather
   than contend, and break with my people.--The two shortest of these
   forms are here inserted for the satisfaction of the reader.--They are
   as follows:

   "I hope I do truly find a heart to give up myself wholly to God,
   according to the tenor of that covenant of grace which was sealed in my
   baptism; and to walk in a way of obedience to all the commandments of
   God, which the covenant of grace requires, as long as I live." Another,

   "I hope I truly find in my heart a willingness to comply with all the
   commandments of God, which require me to give up myself wholly to him,
   and to serve him with my body and my spirit. And do accordingly now
   promise to walk in a way of obedience to all the commandments of God,
   as long as I live."

   Such kind of professions as these I stood ready to accept, rather than
   contend and break with my people Not but that I think it much more
   convenient, that ordinarily the public profession of religion that is
   made by Christians, should be much fuller and more particular And that
   (as I hinted in my letter to Mr. Clark) I should not choose to be tied
   up to any certain form of words, but to have liberty to vary the
   expressions of a public profession, the more exactly to suit the
   sentiments and experience of the professor, that it might be a more
   just and free expression of what each one finds in his
   heart.--Moreover, it must be noted, that I ever insisted on it, that it
   belonged to me as a pastor, before a profession was accepted, to have
   full liberty to instruct the candidate in the meaning of the terms of
   it, and in the nature of the things proposed to be professed; and to
   inquire into his doctrinal understanding of these things, according to
   my best discretion; and to caution the person, as I should think
   needful, against rashness in making such a profession, or doing it
   mainly for the credit of himself or his family, or from any secular
   views whatsoever, and to put him on serious self-examination, and
   searching his own heart and prayer to God to search and enlighten him,
   that he may not be hypocritical and deceived in the profession he
   makes; withal pointing forth to him the many ways in which professors
   are liable to be deceived.

   Nor do I think it improper for a minister in such a case, to inquire
   and know of the candidate what can be remembered of the circumstances
   of his christian experience; as this may tend much to illustrate his
   profession, and give a minister great advantage for proper
   instructions: though a particular knowledge and remembrance of the time
   and method of the first conversion to God, is not to be made the test
   of a person's sincerity, nor insisted on as necessary in order to his
   being received into full charity. Not that I think it at all improper
   or unprofitable, that in some special cases, a declaration of the
   particular circumstances of a person's first awakening, and the manner
   of his convictions, illuminations, and comforts, should be publicly
   exhibited before the whole congregation, on occasion of his admission
   into the church; though this be not demanded as necessary to admission.
   I ever declared against insisting on a relation of experiences, in this
   sense, (vis. a relation of the particular time and steps of the
   operation of the Spirit, in first conversion,) as the term of
   communion: yet, if by a relation of experiences, be meant a declaration
   of experience of the great things wrought, wherein true grace and the
   essential acts and habits of holiness consist: in this sense, I think
   an account of a person's experiences necessary in order to his
   admission into full communion in the church. But that in whatever
   inquiries are made, and whatever account is given, neither minister nor
   church are to set up themselves as searchers of hearts, but are to
   accent the serious solemn profession of the well-instructed professor,
   of a good life, as best able to determine what he finds in his own
   heart. These things may serve in some measure to set right those of my
   readers who have been misled in their apprehensions of the state of the
   controversy between me and my people, by the forementioned
   misrepresentations.

      A FAREWELL SERMON

   2 Corinthians i. 14

   AS ALSO YOU HAVE ACKNOWLEDGED US IN PART, THAT WE ARE YOUR REJOICING,
   EVEN AS YE ALSO ARE OURS IN THE DAY OF THE LORD JESUS.

   The apostle, in the preceding part of the chapter, declares what great
   troubles he met with in the course of his ministry. In the text, and
   two foregoing verses, he declares what were his comforts and supports
   under the troubles he met with. There are four things in particular.

   1. That he had approved himself to his own conscience, 2 Corinthians
   1:12,. "For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience,
   that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by
   the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more
   abundantly to you-wards."

   2. Another thing he speaks of as matter of comfort, is that as he had
   approved himself to his own conscience, so he had also to the
   consciences of his hearers, the Corinthians, to whom he now wrote, and
   that they should approve of him at the day of judgment.

   3. The hope he had of seeing the blessed fruit of his labors and
   sufferings in the ministry, in their happiness and glory, in that great
   day of accounts.

   4. That in his ministry among the Corinthians, he had approved himself
   to his Judge, who would approve and reward his faithfulness in that
   day.

   These three last particulars are signified in my text, and the
   preceding verse, and indeed all the four are implied in the text. It is
   implied that the Corinthians had acknowledged him as their spiritual
   father, and as one that had been faithful among them, and as the means
   of their future joy and glory at the day of judgment. It is implied
   that the apostle expected at that time to have a joyful meeting with
   them before the Judge, and with joy to behold their glory, as the fruit
   of his labors, and so they would be his rejoicing. It is implied also
   that he then expected to be approved of the great Judge, when he and
   they should meet together before him, and that he would then
   acknowledge his fidelity, and that this had been the means of their
   glory, and that thus he would, as it were, give them to him as his
   crown of rejoicing. But this the apostle could not hope for, unless he
   had the testimony of his own conscience in his favor. And therefore the
   words do imply, in the strongest manner, that he had approved himself
   to his own conscience.

   There is one thing implied in each of these particulars, and in every
   part of the text, which I shall make the subject of my present
   discourse, viz.

   Doctrine: Ministers, and the people that have been under their care,
   must meet one another before Christ's tribunal at the day of judgment.

   Ministers, and the people that have been under their care, must be
   parted in this world, how well soever they have been united. If they
   are not separated before, they must be parted by death, and they may be
   separated while life is continued. We live in a world of change, where
   nothing is certain or stable, and where a little time, a few
   revolutions of the sun, brings to pass strange things, surprising
   alterations, in particular persons in families, in towns and churches,
   in countries and nations. It often happens, that those who seem most
   united, in a little time are most disunited, and at the greatest
   distance. Thus ministers and people, between whom there has been the
   greatest mutual regard and strictest union, may not only differ in
   their judgments, and be alienated in affection, but one may rend from
   the other, and all relation between them be dissolved. The minister may
   be removed to a distant place, and they may never have any more to do
   one with another in this world. But if it be so, there is one meeting
   more that they must have, and that is in the last great day of
   accounts. Here I would show,

   I. In what manner ministers, and the people which have been under their
   care, shall meet one another at the day of judgment.

   II. For what purposes.

   III. For what reasons God has so ordered it, that ministers and their
   people shall then meet together in such a manner, and for such
   purposes.

   1. I would show, in some particulars, in what manner ministers and the
   people which have been under their care, shall meet one another at the
   day of judgment.

   (1.) They shall not meet at the day merely as all the world must then
   meet together. I would observe a difference in two things.

   1. As to a clear actual view, and distinct knowledge and notice, of
   each other.

   Although the whole world will be then present, all mankind of all
   generations gathered in one vast assembly, with all of the angelic
   nature, both elect and fallen angels, yet we need not suppose that
   everyone will have a distinct and particular knowledge of each
   individual of the whole assembled multitude, which will undoubtedly
   consist of many millions of millions. Though it is probable that men's
   capacities will be much greater than in their present state, yet they
   will not be infinite. Though their understanding and comprehension will
   be vastly extended, yet men will not be deified. There will probably be
   a very enlarged view that particular persons will have of the various
   parts and members of that vast assembly, and so of the proceedings of
   that great day. But yet it must needs be, that according to the nature
   of finite minds, some persons and some things, at that day, shall fall
   more under the notice of particular persons than others. This (as we
   may well suppose) according as they shall have a nearer concern with
   some than others in the transactions of the day. There will be special
   reason why those who have had special concerns together in this world,
   in their state of probation, and whose mutual affairs will be then to
   be tried and judged, should especially be set in one another's view.
   Thus we may suppose, that rulers and subjects, earthly judges and those
   whom they have judged, neighbors who have had mutual converse,
   dealings, and contests, heads of families and their children and
   servants, shall then meet, and in a peculiar distinction be set
   together. And especially will it be thus with ministers and their
   people. It is evident by the text, that these shall be in each other's
   view, shall distinctly know each other, and shall have particular
   notice one of another at that time.

   2. They shall meet together, as having special concern one with another
   in the great transactions of that day.

   Although they shall meet the whole world at that time, yet they will
   not have any immediate and particular concern with all. Yea, the far
   greater part of those who shall then be gathered together, will be such
   as they have had no intercourse with in their state of probation, and
   so will have no mutual concerns to be judged of. But as to ministers
   and the people that have been under their care, they will be such as
   have had much immediate concern one with another, in matters of the
   greatest moment. Therefore they especially must meet, and be brought
   together before the Judge, as having special concern one with another
   in the design and business of that great day of accounts.--Thus their
   meeting, as to the manner of it, will be diverse from the meeting of
   mankind in general.

   2. Their meeting at the day of judgment will be very diverse from their
   meetings one with another in this world.

   Ministers and their people, while their relation continues, often meet
   together in this world. They are wont to meet from sabbath to sabbath,
   and at other times, for the public worship of God, and administration
   of ordinances, and the solemn services of God's house. And besides
   these meetings, they have also occasions to meet for the determining
   and managing their ecclesiastical affairs, for the exercise of church
   discipline, and the settling and adjusting those things which concern
   the purity and good order of public administrations. But their meeting
   at the day of judgment will be exceeding diverse, in its manner and
   circumstances, from any meetings and interviews they have one with
   another in the present state. I would observe how, in a few
   particulars.

   1. Now they meet together in a preparatory mutable state, but then in
   an unchangeable state.

   Now sinners in the congregation meet their minister in a state wherein
   they are capable of a saving change, capable of being turned, through
   God's blessing on the ministrations and labors of their pastor, from
   the power of Satan unto God; and being brought out of a state of guilt,
   condemnation, and wrath, to a state of peace and favor with God, to the
   enjoyment of the privileges of his children, and a title to their
   eternal inheritance. And saints now meet their minister with great
   remains of corruption, and sometimes under great spiritual difficulties
   and affliction: and therefore are yet the proper subjects of means for
   a happy alteration of their state, which they have reason to hope for
   in the attendance on ordinances, and of which God is pleased commonly
   to make his ministers the instruments. Ministers and their people now
   meet in order to the bringing to pass such happy changes: they are the
   great benefits sought in their solemn meetings.

   But when they shall meet together at the day of judgment, it will be
   far otherwise. They will all meet in an unchangeable state. Sinners
   will be in an unchangeable state. They who then shall be under the
   guilt and power of sin, and have the wrath of God abiding on them,
   shall be beyond all remedy or possibility of change, and shall meet
   their ministers without any hopes of relief or remedy, or getting any
   good by their means. And as for the saints, they will be already
   perfectly delivered from all their corruption, temptation, and
   calamities of every kind, and set forever out of their reach; and no
   deliverance, no happy alteration, will remain to be accomplished in the
   use of means of grace, under the administrations of ministers. It will
   then be pronounced, "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he
   that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let
   him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still."

   2. Then they shall meet together in a state of clear, certain, and
   infallible light.

   Ministers are set as guides and teachers, and are represented in
   Scripture as lights set up in the churches, and in the present state
   meet their people, from time to time, in order to instruct and
   enlighten them, to correct their mistakes, and to be a voice behind
   them, when they turn aside to the right hand or the left, saying, "This
   is the way, walk ye in it;" to evince and confirm the truth by
   exhibiting the proper evidences of it. They to refute errors and
   corrupt opinions, to convince the erroneous, and establish the
   doubting. But when Christ shall come to judgment, every error and false
   opinion shall be detected. All deceit and delusion shall vanish away
   before the light of that day, as the darkness of the night vanishes at
   the appearance of the rising sun. Every doctrine of the Word of God
   shall then appear in full evidence, and none shall remain unconvinced.
   All shall know the truth with the greatest certainty, and there shall
   be no mistakes to rectify.

   Now ministers and their people may disagree in their judgments
   concerning some matters of religion, and may sometimes meet to confer
   together concerning those things wherein they differ, and to hear the
   reasons that may be offered on one side and the other; and all may be
   ineffectual as to any conviction of the truth. They may meet and part
   again, no more agreed than before, and that side which was in the wrong
   may remain so still. Sometimes the meetings of ministers with their
   people, in such a case of disagreeing sentiments, are attended with
   unhappy debate and controversy, managed with much prejudice and want of
   candor; not tending to light and conviction, but rather to confirm and
   increase darkness, and establish opposition to the truth, and
   alienation of affection one from another. But when they shall meet
   together at the day of judgment, before the tribunal of the great
   Judge, the mind and will of Christ will be made known, and there shall
   no longer be any debate or difference of opinions. The evidence of the
   truth shall appear beyond all dispute, and all controversies shall be
   finally and forever decided.

   Now ministers meet their people in order to enlighten and awaken the
   consciences of sinners: setting before them the great evil and danger
   of sin, the strictness of God's law, their own wickedness of heart and
   practice, the great guilt they are under, the wrath that abides upon
   them, and their impotence, blindness, poverty, and helpless and undone
   condition. But all is often in vain. They remain still, notwithstanding
   all their ministers can say, stupid and unawakened, and their
   consciences unconvinced. But it will not be so at their last meeting at
   the day of judgment. Sinners, when they shall meet their minister
   before their great Judge, will not meet him with a stupid conscience.
   They will then be fully convinced of the truth of those things which
   they formerly heard from him, concerning the greatness and terrible
   majesty of God, his holiness and hatred of sin, his awful justice in
   punishing it, the strictness of his law and the dreadfulness and truth
   of his threatenings, and their own unspeakable guilt and misery. And
   they shall never more be insensible of these things. The eyes of
   conscience will now be fully enlightened, and never shall be blinded
   again. The mouth of conscience shall now be opened, and never shall be
   shut any more.

   Now ministers meet with their people, in public and private, in order
   to enlighten them concerning the state of their souls; to open and
   apply the rules of God's Word to them, in order to their searching
   their own hearts, and discerning their state. But now ministers have no
   infallible discernment of the state of their people; and the most
   skillful of them are liable to mistakes, and often are mistaken in
   things of this nature. Nor are the people able certainly to know the
   state of their minister, or one another's state: very often those pass
   among them for saints, and it may be eminent saints, that are grand
   hypocrites. And on the other hand, those are sometimes censured, or
   hardly received into their charity, that are indeed some of God's
   jewels. And nothing is more common than for men to be mistaken
   concerning their own state. Many that are abominable to God, and the
   children of his wrath, think highly of themselves, as his precious
   saints and dear children. Yea, there is reason to think that often some
   that are most bold in their confidence of their safe and happy state,
   and think themselves not only true saints, but the most eminent saints
   in the congregation, are in a peculiar manner a smoke in God's
   nostrils. And thus it undoubtedly often is in those congregations where
   the Word of God is most faithfully dispensed, notwithstanding all that
   ministers can say in their clearest explications, and most searching
   applications of the doctrines and rules of God's Word to the souls of
   their hearers. But in the day of judgment they shall have another sort
   of meeting. Then the secrets of every heart shall be made manifest, and
   every man's state shall be perfectly known.1 Cor. iv. 5 . "Therefore
   judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring
   to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
   counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God."
   Then none shall be deceived concerning his own state, nor shall be any
   more in doubt about it. There shall be an eternal end to all the
   self-conceit and vain hopes of deluded hypocrites, and all the doubts
   and fears of sincere Christians. And then shall all know the state of
   one another's souls. The people shall know whether their minister has
   been sincere and faithful, and the minister shall know the state of
   every one of their people, and to who the word and ordinances of God
   have been a savor of life unto life, and to whom a savor of death unto
   death.

   Now in this present state it often happens that when ministers and
   people meet together to debate and manage their ecclesiastical affairs,
   especially in a state of controversy, they are ready to judge and
   censure with regard to each other's views, designs, and the principles
   and ends by which each is influenced, and are greatly mistaken in their
   judgment and wrong one another in their censures. But at that future
   meeting, things will be set in a true and perfect light, and the
   principles and aims that everyone has acted from, shall be certainly
   known. There will be an end to all errors of this kind, and all
   unrighteous censures.

   3. In this world, ministers and their people often meet together to
   hear of and wait upon an unseen Lord. But at the judgment, they shall
   meet in his most immediate and visible presence.

   Ministers, who now often meet their people to preach to them the King
   eternal, immortal, and invisible, to convince them that there is a God
   and declare to them what manner of being he is, and to convince them
   that he governs and will judge the world, and that there is a future
   state of rewards and punishments, and to preach to them a Christ in
   heaven, at the right hand of God, in an unseen world--shall then meet
   their people in the most immediate sensible presence of this great God,
   Savior, and Judge, appearing in the most plain, visible, and open
   manner, with great glory, with all his holy angels, before them and the
   whole world. They shall not meet them to hear about an absent Christ,
   an unseen Lord, and future Judge; but to appear before that
   Judge--being set together in the presence of that supreme Lord--in his
   immense glory and awful majesty, of whom they have heard so often in
   their meetings together on earth.

   4. The meeting at the last day, of ministers and the people that have
   been under their care, will not be attended by anyone with a careless,
   heedless heart.

   With such a heart are their meetings often attended in this world by
   many persons, having little regard to him whom they pretend unitedly to
   adore in the solemn duties of his public worship, taking little heed to
   their own thoughts or frame of their minds, not attending to the
   business they are engaged in, or considering the end for which they are
   come together. But at that great day there will not be one careless
   heart: no sleeping, no wandering of mind from the great concern of the
   meeting, no inattentiveness to the business of the day, no
   regardlessness of the presence they are in or of those great things
   which they shall hear from Christ, or that they formerly heard from
   him, and of him, by their ministers in their state of trial, or which
   they shall now hear their ministers declaring concerning them before
   their Judge.

   Having observed these things, concerning the manner and circumstances
   of this future meeting, before the tribunal of Christ at the day of
   judgment, I now proceed,

   II. To observe to what purposes they shall then meet.

   1. To give an account, before the great Judge, of their behavior one to
   another, in the relation they bore to each other in this world.

   Ministers are sent forth by Christ to their people on his business.
   They are his servants and messengers; and, when they have finished
   their service, they must return to their master to give him an account
   of what they have done, and of the entertainment they have had in
   performing their ministry. Thus we find, in Luke xiv. 16-21., that when
   the servant who was sent forth to call the guests to the great supper,
   had finished his appointed service, he returned to his master, and gave
   him an account of what he had done, and of the entertainment he had
   received. And when the master, being angry, sent his servant to others,
   he returns again and gives his master an account of his conduct and
   success. So we read, in Heb. 13, 17. of ministers or rulers in the
   house of God, that "they watch for souls, as those that must give
   account." And we see by the forementioned Luke 14. that ministers must
   give an account to their master, not only of their own behavior in the
   discharge of their office, but also of their people's reception of
   them, and of the treatment they have met with among them.

   Faithful ministers will then give an account with joy, concerning those
   who have received them well, and made a good improvement of their
   ministry; and these will be given them, at that day, as their crown of
   rejoicing. And, at the same time, they will give an account of the ill
   treatment of such as have not well received them and their messages
   from Christ. They will meet these, not as they used to do in this
   world, to counsel and warn them, but to bear witness against them, as
   their judges and assessors with Christ, to condemn them. And, on the
   other hand, the people will at that day rise up in judgment against
   wicked and unfaithful ministers, who have sought their own temporal
   interest more than the good of the souls of their flock.

   2. At that time ministers, and the people who have been under their
   care, shall meet together before Christ, that he may judge between
   them, as to any controversies which have subsisted between them in this
   world.

   It often comes to pass in this evil world, that great differences and
   controversies arise between ministers and the people under their
   pastoral care. Though they are under the greatest obligations to live
   in peace, above persons in almost any relation whatever, and although
   contests and dissensions between persons so related are the most
   unhappy and terrible in their consequences on many accounts of any sort
   of contentions, yet how frequent have such contentions been! Sometimes
   a people contest with their ministers about their doctrine, sometimes
   about their administrations and conduct, and sometimes about their
   maintenance. Sometimes such contests continue a long time, and
   sometimes they are decided in this world, according to the prevailing
   interest of one party or the other, rather than by the Word of God, and
   the reason of things. And sometimes such controversies never have any
   proper determination in this world.

   But at the day of judgment there will be a full, perfect, and
   everlasting decision of them. The infallible Judge, the infinite
   fountain of light, truth, and justice, will judge between the
   contending parties, and will declare what is the truth, who is in the
   right, and what is agreeable to his mind and will. And in order hereto,
   the parties must stand together before him at the last day, which will
   be the great day of finishing and determining all controversies,
   rectifying all mistakes, and abolishing all unrighteous judgments,
   errors, and confusions, which have before subsisted in the world of
   mankind.

   3. Ministers, and the people that have been under their care, must meet
   together at that time to receive an eternal sentence and retribution
   from the Judge, in the presence of each other, according to their
   behavior in the relation they stood in one to another in the present
   state.

   The Judge will not only declare justice, but he will do justice between
   ministers and their people. He will declare what is right between them,
   approving him that has been just and faithful, and condemning the
   unjust. Perfect truth and equity shall take place in the sentence which
   he passes, in the rewards he bestows, and the punishments which he
   inflicts. There shall be a glorious reward to faithful ministers, to
   those who have been successful. Dan. xii. 3, "And they that be wise
   shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many
   to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever:" and also to those
   who have been faithful, and yet not successful, Isa. xil. 4, "Then I
   said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought; yet
   surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my reward with my God." And
   those who have well received and entertained them shall be gloriously
   rewarded, Mat. x. 41, "He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that
   receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet
   in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward, and he that
   receiveth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall
   receive a righteous man's reward." Such people, and their faithful
   ministers, shall be each other's crown of rejoicing, 1 Thes. ii. 20.
   "For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye
   in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our
   glory and joy." And in the text, "We are your rejoicing, as ye also are
   ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus." [95] But they that evil entreat
   Christ's faithful ministers, especially in that wherein they are
   faithful, shall be severely punished; Mat. x. 14, 15, "And whosoever
   shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that
   house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you,
   it shall be more tolerable for the sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah, in
   the day of judgment, than for that city." Deu. xxxiii. 8-11."And of
   Levi he said, Let thy Thummin and thy Urim be with thy holy one. They
   shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law. Bless, Lord, his
   substance, and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of
   them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise
   not again." On the other hand, those ministers who are found to have
   been unfaithful, shall have a most terrible punishment. See Eze.
   xxxiii. 6;. Mat. xxiii. 1-33.

   Thus justice shall be administered at the great day to ministers and
   their people: and to that end they shall meet together, that they may
   not only receive justice to themselves, but see justice done to the
   other party. For this is the end of that great day, to reveal or
   declare the righteous judgment of God; Rom. ii. 5. Ministers shall have
   justice done them, and they shall see justice done to their people. And
   the people shall receive justice themselves from their Judge, and shall
   see justice done to their minister. And so all things will be adjusted
   and settled forever between them: everyone being sentenced and
   recompensed according to his works, either in receiving and wearing a
   crown of eternal joy and glory, or in suffering everlasting shame and
   pain.--I come now to the next thing proposed, viz.

   III. To give some reasons why we may suppose God has so ordered it,
   that ministers, and the people that have been under their care, shall
   meet together at the day of judgment, in such a manner and for such
   purposes.

   There are two things which I would now observe.

   1. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people are of the
   greatest importance.

   The Scripture declares that God will bring every work into judgment,
   with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil. It
   is fit that all the concerns and all the behavior of mankind, both
   public and private, should be brought at last before God's tribunal,
   and finally determined by an infallible judge. But it is especially
   requisite that it should be thus, as to affairs of very great
   importance.

   Now the mutual concerns of a Christian minister and his church and
   congregation, are of the vastest importance: in many respects, of much
   greater moment than the temporal concerns of the greatest earthly
   monarchs, and their kingdoms or empires. It is of vast consequence how
   ministers discharge their office, and conduct themselves towards their
   people in the work of the ministry, and in affairs appertaining to it.
   It is also a matter of vast importance, how a people receive and
   entertain a faithful minister of Christ, and what improvement they make
   of his ministry. These things have a more immediate and direct respect
   to the great and last end for which man was made, and the eternal
   welfare of mankind, than any of the temporal concerns of men, whether
   private or public. And therefore it is especially fit that these
   affairs should be brought into judgment, and openly determined and
   settled, in truth and righteousness, and that to this end, ministers
   and their people should meet together before the omniscient and
   infallible Judge.

   2. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a special
   relation to the main things appertaining to the day of judgment.

   They have a special relation to that great and divine person who will
   then appear as Judge. Ministers are his messengers, sent forth by him,
   and in their office and administrations among their people, represent
   his person, stand in his stead, as those that are sent to declare his
   mind, to do his work, and to speak and act in his name. And therefore
   it is especially fit that they should return to him to give an account
   of their work and success. The king is judge of all his subjects, they
   are all accountable to him. But it is more especially requisite that
   the king's ministers, who are especially entrusted with the
   administrations of his kingdom, and who are sent forth on some special
   negotiation, should return to him, to give an account of themselves,
   and their discharge of their trust, and the reception they have met
   with.

   Ministers are not only messengers of the person who at the last day
   will appear as Judge, but the errand they are sent upon, and the
   affairs they have committed to them as his ministers, most immediately
   concern his honor, and the interest of his kingdom. The work they are
   sent upon is to promote the designs of his administration and
   government, therefore their business with their people has a near
   relation to the day of judgment. For the great end of that day is
   completely to settle and establish the affairs of his kingdom, to
   adjust all things that pertain to it, that everything that is opposite
   to the interests of his kingdom may be removed, and that everything
   which contributes to the completeness and glory of it may be perfected
   and confirmed, that this great King may receive his due honor and
   glory.

   Again, the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a direct
   relation to the concerns of the day of judgment, as the business of
   ministers with their people is to promote the eternal salvation of the
   souls of men, and their escape from eternal damnation. The day of
   judgment is the day appointed for that end, openly to decide and settle
   men's eternal state, to fix some in a state of eternal salvation, and
   to bring their salvation to its utmost consummation, and to fix others
   in a state of everlasting damnation and most perfect misery. The mutual
   concerns of ministers and people have a most direct relation to the day
   of judgment, as the very design of the work of the ministry is the
   people's preparation for that day. Ministers are sent to warn them of
   the approach of that day, to forewarn them of the dreadful sentence
   then to be pronounced on the wicked, and declare to them the blessed
   sentence then to be pronounced on the righteous, and to use means with
   them that they may escape the wrath which is then to come on the
   ungodly, and obtain the reward then to be bestowed on the saints.

   And as the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have so near
   and direct a relation to that day, it is especially fit that those
   concerns should there settled and issued, and that in order to this,
   ministers and their people should meet and appear together before the
   great Judge at that day.

      APPLICATION

   The improvement I would make of the subject is to lead the people here
   present, who have been under my pastoral care, to some reflections, and
   give them some advice suitable to our present circumstances, relating
   to what has been lately done in order to our being separated, but
   expecting to meet each other before the great tribunal at the day of
   judgment.

   The deep and serious consideration of our future most solemn meeting,
   is certainly most suitable at such a time as this. There having so
   lately been that done, which, in all probability, will (as to the
   relation we have heretofore stood in) be followed with an everlasting
   separation.

   How often have we met together in the house of God in this relation!
   How often have I spoke to you, instructed, counseled, warned, directed,
   and fed you, and administered ordinances among you, as the people which
   were committed to my care, and of whose precious souls I had the
   charge! But in all probability this never will be again.

   The prophet Jeremiah ( chap. xxv: 3, puts the people in mind how long
   he had labored among them in the work of the ministry: "From the
   thirteenth year of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, even unto
   this day (that is, the three and twentieth year), the word of the Lord
   came unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking." I
   am not about to compare myself with the prophet Jeremiah, but in this
   respect I can say as he did that "I have spoken the Word of God to you,
   unto the three and twentieth year, rising early and speaking." It was
   three and twenty years, the 15th day of last February, since I have
   labored in the work of the ministry, in the relation of a pastor to
   this church and congregation. And though my strength has been weakness,
   having always labored under great infirmity of body, besides my
   insufficiency for so great a charge in other respects, yet I have not
   spared my feeble strength, but have exerted it for the good of your
   souls. I can appeal to you, as the apostle does to his hearers, Gal.
   iv. 13, "Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the
   gospel unto you." I have spent the prime of my life and strength in
   labors for your eternal welfare. You are my witnesses that what
   strength I have had I have not neglected in idleness, nor laid out in
   prosecuting worldly schemes, and managing temporal affairs, for the
   advancement of my outward estate, and aggrandizing myself and family.
   But [I] have given myself to the work of the ministry, laboring in it
   night and day, rising early and applying myself to this great business
   to which Christ appointed me. I have found the work of the ministry
   among you to be a great work indeed, a work of exceeding care, labor
   and difficulty. Many have been the heavy burdens that I have borne in
   it, to which my strength has been very unequal. God called me to bear
   these burdens; and I bless his name that he has so supported me as to
   keep me from sinking under them, and that his power herein has been
   manifested in my weakness. So that although I have often been troubled
   on every side, yet I have not been distressed; perplexed, but not in
   despair; cast down, but not destroyed.--But now I have reason to think
   my work is finished which I had to do as your minister: you have
   publicly rejected me, and my opportunities cease.

   How highly therefore does it now become us to consider of that time
   when we must meet one another before the chief Shepherd! When I must
   give an account of my stewardship, of the service I have done for, and
   the reception and treatment I have had among the people to whom he sent
   me. And you must give an account of your own conduct towards me, and
   the improvement you have made of these three and twenty years of my
   ministry. For then both you and I must appear together, and we both
   must give an account, in order to an infallible, righteous and eternal
   sentence to be passed upon us, by him who will judge us with respect to
   all that we have said or done in our meeting here, and all our conduct
   one towards another in the house of God and elsewhere. [He] will try
   our hearts, and manifest our thoughts, and the principles and frames of
   our minds. He will judge us with respect to all the controversies which
   have subsisted between us, with the strictest impartiality, and will
   examine our treatment of each other in those controversies. There is
   nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid which shall not be
   known. All will be examined in the searching, penetrating light of
   God's omniscience and glory, and by him whose eyes are as a flame of
   fire. Truth and right shall be made plainly to appear, being stripped
   of every veil. And all error, falsehood, unrighteousness, and injury
   shall be laid open, stripped of every disguise. Every specious
   pretense, every cavil, and all false reasoning shall vanish in a
   moment, as not being able to bear the light of that day. And then our
   hearts will be turned inside out, and the secrets of them will be made
   more plainly to appear than our outward actions do now. Then it shall
   appear what the ends are which we have aimed at, what have been the
   governing principles which we have acted from, and what have been the
   dispositions we have exercised in our ecclesiastical disputes and
   contests. Then it will appear whether I acted uprightly, and from a
   truly conscientious, careful regard to my duty to my great Lord and
   Master, in some former ecclesiastical controversies, which have been
   attended with exceeding unhappy circumstances and consequences. It will
   appear whether there was any just cause for the resentment which was
   manifested on those occasions. And then our late grand controversy,
   concerning the qualifications necessary for admission to the privileges
   of members, in complete standing, in the visible church of Christ, will
   be examined and judged in all its parts and circumstances, and the
   whole set forth in a clear, certain, and perfect light. Then it will
   appear whether the doctrine which I have preached and published
   concerning this matter be Christ's own doctrine, whether he will not
   own it as one of the precious truths which have proceeded from his own
   mouth, and vindicate and honor as such before the whole universe. Then
   it will appear what is meant by "the man that comes without the wedding
   garment;" for that is the day spoken of, Mat. xxii. 13. wherein such a
   one shall be "bound hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness, where
   shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." And then it will appear
   whether, in declaring this doctrine, and acting agreeable to it, and in
   my general conduct in the affair, I have been influenced from any
   regard to my own temporal interest, or honor, or desire to appear wiser
   than others, or have acted from any sinister, secular views whatsoever,
   and whether what I have done has not been from a careful, strict, and
   tender regard to the will of my Lord and Master, and because I dare not
   offend him, being satisfied what his will was, after a long, diligent,
   impartial, and prayerful inquiry. Then it will be seen whether I had
   this constantly in view and prospect, to engage me to great solicitude
   not rashly to determine the question, that such a determination would
   not be for my temporal interest, but every way against it, bringing a
   long series of extreme difficulties, and plunging me into an abyss of
   trouble and sorrow. And then it will appear whether my people have done
   their duty to their pastor with respect to this matter; whether they
   have shown a right temper and spirit on this occasion; whether they
   have done me justice in hearing, attending to and considering what I
   had to say in evidence of what I believed and taught as part of the
   counsel of God; whether I have been treated with that impartiality,
   candor, and regard which the just Judge esteemed due; and whether, in
   the many steps which have been taken, and the many things that have
   been said and done in the course of this controversy, righteousness,
   and charity, and Christian decorum have been maintained; or, if
   otherwise, to how great a degree these things have been violated. Then
   every step of the conduct of each of us in this affair, from first to
   last, and the spirit we have exercised in all, shall be examined and
   manifested, and our own consciences shall speak plain and loud, and
   each of us shall be convinced, and the world shall know; and never
   shall there be any more mistake, misrepresentation, or misapprehension
   of the affair to eternity.

   This controversy is now probably brought to an issue between you and me
   as to this world. It has issued in the event of the week before last,
   but it must have another decision at that great day, which certainly
   will come, when you and I shall meet together before the great judgment
   seat. Therefore I leave it to that time, and shall say no more about it
   at present.--But I would now proceed to address myself particularly to
   several sorts of persons.

   I. To those who are professors of godliness amongst us.

   I would now call you to a serious consideration of that great day
   wherein you must meet him who has heretofore been your pastor, before
   the Judge whose eyes are as a flame of fire.--I have endeavored,
   according to my best ability, to search the Word of God, with regard to
   the distinguishing notes of true piety, those by which persons might
   best discover their state, and most surely and clearly judge of
   themselves. And these rules and marks I have from time to time applied
   to you, in the preaching of the Word to the utmost of my skill, and in
   the most plain and search manner that I have been able, in order to the
   detecting the deceived hypocrite, and establishing the hopes and
   comforts of the sincere. And yet it is to be feared, that after all
   that I have done, I now leave some of you in a deceived, deluded state.
   For it is not to be supposed that among several hundred professors,
   none are deceived.

   Henceforward I am like to have no more opportunity to take the care and
   charge of your souls, to examine and search them. But still I entreat
   you to remember and consider the rules which I have often laid down to
   you during my ministry, with a solemn regard to the future day when you
   and I must meet together before our Judge, when the uses of examination
   you have heard from me must be rehearsed again before you, and those
   rules of trial must be tried, and it will appear whether they have been
   good or not. It will also appear whether you have impartially heard
   them, and tried yourselves by them. The Judge himself, who is
   infallible, will try both you and me. And after this none will be
   deceived concerning the state of their souls.

   I have often put you in mind, that whatever your pretenses to
   experiences, discoveries, comforts, and joys have been, at that day
   everyone will be judged according to his works, and then you will find
   it so. May you have a minister of greater knowledge of the Word of God,
   and better acquaintance with soul cases, and of greater skill in
   applying himself to souls, whose discourses may be more searching and
   convincing, that such of you as have held fast deceit under my
   preaching, may have your eyes opened by his: that you may be undeceived
   before that great day.

   What means and helps for instruction and self-examination you may
   hereafter have is uncertain. But one thing is certain: that the time is
   short, your opportunity for rectifying mistakes in so important a
   concern will soon come to an end. We live in a world of great changes.
   There is now a great change come to pass. You have withdrawn yourselves
   from my ministry, under which you have continued for so many years. But
   the time is coming, and will soon come, when you will pass out of time
   into eternity, and so will pass from under all means of grace
   whatsoever.

   The greater part of you who are professors of godliness have (to use
   the phrase of the apostle) "acknowledged me, in part:" you have
   heretofore acknowledged me to be your spiritual father, the instrument
   of the greatest good to you that can be obtained by any of the children
   of men. Consider of that day when you and I shall meet before our
   Judge, when it shall be examined whether you have had from me the
   treatment which is due to spiritual children, and whether you have
   treated me as you ought to have treated a spiritual father.--As the
   relation of a natural parent brings great obligations on children in
   the sight of God, so much more, in many respects, does the relation of
   a spiritual father bring great obligations on such of whose
   conversation and eternal salvation they suppose God has made them the
   instruments, 1 Cor. iv. 15,"For though you have ten thousand
   instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ
   Jesus, I have begotten you through the gospel."

   II. Now I am taking my leave of this people I would apply myself to
   such among them as I leave in a Christless, graceless condition, and
   would call on such seriously to consider of that solemn day when they
   and I must meet before the Judge of the world.

   My parting with you is, in some respects, in a peculiar manner a
   melancholy parting, inasmuch as I leave you in most melancholy
   circumstances, because I leave you in the gall of bitterness and bond
   of iniquity, having the wrath of God abiding on you, and remaining
   under condemnation to everlasting misery and destruction. Seeing I must
   leave you, it would have been a comfortable and happy circumstance of
   our parting, if I had left you in Christ, safe and blessed in that sure
   refuge and glorious rest of the saints. But it is otherwise. I leave
   you far off, aliens and strangers, wretched subjects and captives of
   sin and Satan, and prisoners of vindictive justice: without Christ, and
   without God in the world.

   Your consciences bear me witness that while I had opportunity, I have
   not ceased to warn you, and set before you your danger. I have studied
   to represent the misery and necessity of your circumstances in the
   clearest manner possible. I have tried all ways that I could think of
   tending to awaken your consciences, and make you sensible of the
   necessity of your improving your time, and being speedy in flying from
   the wrath to come, and thorough in the use of means for your escape and
   safety. I have diligently endeavored to find out and use the most
   powerful motives to persuade you to take care for your own welfare and
   salvation. I have not only endeavored to awaken you, that you might be
   moved with fear, but I have used my utmost endeavors to win you: I have
   sought out acceptable words, that if possible I might prevail upon you
   to forsake sin, and turn to God, and accept of Christ as your Savior
   and Lord. I have spent my strength very much in these things. But yet,
   with regard to you whom I am addressing, I have not been successful,
   but have this day reason to complain in those words, Jer. vi. 29, "The
   bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder
   melteth in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away." It is to be
   feared that all my labors, as to many of you, have served no other
   purpose but to harden you, and that the word which I have preached,
   instead of being a savor of life unto life, has been a savor of death
   unto death. Though I shall not have any account to give for the future
   of such as have openly and resolutely renounced my ministry, as of a
   trust committed to me, yet remember you must give account for
   yourselves, of your care of your own souls, and your improvement of all
   means past and future, through your whole lives. God only knows what
   will become of your poor perishing souls, what means you may hereafter
   enjoy, or what disadvantages and temptations you may be under. May God
   in his mercy grant that however all past means have been unsuccessful,
   you may have future means which may have a new effect, and that the
   Word of God, as it shall be hereafter dispensed to you, may prove as
   the fire and the hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces. However, let
   me now at parting exhort and beseech you not wholly to forget the
   warnings you have had while under my ministry. When you and I shall
   meet at the day of judgment, then you will remember them. The sight of
   me, your former minister, on that occasion, will soon revive them in
   your memory; and that in a very affecting manner. O do not let that be
   the first time that they are so revived.

   You and I are now parting one from another as to this world. Let us
   labour that we may not be parted after our meeting at the last day. If
   I have been your faithful pastor (which will that day appear whether I
   have or no), then I shall be acquitted, and shall ascend with Christ. O
   do your part that in such a case, you may not be forced eternally to
   part from me, and all that have been faithful in Christ Jesus. This is
   a sorrowful parting, but that would be a more sorrowful.--This you may
   perhaps bear without being much affected with it, if you are not glad
   of it, but such a parting in that day will most deeply, sensibly, and
   dreadfully affect you.

   III. I would address myself to those who are under some awakenings.

   Blessed be God that there are some such, and that (although I have
   reason to fear I leave multitudes in this large congregation in a
   Christless state) yet I do not leave them all in total stupidity and
   carelessness about their souls. Some of you that I have reason to hope
   are under some awakenings, have acquainted me with your circumstances,
   which has a tendency to cause me, now I am leaving you, to take my
   leave with peculiar concern for you. What will be the issue of your
   present exercise of mind, I know not, but it will be known at that day,
   when you and I shall meet before the judgment seat of Christ. Therefore
   now be much in consideration of that day.

   Now I am parting with this flock, I would once more press upon you the
   counsels I have heretofore given, to take heed of slightly so great a
   concern, to be thorough and in good earnest in the affair, and to
   beware of backsliding, to hold on and hold out to the end. And cry
   mightily to God, that these great changes which pass over this church
   and congregation do not prove your overthrow. There is great temptation
   in them, and the devil will undoubtedly seek to make his advantage of
   them, if possible to cause your present convictions and endeavors to be
   abortive. You had need to double your diligence, and watch and pray,
   lest you be overcome by temptation.

   Whoever may hereafter stand related to you as your spiritual guide, my
   desire and prayer is that the great Shepherd of the sheep would have a
   special respect to you, and be your guide (for there is none teacheth
   like him), and that he who is the infinite fountain of light, would
   "open your eyes, and turn you from darkness unto light, and from the
   power of Satan unto God; that you may receive forgiveness of sins, and
   inheritance among them that are sanctified, through faith that is in
   Christ;" that so in that great day, when I shall meet you again before
   your Judge and mine, we may meet in joyful and glorious circumstances,
   never to be separated any more.

   IV. I would apply myself to the young people of the congregation.

   Since I have been settled in the work of the ministry in this place, I
   have ever had a peculiar concern for the souls of the young people, and
   a desire that religion might flourish among them; and have especially
   exerted myself in order to it. Because I knew the special opportunity
   they had beyond others, and that ordinarily those for whom God intended
   mercy, were brought to fear and love him in their youth. And it has
   ever appeared to me a peculiarly amiable thing, to see young people
   walking in the ways of virtue and Christian piety, having their hearts
   purified and sweetened with a principle of divine love. How exceeding
   beautiful, and conducive to the adorning and happiness of the town, if
   the young people could be persuaded, when they meet together, to
   converse as Christians and as the children of God, avoiding impurity,
   levity and extravagance, keeping strictly to rules of virtue and
   conversing together of the things of God, and Christ, and heaven! This
   is what I have longed for, and it has been exceeding grievous to me
   when I have heard of vice, vanity and disorder among our youth. And so
   far as I know my own heart, it was from hence that I formerly led this
   church to some measures, for the suppressing vice among our young
   people, which gave so great offense, and by which I became so
   obnoxious. I have sought the good, and not the hurt of our young
   people. I have desired their truest honor and happiness, and not their
   reproach: knowing that true virtue and religion tended not only to the
   glory and felicity of young people in another world, but their greatest
   peace and prosperity, and highest dignity and honor in this world, and
   above all things to sweeten, and render pleasant and delightful, even
   the days of youth.

   But whether I have loved you, and sought your good more or less, now
   committing your souls to him who once committed the pastoral care of
   them to me--nothing remains, but only (as I am now taking my leave of
   you) earnestly to beseech you, from love to yourselves, if you have
   none to me, not to despise and forget the warnings and counsels I have
   so often given you. Remember the day when you and I must meet again
   before the great Judge of quick and dead, when it will appear whether
   the things I have taught you were true, whether the counsels I have
   given you were good, and whether I truly sought your welfare, and
   whether you have well improved my endeavors.

   I have, from time to time, earnestly warned you against frolicking (as
   it is called), and some other liberties commonly taken by young people
   in the land. And whatever some may say in justification of such
   liberties and customs, and may laugh at warnings against them, I now
   leave you my parting testimony against such things, not doubting but
   God will approve and confirm it in that day when we shall meet before
   him.

   V. I would apply myself to the children of the congregation, the lambs
   of this flock, who have been so long under my care.

   I have just now said that I have had a peculiar concern for the young
   people, and in so saying I did not intend to exclude you. You are in
   youth, and in the most early youth. Therefore I have been sensible that
   if those that were young had a precious opportunity for their souls'
   good, you who are very young had, in many respects, a peculiarly
   precious opportunity. And accordingly I have not neglected you. I have
   endeavored to do the part of a faithful shepherd, in feeding the lambs
   as well as the sheep. Christ did once commit the care of your souls to
   me as your minister; and you know, dear children, how I have instructed
   you, and warned you from time to time. You know how I have often called
   you together for that end, and some of you, sometimes, have seemed to
   be affected with what I have said to you. But I am afraid it has had no
   saving effect as to many of you, but that you remain still in an
   unconverted condition, without any real saving work wrought in your
   souls, convincing you thoroughly of your sin and misery, causing you to
   see the great evil of sin, and to mourn for it, and hate it above all
   things, and giving you a sense of the excellency of the Lord Jesus
   Christ, bringing you with all your hearts to cleave to him as your
   Savior, weaning your hearts from the world, and causing you to love God
   above all, and to delight in holiness more than in all the pleasant
   things of this earth. And I must now leave you in a miserable
   condition, having no interest in Christ, and so under the awful
   displeasure and anger of God, and in danger of going down to the pit of
   eternal misery.--Now I must bid you farewell. I must leave you in the
   hands of God. I can do no more for you than to pray for you. Only I
   desire you not to forget, but often think of the counsels and warnings
   I have given you, and the endeavors I have used, that your souls might
   be saved from everlasting destruction.

   Dear children, I leave you in an evil world, that is full of snares and
   temptations. God only knows what will become of you. This the Scripture
   has told us that there are but few saved, and we have abundant
   confirmation of it from what we see. This we see, that children die as
   well as others. Multitudes die before they grow up, and of those that
   grow up, comparatively few ever give good evidence of saving conversion
   to God. I pray God to pity you, and take care of you, and provide for
   you the best means for the good of your souls, and that God himself
   would undertake for you to be your heavenly Father, and the mighty
   Redeemer of your immortal souls. Do not neglect to pray for yourselves.
   Take heed you be not of the number of those who cast off fear, and
   restrain prayer before God. Constantly pray to God in secret, and often
   remember that great day when you must appear before the judgment seat
   of Christ, and meet your minister there, who has so often counseled and
   warned you.

   I conclude with a few words of advice to all in general, in some
   particulars, which are of great importance in order to the future
   welfare and prosperity of this church and congregation.

   1. One thing that greatly concerns you, as you would be a happy people,
   is the maintaining of family order.

   We have had great disputes how the church ought to be regulated; and
   indeed the subject of these disputes was of great importance: but the
   due regulation of your families is of no less, and, in some respects,
   of much greater importance. Every christian family ought to be as it
   were a little church, consecrated to Christ, and wholly influenced and
   governed by his rules. And family education and order are some of the
   chief of the means of grace. If these fail, all other means are likely
   to prove ineffectual. If these are duly maintained, all the means of
   grace will be likely to prosper and be successful.

   Let me now therefore, once more, before I finally cease to speak to
   this congregation, repeat, and earnestly press the counsel which I have
   often urged on heads of families, while I was their pastor, to great
   painfulness in teaching, warning, and directing their children;
   bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; beginning
   early, where there is yet opportunity, and maintaining a constant
   diligence in labours of this kind. Remember that, as you would not have
   all your instructions and counsels ineffectual, there must be
   government as well as instructions, which must be maintained with an
   even hand, and steady resolution, as a guard to the religion and morals
   of the family, and the support of its good order. Take heed that it be
   not with any of you as it was with Eli of old, who reproved his
   children, but restrained them not; and that, by this means, you do not
   bring the like curse on your families as he did on his.

   And let children obey their parents, and yield to their instructions,
   and submit to their orders, as they would inherit a blessing and not a
   curse. For we have reason to think, from many things in the word of
   God, that nothing has a greater tendency to bring a curse on persons in
   this world, and on all their temporal concerns, than an undutiful,
   unsubmissive, disorderly behaviour in children towards their parents.

   2. As you would seek the future prosperity of this society, it is of
   vast importance that you should avoid contention.

   A contentious people will be a miserable people. The contentions which
   have been among you. since I first became your pastor, have been one of
   the greatest burdens I have laboured under in the course of my
   ministry--not only the contentions you have had with me, but those
   which you have had one with another, about your lands, and other
   concerns--because I knew that contention, heat of spirit, evil
   speaking, and things of the like nature, were directly contrary to the
   spirit of Christianity, and did, in a peculiar manner, tend to drive
   away God's Spirit from a people, and to render all means of grace
   ineffectual, as well as to destroy a people's outward comfort and
   welfare.

   Let me therefore earnestly exhort you, as you would seek your own
   future good, hereafter to watch against a contentious spirit. " If you
   would see good days, seek peace, and ensue it." 1 Pet. iii. 10, 11..
   Let the late contention about the terms of christian communion, as it
   has been the greatest, be the last. I would, now I am preaching my
   farewell sermon, say to you, as the apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
   xiii. 11. "Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of one mind,
   live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you."

   And here I would particularly advise those that have adhered to me in
   the late controversy, to watch over their spirits, and avoid all
   bitterness towards others. Your temptations are, in some respects, the
   greatest; because what has been lately done is grievous to you. But
   however wrong you may think others have done, maintain, with great
   diligence and watchfulness, a christian meekness and sedateness of
   spirit; and labour, in this respect, to excel others who are of the
   contrary part. And this will be the best victory: for "he that rules
   his spirit, is better than he that takes a city." Therefore let nothing
   be done through strife or vain-glory. Indulge no revengeful spirit in
   any wise; but watch and pray against it: and, by all means in your
   power, seek the prosperity of this town. And never think you behave
   yourselves as becomes Christians, but when you sincerely, sensibly, and
   fervently love all men, of whatever party or opinion, and whether
   friendly or unkind, just or injurious, to you or your friends, or to
   the cause and kingdom of Christ.

   3. Another thing that vastly concerns the future prosperity of the
   town, is, that you should watch against the encroachments of error; and
   particularly Arminianism, and doctrines of like tendency.

   You were, many of you, as I well remember, much alarmed with the
   apprehension of the danger of the prevailing of these corrupt
   principles, near sixteen years ago. But the danger then was small in
   comparison of what appears now. These doctrines at this day are much
   more prevalent than they were then. The progress they have made in the
   land, within this seven years, seems to have been vastly greater than
   at any time in the like space before. And they are still prevailing and
   creeping into almost all parts of the land, threatening the utter ruin
   of the credit of those doctrines which are the peculiar glory of the
   gospel, and the interests of vital piety. And I have of late perceived
   some things among yourselves, that show that you are far from being out
   of danger, but on the contrary remarkably exposed. The elder people may
   perhaps think themselves sufficiently fortified against infection. But
   it is fit that all should beware of self-confidence and carnal
   security, and should remember those needful warnings of sacred writ,
   "Be not high minded, but fear; and let him that stands, take heed lest
   he fall." But let the case of the elder people be as it will, the
   rising generation are doubtless greatly exposed. These principles are
   exceeding taking with corrupt nature, and what young people, at least
   such as have not their hearts established with grace, are easily led
   away with.

   And if these principles should greatly prevail in this town, as they
   very lately have done in another large town I could name, formerly
   greatly noted for religion, for a long time, it will threaten the
   spiritual and eternal ruin of this people, in the present and future
   generations. Therefore you have need of the greatest and most diligent
   care and watchfulness with respect to this matter.

   4. Another thing which I would advise to, that you may hereafter be a
   prosperous people, is, that you would give yourselves much to prayer.

   God is the fountain of all blessing and prosperity, and he will be
   sought to for his blessing. I would therefore advise you not only to be
   constant in secret and family prayer, and in the public worship of God
   in his house, but also often to assemble yourselves in private praying
   societies. I would advise all such as are grieved for the afflictions
   of Joseph, and sensibly affected with the calamities of this town, of
   whatever opinion they he with relation to the subject of our late
   controversy, often to meet together for prayer, and cry to God for his
   mercy to themselves, and mercy to this town, and more to Zion and the
   people of God in general through the world.

   5. The last article of advice I would give (which doubtless does
   greatly concern your prosperity) is, that you would take great care
   with regard to the settlement of a minister; and particularly in these
   two respects.

   (I.) That he be a man of thoroughly sound principles, in the scheme of
   doctrine which he maintains.

   Of this you will stand in the greatest need, especially at such a day
   of corruption as this is. And in order to obtain such a one, you had
   need to exercise extraordinary care and prudence.--I know the
   danger.--I know the manner of many young gentlemen of corrupt
   principles, their ways of concealing themselves, the fair specious
   disguises they are wont to put on, by which they deceive others, to
   maintain their own credit, and get themselves into others' confidence,
   and establish their own interest, until they see a convenient
   opportunity to begin more openly to broach and propagate their corrupt
   tenets.

   (2.) Labour to obtain a man who has an established character, as a
   person of serious religion and fervent piety.

   It is of vast importance that those who are settled in this work should
   be men of true piety, at all times, and in all places; but more
   especially at some times, and in some towns and churches. And this
   present time, wherein region is in danger, by so many corruptions in
   doctrine and practice, is in a peculiar manner a day wherein such
   ministers are necessary. Nothing else but sincere piety of heart is at
   all to be depended on, as a security to a young man, just coming into
   the world, from the prevailing infection, or thoroughly to engage him
   in proper and successful endeavours to withstand and oppose the torrent
   of error and prejudice, against the high mysterious evangelical
   doctrines of the religion of Jesus Christ, and their genuine effects in
   true experimental religion. And this is a place that does peculiarly
   need such a minister, for reasons obvious to all.

   If you should happen to settle a minister who knows nothing truly of
   Christ, and the way of salvation by him, nothing experimentally of the
   nature of vital religion, alas, how will you be exposed as sheep
   without a shepherd! Here is need of one who shall be eminently fit to
   stand in the gap, and make up the hedge, and who shall be as the
   chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. You need one that shall
   stand as champion in the cause of truth and the power of godliness.

   Having briefly mentioned these important articles of advice, nothing
   remains, but that I now take my leave of you, and bid you all farewell;
   wishing and praying for your best prosperity. 1 would now commend your
   immortal souls to him, who formerly committed them to me, expecting the
   day when I must meet you again before him, who is the Judge of quick
   and dead. I desire that I may never forget this people, who have been
   so long my special charge, and that I may never cease fervently to pray
   for your prosperity. May God bless you with a faithful pastor, one that
   is well acquainted with his mind and will, thoroughly warning sinners,
   wisely and skilfully searching professors, and conducting you in the
   way to eternal blessedness. May you have truly a burning and shining
   light set up in this candlestick; and may you, not only for a season,
   but during his whole life, that a long life, be willing to rejoice in
   his light.

   And let me be remembered in the prayers of all God's people that are of
   a calm spirit, and are peaceable and faithful in Israel, of whatever
   opinion they may be with respect to terms of church communion. And let
   us all remember, and never forget our future solemn meeting on that
   great day of the Lord; the day of infallible decision, and of the
   everlasting and unalterable sentence. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [95] 2 Cor. i. 4
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX NO. I

   The following interesting particulars of the ancestors of Jonathan
   Edwards will be acceptable to the reader. They are introduced in this
   separate form that the thread of the narration may not be interrupted;
   and this plan will be adopted for a similar reason in other instances.

   The family of Edwards is of Welch origin. The Rev. Richard Edwards, the
   great-great-grandfather, and earliest known ancestor of President
   Edwards, was a clergyman in London, in the time of Queen Elizabeth. He
   came, according to the family tradition, from Wales to the metropolis,
   but in what county his family lived, or of what church in London he was
   minister, is not know. His wife, Mrs. Ann Edwards, after the death of
   her husband, married Mr. James Coles; who with her son, William
   Edwards, then young and unmarried, accompanied her to Hartford in
   Connecticut about the year 1640, where they both died.

   William Edwards, Esquire, the great-grandfather, resided in Hartford,
   and is supposed to have been by profession a merchant. His wife, whose
   christian name was Agnes, and who came when a young lady with her
   parents to America, had two brothers in England(one the mayor of
   Exeter, the other the mayor of Barnstable. Their marriage occurred
   probably about the year 1645. It is not known whether they had more
   than one child.

   Richard Edwards, Esquire, the grandfather, and so far as can now be
   ascertained, the only child of William and Agnes Edwards, was born at
   Hartford in May, 1647, and resided in that town during his life. [96]
   He also was a merchant, and a man of wealth and respectability. At an
   early age he became a communicant in the presbyterian church in
   Hartford, and adorned his profession by a long life of conscientious
   integrity, and unusual devotedness to the prosperity of religion. He
   married Elizabeth Tuthill, the daughter of William and Elizabeth
   Tuthill, who came from Northamptonshire in England. Mr. Tuthill was a
   merchant of New-Haven, and one of the proprietors of the colony
   attempted on Delaware Bay. By this connecxion Mr. Edwards had seven
   children, the eldest of whom was the Rev. Timothy Edwards. After her
   decease, he married a Miss Talcot, of Hartford, sister of the Hon. John
   Talcot, by whom he had six children. He died April 20, 1718, in the 71
   year of his age; exhibiting, resignation and triumphant faith.

   The family of Stoddard is of English descent. Anthony Stoddard,
   Esquire, the maternal great-grandfather of President Edwards, and the
   first of the family in America, emigrated from the west of England to
   Boston. He had five wives; the first of whom, Mary Downing, the sister
   of Sir George Downing, was the mother of the Rev. Solomon Stoddard of
   Northampton. His other children were Anthony, Simeon, Samson, and
   Israel.

   The Rev. Solomon Stoddard, his eldest child, and the maternal
   grandfather of President Edwards, was born in 1643, and received the
   degree of A. B. at Harvard college in 1662. Soon after his licensure,
   the first minister of Northampton, the Rev. Eleazar Mather, then a
   young man, died, [97] and the parish applied to one of the ministers of
   Boston to designate a successor. He advised them at all hazards to
   secure Mr. Stoddard. When the parish committee applied to him, he had
   already taken his passage for London, and put his effects on board the
   ship with the expectation of sailing the next day; but through the
   earnest solicitation of the gentlemen who had recommended him, he was
   induced to relinquish the voyage and go to Northampton. He began to
   preach there in 1669, soon after the death of Mr. Mather, and on the
   4th of March, 1670, received a unanimous call from the church and
   people of that village to become their minister; but was not ordained
   until September 11, 1672. On the 8th of March, 1670, he married Mrs.
   Esther Mather, originally Miss Warham, the youngest child of Rev. John
   Warham, of Windsor in Connecticut, [98] and widow of his predecessor,
   who had left three children. Mr. and Mrs. Stoddard had twelve children;
   six sons and six daughters. He was a man celebrated throughout the
   colonies for his capacity, his knowledge of men, his influence in the
   churches, and his zeal for vital religion; and will long be remembered
   for his valuable writings, which have often been published on both
   sides of the Atlantic. [99] He was the minister of Northampton from
   1672 until his death in 1729, and left impressions of a character
   strongly marked for originality, for talents, for energy, and for
   piety, on the minds of its inhabitants, which the lapse of a century
   has scarcely begun to diminish.

   The Rev. Timothy Edwards, the father of President Edwards, was born at
   Hartford, May 14, 1669, and pursued his studies preparatory to his
   admission to college, under the Rev. Mr. Glover of Springfield, a
   gentleman distinguished for his classical attainments. In 1687, he
   entered Harvard college, at that time the only seminary in the
   colonies; and received the two degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts
   on the same day, July 4, 1691, one in the morning, and the other in the
   afternoon, "an uncommon mark of respect paid to his extraordinary
   proficiency in learning," such is the statement in the records of East
   Windsor. After the usual course of theological study, at that time
   longer and more thorough than it was during the latter half of the
   following century, he was ordained to the ministry of the gospel in the
   east parish of Windsor in Connecticut, in May, 1694.

   Windsor was the earliest settlement in that colony, the first house
   having been erected there in Oct. 1633. The original inhabitants came
   from Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire in England. They
   arrived at Boston in the beginning of the year 1630; and planted
   themselves at Dorchester in Massachusetts, were there formed into a
   congregational church on the 20th of March; when the Rev. John Warham,
   previously a distinguished clergyman in Exeter, but ejected as a
   nonconformist, was installed their pastor. Finding themselves
   straitened for room at that place, in consequence of the great number
   of emigrants from England, the church with their minister left
   Dorchester, and planted themselves in Windsor, in the summer of 1635.
   This town, lying immediately north of Hartford, and delightfully
   situated in the valley of Connecticut, originally comprehended a very
   large tract of land on both sides of the river, and is distinguished
   for the fertility of its soil, and the beauty of its scenery. The
   inhabitants constituted one parish until the year 1694; when those
   residing on the eastern side of the Connecticut, finding it
   inconvenient to cross the river, and being grown sufficiently numerous
   to support public worship among themselves, proceeded to build a
   church, which stood near to the present burying ground, and invited Mr.
   Timothy Edwards, son of Richard Edwards, Esquire, of Hartford to be
   their minister.

   Mr. Edwards was married, on the 6th day of November, 1694, to Esther
   Stoddard, the second child of the Rev. Solomon Stoddard, who was born
   in 1672. His father, immediately after his settlement, purchased for
   him a farm of moderate extent, and built him a house, which was
   regarded, at the time of its erection, as a handsome residence. It was
   still standing in 1803; it was a solid, substantial house of moderate
   dimensions, had one chimney in the middle, and was entered, like all
   other houses at that period, by stepping over the sill. In this house
   his children were born, and he and Mrs. Edwards resided during their
   lives. They had one son and ten daughters, whose names follow in the
   order of their births:(Esther, Elizabeth, Anne, Mary, Jonathan, Eunice,
   Abigail, Jerusha, Hannah, Lucy, and Martha. [100]

   In the spring of 1711, Mr. Edwards and the Rev. Mr. Buckingham of
   Milford, were appointed by the legislature of the colony, the chaplains
   of the Connecticut troops in a military expedition, designed for
   Canada. He left Windsor for New-Haven in July. A fleet, consisting of
   twenty men of war and eighty transports, sailed from Canada on the 30th
   of that month. Three companies under the command of Lieut. Col.
   Livingston, marched from New-Haven for Albany on the 9th of August,
   with whom went Mr. Edwards and Mr. Buckingham. The country through
   which their march lay, was at that time chiefly uncleared; and the
   troops were obliged to lie out two nights in the forest. They reached
   Albany on the 15th, and found there, including their own regiment,
   about 1100 whites, and 120 Indians. The following letter, addressed to
   Mr. Edwards from Albany, not only details the state of the expedition,
   but unfolds the character of the writer, and the circumstances of his
   family.

   "To Mrs. Ester Edwards, on the east side of Connecticut river, in
   Windsor.

   Albany, August 17, 1711.

   My dear and loving wife,

   The last Wednesday we came to this place. That we might not travel too
   hard for the footmen of our troops, (which consisted but of half the
   regiment, the rest not marching out of New-Haven when we did,) we spent
   seven days in the journey, which Col. Livingston judges to be about 160
   miles, and I am apt to think it may not be much short of it. I lay with
   our troops two nights in the woods. I took cold in my journey, and have
   something of a cough, and am otherwise not much amiss. Notwithstanding
   this I am able to travel, and hope I shall be so through the whole
   journey. Col. Livingston has been very careful of me, so that through
   the whole march, both as to diet and lodging, I fared as well in the
   main as himself. The rest of the officers and the troops carry
   themselves as well to me as I can expect or desire.

   Here are about 1100 white men, (or will be, at least, when the rest of
   the regiment come up, whom we expect to-night) and 120 Indians, beside
   what are expected of the Five Nations, which many here think will be
   1600 or 1800 men, but Col. Schuyler told me that he did not expect more
   than 1000. About 200 or 250 more whites are expected; so that the whole
   army that goes to Canada is like to be about 2500 men; to carry whom
   over the lake, there are provided, as I am told here, 350 batteaux and
   40 or 50 bark canoes. The Governor of New York and the General are
   here. The General is in great haste to have the forces on their march;
   so that Col. Schuyler's regiment was, as I understand, ordered to march
   out of town yesterday; but as I slept last night, and still am, on the
   east side of the river, I am uncertain whether they are yet gone. The
   General told Col. Livingston and me also afterwards, that we must march
   for Wood Creek to-morrow, but I am apt to think we shall hardly march
   till Monday.

   Whether I shall have any time to write to you after this I know not;
   but however that may be, I would not have you discouraged or over
   anxious concerning me, for I am not so about myself. I have still
   strong hopes of seeing thee and our dear children once again. I cannot
   but hope that I have had the gracious presence of God with me since I
   left home, encouraging and strengthening my soul, as well as preserving
   my life. I have been much cheered and refreshed respecting this great
   undertaking, in which I verily expect to proceed, and that I shall,
   before many weeks are at an end, see Canada; but I trust in the Lord
   that he will have mercy on me, and thee, my dear, and all our dear
   children, and that God has more work for me to do in the place where I
   have dwelt for many years, and that you and I shall yet live together
   on earth, as well as dwell together for ever in heaven with the Lord
   Jesus Christ, and all his saints, with whom to be is best of all.

   Remember my love to each of the children, to Esther, Elizabeth, Anne,
   Mary, Jonathan, Eunice, and Abigail. The Lord have mercy on and
   eternally save them all, with our dear little Jerusha! The Lord bind up
   their souls with thine and mine in the bundle of life. Tell the
   children, that I would have them, if they desire to see their father
   again, to pray daily for me in secret; and above all things to seek the
   favour of God in Christ Jesus, and that while they are young.

   I would have you very careful of my books and account of rates. I sent
   you from New-Haven a 40s. bill in a letter by Lieut. Willis, and since
   that ordered the treasurer to deliver to my father six pounds more for
   you. You may call for it, or send for it by some sure hand.

   Though for a while we must be absent from each other, yet, I desire
   that we may often meet at the throne of grace in our earnest prayers
   one for another, and have great hopes that God will hear and answer our
   prayers. The God of grace be with you.

   I am, thy loving husband,

   On Monday, August 20th, they marched for Wood Creek. At Saratoga, in
   consequence of the fatigues and exposure of the march, Mr. Edwards was
   taken severely ill. On the 4th of September, being unable to proceed
   with the army, he was conveyed in a boat to Stillwater. Thence he was
   carried back through the woods to Albany, where he arrived in three
   days in a state of extreme danger. On the 10th he wrote to Mrs. Edwards
   as follows:

   "To Mrs. Esther Edwards in Windsor, New England.

   Albany, Sept. 10, 1711.

   My dear,

   I came last Tuesday from Saratoga towards Albany, very ill, in order to
   return home; having been ill more than a month, and growing at last so
   weak that I could go no further than that place, which is near fifty
   miles above Albany. I came to Albany in a waggon, lying along in a bed,
   prepared for me, last Thursday night. Since then I have been at the
   house of Madam Vandyke, a Dutch gentlewoman, where I have been so
   kindly taken care of, that I am much better, and daily gain strength,
   and my lost appetite is somewhat recovered. I hope to be able to ride
   homeward next week.

   Last Friday I sent Mr. Hezekiah Mason to New England, to acquaint my
   father and my friends at Windsor how it is with me, and to desire three
   or four of them to come hither and to bring an easy horse with them for
   me to ride upon, and to come provided to carry home my effects, and to
   bring a blanket or two with them in case we should be forced to sleep
   in the woods. I should have written by him, but was too ill to do it.
   This is the first day I have been able to sit up. If the neighbours
   have not started when you receive this, speak to Mr. Drake that they
   set out as soon as possible.

   I rejoice to learn, by a letter from my father, that you were all well
   on the 2d, and hope in the mercy of God to see you all ere long.

   Lieut. Silvy, sent over by the queen to serve in this expedition, a
   stout, active young man, who came sick with me in another waggon from
   the camp to Albany, died this evening just by my lodgings. We came
   together from the camp sick, we lay together in one room by the way
   sick, we lodged just by one another several days in this town sick(but
   he is dead, and I am alive and recovering. Blessed be God for his
   distinguishing and underserved grace to me! Remember my love to all the
   children. Give my respects to Mr. Colton, who I understand stays with
   you. I wish you to provide something for my cough, which is the worst I
   ever had in my life. Remember my love to sister Staughton, and my duty
   to my father and mother, if you have opportunity.

   I am your very affectionately loving husband,

   Timothy Edwards."

   Owing to the lateness of the season and to numerous disappointments,
   the expedition was soon after relinquished; and in the course of the
   months Mr. Edwards returned home.

   Mr. and Mrs. Edwards lived together in the married state upwards of
   sixty-three years. Mr. Edwards was about five feet ten inches in
   height, of a fair complexion; of a strong robust frame, bull, but not
   corpulent. He was a man of polished manners, and particularly attentive
   to his external appearance.(The management not only of his domestic
   concerns, but of his property generally, was intrusted to the care of
   Mrs. Edwards, who discharged the duties of a wife and a mother with
   singular fidelity and success. In strength of character she resembled
   her father, and like him she left behind her, in the place where she
   resided for seventy-six years, that "good name which is better than
   precious ointment."

   "On a visit to East Windsor, in the summer of 1823," remarks Mr.
   Dwight, "I found a considerable number of persons advanced in years,
   who had been well acquainted with Mrs. Edwards, and two upwards of
   ninety, who had been pupils of her husband. From them I learned that
   she received a superior education in Boston, was tall, dignified, and
   commanding in her appearance, affable and gentle in her manners, and
   was regarded as surpassing her husband in native vigour of
   understanding. They all united in speaking of her as possessed of
   remarkable judgment and prudence, of an exact sense of propriety, of
   extensive information, of a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures and
   theology, and of singular conscientiousness, piety, and excellence of
   character. By her careful attention to all his domestic concerns, her
   husband was left at full liberty to devote himself to the proper duties
   of his profession. Like many of the ministers of the gospel of that
   early period in New England, he was well acquainted with Hebrew
   literature, and was regarded as a man of more than usual learning; but
   was particularly distinguished for his accurate knowledge of the Greek
   and Roman classics. In addition to his other duties, he annually
   prepared a number of pupils for college, there being at that time no
   public schools endowed for this purpose. One of my aged informants, who
   pursued his preparatory studies under him, told me, that on his
   admission to college, when the officers had learned with whom he had
   studied, they remarked to him, that there was no need of examining Mr.
   Edward's scholars."

   He was for that period unusually liberal and enlightened, with regard
   to the education of his children; preparing not only his son but each
   of his daughters also for college. In a letter, bearing date Aug. 3,
   1711, while absent on the expedition to Canada, he wishes that Jonathan
   and the girls may continue to prosecute the study of Latin; and in
   another of Aug. 7, that he may continue to recite his Latin to his
   elder sisters. When his daughters were of the proper age, he sent them
   to Boston, to finish their education. Both he and Mrs. Edwards were
   exemplary in their care of their religious instruction; and, as the
   reward of their parental fidelity, were permitted to see the fruits of
   piety in them all during their youth.

   He always preached extemporaneously, and, until he was upwards of
   seventy, without noting down the heads of his discourse. After that
   time, he commonly wrote the divisions on small slips of paper, which,
   as they occasionally appeared beyond the leaves of the Bible that he
   held in his hand, his parishioners called, "Mr. Edwards's thumb
   papers." Apologizing for this one day to one of his pupils, he remarked
   to him, that he found his memory beginning to fail, but that he thought
   his judgment as sound as ever; and this was likewise the opinion of his
   people, till near the close of his life. He is known to have written
   out but a single sermon, which was preached at the general election, in
   1732, and was published. It is a solemn and faithful application of the
   doctrine of a general judgment to his hearers, particularly as
   legislators and magistrates. As he lived till within a few months of
   his son's decease, the latter often visited his father, and preached in
   his desk. It was the customary remark of the people, that "although Mr.
   Edwards was perhaps the more learned man, and more animated in his
   manner, yet Mr. Jonathan was the deeper preacher."

   His influence over his congregation was commanding, and was steadily
   exerted on the side of truth and righteousness. When he knew of any
   division among them, he went immediately to see that the parties were
   reconciled; and when he heard of any improper conduct on the part of
   any individuals, it was his uniform custom to go and reprove them.
   Under his preaching, the gospel was attended with a regular, uniform
   efficacy, and in frequent instances, with revivals of religion, yet no
   record is preserved of the actual admissions to the church. From some
   of the family letters, evidence appears of a revival of religion
   existing in 1715 and 1716; during which Mrs. Edwards, and two of her
   daughters, made a profession of their christian faith; and several
   others of the family are spoken of, as "travelling towards Zion, with
   their faces thitherward." His son observes, in 1737, that he had known
   of no parish in the west of New England, except Northampton, which had
   as often been favoured with revivals of religion, as that of his
   father.

   During the whole of his ministry, he was regarded by his people with
   great respect and affection; no symptoms of dissatisfaction having been
   manifested by them for sixty-three years. In the summer of 1752, on
   account of his increasing infirmities, he proposed to them the
   settlement of a colleague; and they actually settled one, the Rev.
   Joseph Perry, June 11, 1755; but continued his salary until his death,
   which took place Jan. 27, 1758, when he was eighty-nine years of age.

   Mrs. Edwards survived him twelve years; her fourth daughter, Mary,
   residing with her and watching over the infirmities of age. "From a
   lady in East Windsor, far advanced in life, I learned," says Mr.
   Dwight, "the following facts.--Mrs. Edwards was always fond of books,
   and discovered a very extensive acquaintance with them in her
   conversation; particularly with the best theological writers. After the
   death of her husband, her family being small, a large portion of her
   time was devoted to reading. A table always stood in the middle of her
   parlour, on which lay a large quarto Bible, and treatises on doctrinal
   and experimental religion. In the afternoon, at a stated hour, such of
   the ladies of the neighbourhood as found it convenient, went
   customarily to her house, accompanied not unfrequently by their
   children. Her daughter regularly read a chapter of the Bible, and then
   a passage of some religious author; but was often stopped by the
   comments of her mother, who always closed the interview with prayer. On
   these occasions it was a favorite point with the neighbouring females,
   even with those who were young. to be present; all of them regularly
   attending when they were able, and many of them, among whom was my
   informant, dating their first permanent attention to religion from the
   impressions there made. In this way she was regarded with a respect
   bordering on veneration, and was often spoken of by Mr. Perry, as one
   of his most efficient auxiliaries. She died Jan. 19, 1770, in the 99th
   year of her age, retaining her mental faculties until the close of her
   life. Her daughter Mary spent many years of her early life at
   Northampton with Mr. and Mrs. Stoddard; and returning thence to her
   father's house, she was the nurse and attendant, and I may almost say,
   support of her aged parents. She was a woman of most amiable
   disposition, fine understanding, and uncommon attainments, had read
   much, and appeared to have made the best improvement of the knowledge
   that she obtained. [101] She survived her mother six years."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [96] See Appendix, No. II.

   [97] Mr. Mather was ordained June 18, 1661, and died July 24, 1669.

   [98] The Rev. John Warham was originally one of the ministers of
   Exeter. "He was distinguished for piety and the strictest morals; yet
   at times was subject to great religious melancholy. Such were his
   doubts and fears, at some times, that when he administered the Lord's
   supper to his brethren, he did not participate with them, fearing that
   the seals of the covenant did not belong to him. It is said he was the
   first minister in New England who used notes in preaching; yet he was
   applauded by his hearers, as one of the most animated and energetic
   preachers of the day. He was considered as one of the principal fathers
   and pillars of the churches of Connecticut." Trumbull's Hist. of
   Connecticut. I. 467.

   [99] The following is a list of the publications of the Rev. Mr.
   Stoddard 1. The trial of Assurance 1696. 2. The Doctrine of Instituted
   Churches 1700. 3. The Necessity of acknowledging Offences 1801. 4. The
   Danger of Degeneracy 1702. 5. Election Sermon 1703. 6. A Sermon on the
   Lord's Supper, Ex. xii. 47, 48 1707. 7. A Sermon at the Ordination of
   the Rev. Joseph Willard of Swampfield 1708. 8. The Inexcusableness of
   Neglecting the Worship of God 1708. 9. The Falseness of the Hopes of
   many Professors 1708. 10. An Appeal to the Learned on the Lord's Supper
   1709. 11. A plea for Tythes: Divine Teachings rende, Persons blessed
   1712. 12. A Guide to Christ 1714. 13. Three Sermons: The Virtue of
   Christ's Blood: Natural Men under the Government of Self-love: The
   Gospel the Means of Conversion: and a fourth to stir up young men and
   maidens 1717. 14. Sermon at the Ordination of Mr. Thomas Cheney 1718.
   15. Treatise concerning Conversion 1719. 16. Answer to Cases of
   Conscience 1722. 17. Inquiry whether God is not angry with the Country!
   1723. 18. Safety of appearing in the Righteousness of Christ

   [100] See Appendix. No. III.

   [101] From the letter of an excellent lady in Middletown, in whose
   family she resided several years.
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX, NO. II.

        PARTICULARS AS TO THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MR. RICHARD EDWARDS, THE
        GRANDFATHER OF JONATHAN EDWARDS.

   A closely written manuscript of ninety-six pages, foolscap 8vo, by the
   Rev. Timothy Edwards, of East Windsor, and eldest son of Richard
   Edwards, Esquire, is still preserved, headed, "Some things written for
   my own use and comfort, concerning the life and death of my very dear
   and honoured father, Mr. Richard Edwards, late of Hartford, who died
   April 20, 1718, on the sabbath, in the forenoon, being the ninth day of
   his sickness, and the 71st year of his age, he being then very near
   seventy-one years old, having been born in May, 1647."

   The following brief abstract of this account will not be uninteresting
   to those who respect the memory of departed piety and worth; especially
   as it is an accurate moral picture of the man who moulded the character
   of the father and instructor of President Edwards. As far as is
   consistent with brevity, the language of the original is exactly
   preserved.

   "He was naturally of a strong healthy constitution, well formed and
   comely, and of uncommon vigour, activity, and nimbleness of
   body--characteristics, for which he was distinguished until the close
   of life. He had a clear voice and ready utterance, and expressed
   himself not only with ease and propriety, but with uncommon energy and
   effect. He was naturally cheerful, sprightly, and sweet tempered, of a
   ready wit, had a mind well stored with knowledge, particularly the
   knowledge of history and theology, and in conversation was uncommonly
   pleasant and entertaining. He was sober and considerate, a man of great
   courage, resolution, and perseverance; had a clear and strong
   understanding, a sound judgment, and a quick, sharp insight into men
   and things, and was capable of almost any kind of business. He was in
   the full sense of the phrase a man of business, distinguished for his
   wisdom and forecast; had uncommon prudence and discretion in the
   management of his own affairs, and was extensively consulted in matters
   of weight and difficulty by others.

   Though natively quick and warm when provoked or affronted, he had
   acquired the self-government, which became him as a man and a
   Christian; though firm and inflexible in the discharge of his duty, he
   was yet easy to be entreated. He was candid and charitable in his
   estimate of the conduct of others, kind and affectionate in his
   feelings, liberal and generous in the use of his property, obliging in
   his disposition, willing to devote his time and services to the good of
   his fellow-men, readily forgiving injuries on the slightest
   acknowledgment, but yielding nothing to pride and haughtiness of
   spirit. He was uniformly courteous, affable, and easy of access; free
   and familiar with his children and servants, and with the poorest and
   humblest of his neighbours; and at the same time tenderhearted and
   compassionate, easily melting into tears, while witnessing either
   examples of kindness and generosity, or scenes of affliction and
   sorrow, and doing what lay in his power to relieve the wants and
   distresses of others. He had a manly, ingenuous spirit, was accustomed
   to deal very faithfully and thoroughly with his fellow-men about their
   faults and miscarriages, and did not fear, on any proper occasion, to
   tell any man plainly what he saw amiss in his conduct.

   He was a sincere and faithful friend, never disappointing those who
   trusted in him; and it was no difficult thing for any honest man,
   however humble his circumstances, in a just cause, especially if he was
   oppressed and unable to defend himself, to secure his friendship. Such
   confidence, says the writer, have I in my father's faithfulness, that,
   under God, I could venture my estate, my good name, and even my life,
   in the hands of such a friend. In all his dealings with his fellow-men
   he was eminently just and upright. Though his business was very
   extensive, and continued through a long life, and though I had the best
   opportunity of knowing his concerns, I never knew him attempt to wrong
   any individual, or to do any thing which discovered the least shadow of
   deceit or dishonesty. On the contrary, he abhorred all base underhand
   management, scorned all that was little, unfair, and unworthy, and in
   freedom from dissimulation, hypocrisy, and any design to do wrong, was
   among those who excel.

   "In all the relations of life his character was truly estimable. He was
   hospitable and courteous to strangers, and charitable to the poor, and
   was ever ready to sympathize with the afflicted, to plead the cause of
   the widow and the fatherless, and to help those who wanted both friends
   and money to help themselves. He was an affectionate, tender, careful
   husband, one of the best of fathers to his children, a just and kind
   master, esteemed and beloved by his neighbours, a good and punctual
   paymaster, and of a credit always unimpeached. He was not only faithful
   in managing the concerns of others; but equitable, in his demands for
   services rendered, often indeed rendering them for nothing; just and
   moderate in his profits, gentle and accommodating towards his debtors,
   often bearing with them, year after year, if they were poor and honest.
   He was also merciful to his beast.

   He had an excellent spirit of government--having wisdom to govern not
   only himself, but others--so that he was both feared and loved, by his
   children, and servants, and all who were under his control. I cannot
   say that he discovered no infirmities, but they were much outweighed by
   his virtues.

   In the existence and constant presence of God, he appeared not only to
   believe, but to delight. The fear of God seemed habitually before his
   eyes, so that probably nothing would have tempted him to do that, which
   he really thought would offend him. Twice every day he worshipped God
   in his house, by reading the Scriptures and prayer. Other religious
   books were read in their season in the family, and that to an extent
   rarely surpassed. His conversation with, and his letters to, his
   children, were full of religious instruction. He laid great stress on
   the promises of God to the righteous, and his threatenings to the
   wicked; fully expecting and looking for the accomplishment of both. He
   habitually and attentively observed the dispensations of Providence;
   ever acknowledging with thankfulness his goodness to him and his; and
   regarding every affliction as an immediate chastisement from God, so
   that he heard the voice of the rod, and him that appointed it. Rarely
   does any Christian express so solemn and heart-affecting a sense of the
   great and awful dispensations of Providence, towards individuals, or
   towards the world at large.

   He hated vice and wickedness, whenever he saw it, and abhorred to
   justify or make light of sin, whether committed by strangers, or by his
   own near relatives; always discovering in this respect a just,
   conscientious, impartial spirit, and appearing to frown upon it even
   more in his children than in others.

   In prayer he seemed to draw very near to God with peculiar solemnity
   and reverence, with exalted views of his greatness and goodness, and
   with a supreme regard to his glory. He appeared to cherish an admiring
   sense of the wisdom, the power, and the goodness of God, in
   contemplating the works of creation and providence, and the riches of
   his grace as unfolded in the work of redemption. The truth of God he
   studied and understood, as well as loved and obeyed.

   Few men administered christian admonition and reproof with so much
   faithfulness, discretion, and solemnity, or with so much success; and
   few received it with more humility, meekness, and self-application. His
   feelings of religious subjects were at once strong and tender; often
   discovering themselves at public worship, in family prayer, and in
   religious reading and conversation.

   He took peculiar care, that his family sanctified the sabbath, and
   appeared himself conscientiously to keep it holy. On the morning of
   every sacramental sabbath, he regularly spent a long time alone, in
   religious retirement. He was abundant in his religious instructions and
   admonitions to his family, on every proper occasion, and regularly on
   every sabbath afternoon in enforcing the sermons of the day, and the
   instructions of the book which was then read. From my own observation
   of other religious families, with which I have been familiarly
   acquainted, I have reason to believe that few children, even of
   christian parents, have been as much counselled and instructed. He
   loved and honoured the faithful ministers of Christ, for their work's
   sake; and was a sincere and hearty friend to his own minister; actively
   and zealously exciting others to help and befriend him, and resolutely
   and successfully opposing and bearing down those who arrayed themselves
   against him.

   In his religion he was far from being ostentatious, and the applause of
   men he regarded as nothing, in comparison with that testimony of a good
   conscience, which would enable him to appeal to the heart-searching
   God, for the sincerity and uprightness of his conduct. He appeared to
   love the real disciples of Christ, for their piety; disregarding the
   distinctions of sect and party, and receiving all his brethren who were
   received by Christ.

   Though possessed of property, he realized, in an unusual degree, the
   vanity of worldly good, and placed but a slight dependence upon riches,
   honours, or pleasures as the means of permanent happiness. Surely, says
   his son, this world was not my father's god; his chief good was
   something better and nobler, than this present world can afford. He
   appeared habitually sensible of the frailty of his nature, and of the
   nearness of his own death, often conversing on death and the judgment,
   in a truly devout and edifying manner, and frequently observing, near
   the close of life, "I carry my life in my hand every day; I am daily
   looking and waiting until my change come." Few Christians, indeed, seem
   more conversant with their own death, more careful to prepare for it,
   or more ready to meet it.

   In the government of God he seemed habitually to rejoice. His sense of
   the evil of sin was peculiarly deep; he was patient and submissive
   under sufferings, was willing to suffer for Christ's sake, and was free
   from the fear of death. He appeared to be truly humbled under a sense
   of his own sins, to mourn over sin, and to wage a constant warfare
   against it, to love the way of salvation revealed in the gospel, to
   cherish a sacred regard to the glory of God and the interests of
   religion, and to entertain exalted views of the character and glory of
   Christ. Though he never, says his son, gave me an account of his
   conversion at large; yet on various occasions, in conversation, he has
   alluded to the great change then wrought in his views and affections,
   with regard to temporal and spiritual objects, particularly to worldly
   good, the warfare with sin, the hope of reconciliation to God, and a
   title to eternal life. He appeared eminently to trust in God, to
   cherish a deep sense of his dependence, and to lead a life of faith.
   Though I have now been in the ministry, he adds, nearly four and twenty
   years, and, during that period, have often had much private
   conversation with many of the truly pious, I do not remember that I
   have met with any, who seemed more truly to lead such a life, than my
   dear father; and to such a life he habitually advised and directed his
   children, both in his conversation and in his letters. Writing to me on
   an important subject, he says--"I leave you in this, and all your
   affairs, to the direction and guidance of the Fountain of wisdom and
   goodness, who, I doubt not, will guide you into the best and safest
   course, if you trust in him, and by faith commit your ways to him. Make
   the glory of God your main end, and depend on him by a lively faith in
   his promise; for He is faithful who hath promised, that they who wait
   on him shall not want any good thing--that is, any that is really good
   for them"--In a letter addressed to me when I was with the army at
   Albany, [102] then on an expedition to Canada, he thus writes--"I have
   nothing new to write to you, but merely to revive what I have said
   formerly, that, since God, in his allwise providence, has called you to
   this present service, you put your whole trust in him, to carry you
   through it, who never fails any who put their trust in him. You may
   expect to meet with difficulties, but still God is all-sufficient--the
   same God in all places, and in all conditions,--therefore commit
   yourself wholly to his merciful providence, who is a faithful God to
   all his people, in all their ways. So I leave you to the blessing,
   guidance, and keeping of a gracious and faithful God and Father."--I
   have cause to say, "Blessed be God, that once I had a father, thus
   disposed to counsel his children!"

   In all affairs of weight and difficulty, he appeared, in an unusual
   degree, to commit himself to God, to wait on him for direction and for
   help, to leave the event in his hands, and then to be at peace. He has
   sometimes told me, says his son, that when his mind has been much
   agitated in consequence of some great trouble and perplexity, in which
   he could see no means of help or relief, so that he could get no rest
   for a great part of a night, it has been his customary course, to cast
   it entirely on God, and leave it in his hands; and then, said he, I can
   at once go to sleep.

   God was his great refuge in times of trouble, and I have good reason to
   believe that the declaration in Deut. xxxiii. 27. The eternal God is
   thy refuge, and underneath thee are the everlasting arms--might be
   applied to him with truth. In the time of health he trusted in God, and
   strongly relied on his providential care and goodness, to provide for
   himself and his family. This was peculiarly observable in seasons of
   affliction and distress. In sickness he stayed himself on God, and
   looked to the Lord Jesus Christ, to carry him safely through, however
   it might issue. In the very dreadful mortality in 1711, when great
   numbers of the inhabitants dies, he was dangerously sick of the
   distemper; and when the crisis was passed, he gave us the following
   account of his reflections, during the first night of his sickness:
   "When I was first taken ill, I concluded that I had the prevailing
   fever; and was strongly impressed with the belief that I should die of
   it. During the former part of the night, I felt considerable anxiety
   respecting it, but in the latter part of it, the disquiet of my mind
   passed away, and I was willing to leave myself with God. I found myself
   not so much concerned about the issue of my sickness; but thought I was
   satisfied that it should be as he pleased."(This, during his whole
   sickness, gave him inward peace and rest in God, and comfortably freed
   him from the terrors of death.

   The language of his last will, written near the close of life, strongly
   exhibits the good man, who trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the
   Lord is:("I, Richard Edwards of Hartford, being weak in body, yet,
   through God's goodness, my understanding and memory remaining good,
   being sensible of my own mortality, and not knowing how suddenly the
   Lord may put a period to this short life, do therefore make this my
   last will and testament. And first, I commit my soul into the bosom of
   my most merciful God and Father, and ever blessed Redeemer, Jesus
   Christ, hoping for eternal life and salvation through the merits,
   mediation, and intercession of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; and my
   body to the earth, to be buried, nothing doubting but that it shall be
   raised again, and re-united to my soul, by the mighty power of God, at
   the last day, and so rest in hopes of a glorious resurrection, through
   Jesus Christ our Lord."

   The piety and evangelical excellence, which had characterized his life,
   were even more conspicuous in his last sickness, and at his
   death.--Towards one whom he regarded as having greatly injured him, he
   expressed feelings of kindness and good will; and while he declared,
   that in the review of his conduct towards him, he had peace of
   conscience, that he could safely die upon what he had done in it, and
   that under the approach of death, he felt no trouble lying upon his
   mind, with reference to it, yet he declared he could truly say, he
   heartily wished him the best good. He took great care that no wrong
   should be done through mistake, with respect to what had been due, or
   was still due, to him from others. To one of his neighbours who came
   and, whispering in his ear, asked his forgiveness, he readily and
   promptly replied, "I forgive you, I forgive you;" and this so kindly
   and heartily, that the man was melted into tears. He repeatedly charged
   his children, on no consideration to take advantage of the law against
   any, who had mortgaged their lands or estates to him, and whose
   mortgages were out and their debts unpaid.

   When his children came around his bed, weeping at the apprehension of
   his approaching death, and their incalculable loss, he said to them,
   "This time I have long expected, this scene I have looked for, and now
   it is come." As some of us who lived at a distance came into his sick
   chamber for the first time, he said, "I can but look upon you, my
   children, I can't speak to you; I have a great deal to say, but I can't
   say it; God now denies me that liberty." When I first saw him, (April
   16th,) he expressed a hope, that he should meet me with joy, at the
   right hand of Christ in the great day. Something being said to him,
   with reference to death, he replied, "Death, indeed, is terrible to
   nature, but I hope God will strengthen me, and carry me through it, and
   help me to submit to his will; I lie at the feet of God."--While he was
   praying to God by himself, he was overheard to say, "Lord, I come to
   thee with my naked soul; I desire to bow under thy chastizing hand, and
   hope it is a good chastisement." As we sat weeping by his bed-side,
   April 16th, he said to us,--"Come, children, moderate your grief, for
   such things must be, and the will of God is best. I freely submit
   myself to the will of God, whether in life or death, to do with me as
   he pleases." He said to me on the 17th,--"Though I seem to be better
   to-day, yet I am of the opinion that this sickness will be my last; and
   I am very willing that the will of God should be done, I am not at all
   anxious about it: I rely on the Lord Jesus Christ; I have chosen him
   for my Saviour and mighty Redeemer." On my observing, "This must be a
   great support, Sir, to your mind;"--he replied, "it is so." As I was
   sitting by him on the 17th, I heard him say,--"O my poor, frail, mortal
   body, methinks, sometimes I should be glad to slip away from thee!" In
   the midst of most severe pain, he expressed himself very desirous, that
   God would enable him to bear his afflicting hand, and quietly submit to
   his will, even to the end; and that he might not at any time, by
   impatience, be left to sin against him, and for this he desired our
   prayers, that God would, in this respect, strengthen him more and more;
   and in a very humble manner, when he had scarce strength to speak, he
   thus, in a short ejaculation, prayed to God, "O Lord, increase thy
   grace, and strengthen thy servant's faith!" During his whole sickness,
   he appeared to be almost always praying to God; far more than is
   commonly witnessed on the death-bed of the Christian.

   He solemnly exhorted and charged his son John, to carry on the worship
   of God in his family, after his death. To one of his daughters, he
   said, as she stood weeping over him, "I must say to you, as Mr. Whiting
   said to his daughter Sybil, Through wet and dry, through thick and
   thin, keep steady for that port." On the 18th, as his good friend Mr.
   Austin, and myself, sat by him, and we observed him troubled with
   hiccoughs, one of us remarked that the hiccoughs were very distressing,
   and he replied, "God must take his own way, and use his own means, and
   I desire to submit to his holy will, and hope I can do it freely." He
   expressed to me his conviction, that it was better for him to depart
   and be with Christ, than to continue with his family;. On my reminding
   him, that he had many friends, he replied,--"I know that I have many
   friends, but there is one Friend that is better than all;" and when one
   of us spoke of making his bed easy; he replied,--"The favour of Jesus
   Christ will make my bed easy; the bosom of Jesus Christ is the best
   resting-place, for a man in my condition."--To one of my sisters he
   said, "Weep for yourself, my child, as I have wept for myself, I have
   laid hold of the rock of ages, I hope my anchor is within the
   veil;"--and to another, as she observed him in very great pain--"The
   passage may prove rough, but the shore is safe, and the bottom will
   hear me." In reply to a remark of mine, he said,--"I trust in the Lord
   Jesus Christ, and have ventured my soul upon for eternity, and I desire
   to do so more and more." On the night of the 18th, when his distemper
   was most violent, he expressed his full conviction, that he had chosen
   God for his portion, and that he would grant him a favourable issue.

   He expressed high and honourable thoughts of God, in the midst of his
   greatest distress. On Wednesday, observing his uncommon patience and
   resignation under extreme suffering, I was led to remark, that to
   submit quietly and patiently to the will of God, when sorely afflicted
   by him, was one of the hardest lessons a Christian had to learn. His
   reply was striking and affecting:--"Alas! there is no room nor cause to
   complain of God, for he is infinitely good, yea goodness itself, and
   the fountain of it; I should be very ungrateful indeed, if I should
   complain of him who has been so good to me all my days."

   On Saturday, the 19th of April, and the last day but one of his life,
   when he lay rattling in his throat, much oppressed for want of breath,
   and in great pain, so that he seemed to me to be in the very pangs of
   death, he expressed some fear that he might lie long in that condition,
   and so endure great pain and misery before he died, and therefore
   seemed to desire that God would mercifully shorten the time of his
   sufferings, by taking him quickly out of the world. Mrs. Talcot said to
   him, "But you are willing to wait God's time:"--to which he
   replied,--"O yes, O yes." At a time when he appeared to be fast
   sinking, Major Talcot informed him, that he was ready to think death
   was upon him, he was so very low; and I added,--"I hope that God will
   never leave you nor forsake you:"--with great readiness, and with an
   air of much inward satisfaction, he replied,--"I don't fear it, I don't
   fear it!"--When he was hardly able to speak, he told me, in answer to a
   question, that--his hope of eternal life, through the infinite mercy of
   God in Jesus Christ, was still firm; that he trusted all would be well
   with him in a short time, and that then he should think of his present
   afflictions and sufferings with pleasure!--In the former part of the
   night, he told us that he was comforted with the hope of going to
   heaven. On my asking him if he did not wish to recover, he
   replied:--"To recover! No; I am better as I am, I have no desire to go
   back, I have left myself with God!"--In the latter part of the night,
   having lain down for a little sleep, I was called up, as he appeared to
   be dying. I asked him if his hope of salvation continued. He
   said--"Yes."--I asked him whether he still had good thoughts of God,
   and he replied--"Yes, Yes!"--In the morning of the sabbath, a few hours
   before his death, I went to him, and told him, I would make one more
   prayer with him, if he thought he could attend; he was only able to
   say--"Yes"--and at the same time nodded his head; and, when it was
   concluded, gave me the same sign, that he had been able to understand
   and unite with me. In the prayer, I spoke of him as dying; and
   expressing my hope to him afterwards, that he was going to keep sabbath
   with saints and angels in heaven, and inquiring whether he had that
   hope to sustain him, he gave me the customary sign that such was the
   fact.

   In this manner he lived and died, glorifying God both in his life and
   in his death, and leaving behind him that good name, which is better
   than precious ointment."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [102] In August, 1711
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX, NO. III.

   ACCOUNT OF THE CHILDREN OF TIMOTHY AND ESTHER EDWARDS.

   The following particular statement of the children of Timothy and
   Esther Edwards, will probably interest some readers.

   1. Esther, born in 1695; married Rev. Samuel Hopkins of West
   Springfield. They had several children: Hannah, married in 1740, to
   Hon. John Worthington, L.L.D. of Springfield. They had two sons, who
   died in infancy; and four daughters: Mary, who married Hon. Jonathan
   Bliss, chief justice of the province of New Brunswick; Hannah, who
   married Hon. Thomas Dwight of Springfield; Frances, who married Hon.
   Fisher Ames, L.L.D.; and Sophia, who married John Williams, Esq. of
   Weathersfield.

   2. Elizabeth, born 1697; married Col. Jabez Huntington of Windham. They
   had four daughters: 1. Jerusha, married Dr. Clark of Lebanon. 2. Sarah,
   married Hezekiah Wetmore of Middletown, and had two children; and after
   his death married Samuel Beers of Stratford, and had three children:
   Lucy, married to George Smith of Smith-town, L. Island; Sarah Anne,
   married David Burr, Esq. of Fairfield; and William Pitt Beers, Esq. of
   Albany, who married Anne, daughter of Hon. Jonathan Sturges of
   Fairfield. 3. Elizabeth, married Rev. Abraham Davenport of Stamford,
   and had two children; Hon. Jon. Davenport, M.C. and Hon. James
   Davenport, a judge of the supreme court of Connecticut.

   3. Anne, born in 1699, married John Ellworth, Esq. of East Windsor, and
   died in 1798, aged 99. They had four children: 1. John, born Aug. 24,
   1735, and had five children; 2. Solomon, born April 3, 1737, and had
   twelve children; 3. Frederick; 4. Anne, who married Mr. John Stoughton
   of East Windsor, and had six children.

   4. Mary, born in 1701, and died single, Sept. 17, 1776, in the 76th
   year of her age.

   5. Jonathan, the subject of the present Memoir. For his children, see
   Appendix, No. VI.

   6. Eunice, born in 1706, married, in Oct., 1729, Rev. Simon Backus of
   Newington, who went as chaplain of the Connecticut troops to Louisburg,
   in 1745, and died there in 1746. They had seven children: 1. Unknown.
   2. Eunice, born in 1732, died unmarried aged 75. 3. Elizabeth, born in
   1734, married David Bissell of East Windsor. They had two children. 4.
   Esther, married Benjamin Ely of West Springfield, and had fourteen
   children. 5. Rev. Simon Backus, A.B. of Yale, in 1759, married Rachel
   Moseley of East Haddam, and had nine children. 6. Jerusha, married Mr.
   Smith Bailey, and had four children. 7. Mary, died unmarried.

   7. Abigail, born in 1708; married William Metcalf, Esq. of Lebanon, and
   A.B. of Harvard college. She died in 1754. They had five children: 1.
   Abigail, married Moses Bliss, Esq. of Springfield, and had eight
   children, Hon. George Bliss, Moses, William Metcalf, Lucy, married Dr.
   Hezekiah Clark of Lebanon, Abigail, married Hon. William Ely of
   Springfield, Frances, married Rev. William Rowland of Windsor, Emily,
   and Harriet. 2. William, and 3. Eliphalet, who died young. 4. Lucy, who
   married Mr. John Huntington of East Haddam, and had seven children. 5.
   Eliphalet, born Dec. 6, 1748, married Mary West of Lebanon.

   8. Jerusha, born in 1710 and died Dec. 22, 1729, aged about 19 years.

   9. Hannah, born in 1712, and married Seth Wetmore, Esq. of Middletown,
   Conn.

   10. Lucy, born in 1715, and died unmarried in East Windsor, Aug. 21,
   1736, aged 21.

   11. Martha, born in 1716, married Rev. Moses Tuthill of Granville,
   Mass. and died Feb. 1794, aged 77.
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX, NO. IV.

   REMARKS IN MENTAL PHILOSOPHY--THE MIND

   There are four distinct series of these manuscript Notes or Remarks,
   which from the handwriting, as well as from other evidence, were
   obviously commenced by him during his collegiate life, and as nearly as
   can be judged in the following order. The first, entitled "The Mind,"
   is a brief collection of discussions and remarks in mental philosophy.
   The second is without a title, and consists of "Notes on Natural
   Science." The third is entitled "Notes on the Scriptures." The fourth
   is entitled, "Miscellanies." and consists chiefly of observations on
   the doctrines of the Scriptures. The two last he continued through
   life.

   The following series of remarks, entitled "The Mind." appears to have
   been composed either during, or soon after, his perusal of Locke's
   Essay on the Human Understanding.

    "THE MIND."

   Title. The Natural History of the Mental World, or of the Internal
   World: being a Particular Inquiry into the Nature of the Human Mind,
   with respect to both its Faculties--the Understanding and the Will--and
   its various Instincts, and Active and Passive Powers.

   Introduction. Concerning the two worlds--the External and the Internal:
   the External, the subject of Natural Philosophy; the Internal, our own
   Minds. How the Knowledge of the latter is, in many respects, the most
   important. Of what great use the true knowledge of this is; and of what
   dangerous consequence errors, here, are more than in the order.

   Subjects to be handled in the Treatise on the Mind.

   1. Concerning the difference between Pleasure and Pain, and Ideas, or
   the vast difference between the Understanding and the Will.

   2. Concerning Prejudices; the influence of Prejudice to cloud the mind.
   The various sorts of prejudices in particular, and how they come to
   cloud the mind; particularly Prejudices of Interest--the true reason
   why they cloud the judgment.--Prejudices of Education and Custom. Their
   universal influence on wise, and learned, and rational, as well as
   other men; demonstrated from fact and experience--of their insensible
   influence, how it is insensible on great men.--How difficultly a people
   are got out of their old customs. In husbandry, how difficult to
   persuade that a new way is better.--Another prejudice is the general
   cry, and fashion, and vogue, of an age. Its exceeding strong influence,
   like a strong stream, that carries all that way. This influence on
   great men, Prejudices of People, in favour of individual great men, to
   the contempt of others.--Again, the voice of men in power, riches, or
   honourable place.--How some Churches would laugh at their ceremonies,
   if they were without them.--How a man's being rich, or in high place,
   gives great weight to his word.--How much more weighty a man's sayings
   are, after he becomes a Bishop, than before--another prejudice is from
   ridicule, or an high, strong, overbearing, contemptuous style.

   3. Either after or before this, to have a dissertation concerning the
   exceeding vanity, blindness, and weakness of the mind of man.--What
   poor fallible creatures men are. How every man is insensible of his
   own; thinks himself best.--Concerning the Pride of men; how ready to
   think they shall be great men, and to promise themselves great things.

   4. How some men have Strong Reason, but not Good Judgment.

   5. Concerning Certainty and Assurance. How many things that are
   demonstrations in themselves, are not demonstrations to men, and yet
   are strong arguments; no more demonstrations than a boy may have, that
   a cube of two inches may be cut into eight cubes of one inch, for want
   of proper clearness, and full comprehension of the ideas. How assurance
   is capable of infinite degrees.--How none have such a degree, but that
   it might be heightened--even of that, that two and two make four. It
   may be increased by a stronger sight, or a greater clearness of ideas.
   Minds of clearer and stronger sight may be more assured of it, than
   those of more obscure vision. There may be beings of a thousand times
   stronger sight than we are. How God's sight only is infinitely clear
   and strong. That which is demonstration at one time, may be only
   probable reasoning at another, by reason of different degrees of
   clearness and comprehension. It is almost impossible, that a long
   demonstration should beget so great assurance as a short one; because
   many ideas cannot be so clearly comprehended at one time, as a few. A
   very long demonstration may beget assurance, by a particular
   examination of each link of the chain, and so by recollection, that we
   were very careful and assured in the time of it; but this is less
   immediate, and less clear.

   6. Why it is proper for Orators and Preachers to move the
   Passions--needful to show earnestness, &c. how this tends to convince
   the judgment, and many other ways is good and absolutely necessary.

   7. Of the nature of the Affections or Passions--how only strong and
   lively exercises of the Will, together with the effect on the Animal
   nature.

   8. In treating oh Human Nature, treat first of Being in general, and
   show what in Human Nature, necessarily existing from the nature of
   Entity. And then, concerning Perceiving or Intelligent Beings, in
   particular, and show what arises from the nature of such. And then
   Animal Nature, and what from that.

   9. Concerning Enthusiasm, Inspiration, Grace, &c.

   10. Concerning a two-fold ground of Assurance of the Judgment--a
   reducing things to an Identity or Contradiction, as in Mathematical
   demonstrations,--and by a natural, invincible inclination to a
   connexion, as when we see any Effect to conclude a Cause--an opposition
   to believe a thing can begin without a Cause. This is not the same with
   the other, and cannot be reduced to a contradiction.

   11. Difference between Natural Appetites and Rational Desires.

   12. Whether any difference between the Will and Inclination. Imperate
   acts of the Will, nothing but the prevailing Inclination, concerning
   what should be done that moment. So hath God ordained that the motions
   of the Body should follow that.

   13. Concerning the Influence which Nearness, or Remoteness, of Time has
   in Determining the Will, and the Reason of it.

   14. Concerning Speculative Understanding, and Sense of Heart. Whether
   any difference between the Sense of the Heart, and the Will or
   Inclination. How the Scriptures are ignorant of the Philosophic
   distinction of the Understanding, and the Will; and how the Sense of
   the Heart is there called Knowledge, or Understanding.

   15. Of what nature are Ideas of what is Internal or Spiritual. How they
   are the same thing over again.

   16. Concerning Liberty, wherein it consists.

   17. Concerning the prime and proper foundation of Blame.

   18. How far men may be to blame for their Judgments; or for Believing,
   or Not Believing, this or that.

   19. Concerning great Prejudices from the ambiguous and equivocal use of
   Words--such as Liberty, Force, Power, &c. How from this many things
   seem to be, and are called, Natural Notions, that are not so.

   20. Concerning Beauty and Deformity, Love and Hatred, the nature of
   Excellency or Virtue, &c.

   21. Whether or no Self-Love be the ground of all Love.

   22. Concerning the Corruption of Man's Nature. How it comes to be
   corrupt. What is the positive cause of corruption.

   23. How greatly things lose their influence on the mind, through
   persons being used to them; as Miracles, and the Evidence of the Being
   of God, which we daily behold. The greatest Demonstrations--most plain
   and direct Proofs. Use makes things fail of their influence on the
   Understanding, so on the Will and Affections--things most satisfying
   and convincing--things otherwise most moving.

   24. Consider of what nature is that inward sensation, that a man has
   when he Almost thinks of a thing--a name or the like--when we say it is
   at our tongue's end.

   25. Concerning Moral Sense: what Moral Sense is Natural.

   26. How Natural men have a taste of, and Delight in, that External
   Beauty, that is a resemblance to Love.

   27. Sensitive Appetites: How far they consist in some Present Pain,
   attended with the idea of Ease, habitually connected, or associated,
   with the idea of such an object--Whether the sight of Food excites the
   appetite of one who is hungry, any other way.

   By what means persons come to long after a particular thing; either
   from an idea of Pleasure, or the Removal of Pain, associated.

   Not immediately after the Thing itself, but only the pleasure, or the
   removal of pain.

   28. Judgment. Wherein an Act of the judgment consists, or an Assent to
   a thing as true, or a Dissent from it as false. Show it to be different
   from mere Perception such as is in the mere presence of an idea in the
   mind: and so not the Perception of the Agreement and Disagreement of
   Ideas.

   29. Sensation. How far all acts of the mind are from Sensation. All
   ideas begin from thence; and there never can be any idea, thought, or
   act of the mind, unless the mind first received some ideas from
   Sensation, or some other way equivalent, wherein the mind is wholly
   passive in receiving them.

   30. Separate State. How far the Soul, in a Separate State, must depend
   on Sensation, or some way of passively receiving ideas equivalent to
   Sensation, in order to conversing with other minds, to the knowing of
   any occurrence, to beholding any of the works of God, and to its
   further improvement in knowledge.

   31. Sensation. Whether all ideas, wherein the mind is merely passive,
   and which are received immediately without any dependence on Reflexion,
   are not ideas of Sensation, or External ideas? Whether there be any
   difference between these? Whether it be possible for the Soul of man,
   in this manner, to be originally, and without dependence on Reflexion,
   capable of receiving any other ideas than those of sensation, or
   something equivalent, and so some external idea? And whether the first
   ideas of the angels, must not be of some such kind?

   32. Angels. Separate Spirits. How far the Angels and Separate Spirits,
   being in some respects in place, in the Third Heaven, where the body of
   Christ is; their removing from place to place; their coming down from
   Heaven, then ascending to Heaven; their being with Christ at the Day of
   Judgment; their seeing bodies; their beholding the Creation of the
   Material Universe; their having, in their ministry, to do with the
   bodies of men, with the body of Christ, and other material things; and
   their seeing God's works of Providence, relating to the Material
   Universe;--how far these things necessarily imply, that they have some
   kind of Sensations like ours; and, Whether these things do not show
   that, by some laws or other, they are united to some kind of Matter?

   33. Concerning the great Weakness and Fallibility of the Human Mind, in
   its present state.

   34. Concerning Beauty.

   35. How the Affections will suggest words, and expressions, and
   thoughts, and make eloquent.

   36. The manifest analogy between the Nature of the Human Soul and the
   Nature of other things. How Laws of nature take place alike. How it is
   Laws, that constitute all permanent being, in created things, both
   corporeal and spiritual.

   37. Wherein there is an agreement between Men and Beasts. How many
   things, in Men, are like instincts in Brutes.

   38. Whether the mind perceives more than One object at a time.

   39. How far the mind may perceive, without adverting to what it
   perceived; as in the winking of the eyelids, and many other like
   things.

   40. How far there may be Acts of the Will, without our adverting to it;
   as in walking, the act of the will for each individual step, and the
   like.

   41. The agreement between Objects of Sight, and Objects of Feeling; or
   Visible Magnitude and Figure, and Tangible Magnitude and Figure, as to
   Number and Proportion.

   42. How far Imagination is unavoidable, in all Thinking; and Why?

   43. Connexion of Ideas. Concerning the Laws by which Ideas follow each
   other, or call up one another, in which one thing comes into the mind
   after another, in the course of our thinking. How far this is owing to
   the Association of ideas; and how far, to any Relation of Cause and
   Effect, or any other Relation. And whether the whole may not be reduced
   to these following: Association of Ideas; Resemblance of some kind; and
   that Natural Disposition in us, when we see any thing being to be, to
   suppose it owing to a Cause.--Observe how these laws, by which one idea
   suggests and brings in another, are a kind of mutual attraction of
   ideas.--Concerning the importance, and necessity, of this mutual
   attraction and adhesion of ideas--how rarely our minds would serve us,
   if it were not for this. How the mind would be without ideas, except as
   suggested by the Senses. How far Reasoning, Contemplation, &c. depend
   on this.

   44. How far the Love of Happiness is the same with the Faculty of the
   Will? It is not distinct from the mere Capacity of enjoying and
   suffering, and the Faculty of the Will is no other.

   45. Whether it be possible for a man to love any thing better than
   himself; and in what sense it is so.

   46. Example. To inquire, What are the true reasons of so strong an
   inclination, in mankind, to follow Example. How great its influence
   over men, in their opinions, their judgment, their taste, and the whole
   man. How by this means, at certain times, a particular thing will come
   to be in great vogue, and men's passions will all, as it were, be moved
   at once, as the trees in the wood, by the same wind, or as things
   floating with the tide, the same way. Men follow one another like a
   flock of sheep. How sometimes the vogue lasts an age; at other times,
   but a short time; and the reason of this difference.

   47. In what respects men may be, and often are, ignorant of their own
   hearts; and how this comes to pass.

   48. Concerning the Soul's Union with the Body, its Laws, and
   Consequences.

   49. One section, particularly to show wherein Men differ from Beasts.

   50. In how many respects the very Being of Created things depends on
   Laws, or stated methods, fixed by God, of events following one another.

   51. Whether all the Immediate Objects of the mind are properly called
   Ideas; and what inconvenience and confusion arises from giving every
   Subjective Thought that name. What prejudices and mistakes it leads to.

   52. In what respects Ideas, or thoughts, and judgments, may be said to
   be Innate, and in what respects not.

   53. Whether there could have ever been any such thing as Thought,
   without External Ideas, immediately impressed by God, either according
   to some law, or otherwise. Whether any Spirit, or Angel, could have any
   Thought, if it had not been for this. Here particularly explain what I
   mean by External Ideas.

   54. How words came to have such a mighty influence on thought and
   judgment, by virtue of the Association of Ideas, or from Ideas being
   habitually tied to words.

   55. How far, through Habit, men move their bodies without thought or
   consciousness.

   56. Whether Beauty (Natural and Moral.) and the pleasure that arises
   from it, in ourselves or others, be not the only object of the Will; or
   whether Truth be not also the object of the Will. [103]

      THE MIND.

   [12.] Being. It seems strange sometimes to me, that there should be
   Being from all Eternity: and I am ready to say, What need was there
   that any thing should be? I should then ask myself, Whether it seems
   strange that there should be either Something, or Nothing? If so, it is
   not strange that there should BE; for that necessity of there being
   Something, or Nothing, implies it.

   [26.] Cause is that, after or upon the existence of which, or the
   existence of it after such a manner, the existence of another thing
   follows.

   [27.] Existence. If we had only the sense of Seeing, we should not be
   as ready to conclude the visible would to have been an existence
   independent of perception, as we do; because the ideas we have by the
   sense of Feeling, are as much mere ideas, as those we have by the sense
   of Seeing. But we know, that the things that are objects of this sense,
   all that the mind views by Seeing, are merely mental Existences;
   because all these things, with all their modes, do exist in a
   looking-glass, where all will acknowledge, they exist only mentally.

   It is now agreed upon by every knowing philosopher, that Colours are
   not really in the things, no more than pain is in a needle; but
   strictly no where else but in the mind. But yet I think that Colour may
   have an existence out of the mind, with equal reason as any thing in
   Body has any existence out of the mind, beside the very substance of
   the body itself, which is nothing but the Divine power, or rather the
   Constant Exertion of it. For what idea is that, which we call by the
   name of Body? I find Colour has the chief share in it. "Tis nothing but
   Colour, and Figure, which is the termination of this Colour, together
   with some powers, such as the power of resisting, and motion, &c. that
   wholly makes up what we call Body. And if that, which we principally
   mean by the thing itself, cannot be said to be in the thing itself, I
   think nothing can be. If Colour exists not out of the mind, then
   nothing belonging to Body exists out of the mind but Resistance, which
   is Solidity, and the termination of this Resistance, with its
   relations, which is Figure, and the communication of this Resistance,
   from space to space, which is Motion; though the latter are nothing but
   modes of the former. Therefore, there is nothing out of the mind but
   Resistance. And not that neither, when nothing is actually resisted.
   Then, there is nothing but the Power of Resistance. And as Resistance
   is nothing else but the actual exertion of God's power, so the Power
   can be nothing else, but the constant Law or Method of that actual
   exertion. And how is there any Resistance, except it be in some mind,
   in idea? What is it that is resisted? It is not Colour. And what else
   is it? It is ridiculous to say, that Resistance is resisted. That does
   not tell us at all what is to be resisted. There must be something
   resisted before there can be Resistance; but to say Resistance is
   resisted, is ridiculously to suppose Resistance, before there is any
   thing to be resisted. Let us suppose two globes only existing, and no
   mind. There is nothing there, ex confesso, but Resistance. That is,
   there is such a Law, that the space within the limits of a globular
   figure shall resist. Therefore, there is nothing there but a power, or
   an establishment. And if there be any Resistance really out of the
   mind, one power and establishment must resist another establishment and
   law of Resistance, which is exceedingly ridiculous. But yet it cannot
   be otherwise, if any way out of the mind. But now it is easy to
   conceive of Resistance, as a mode of an idea. It is easy to conceive of
   such a power, or constant manner of stopping or resisting a colour. The
   idea may be resisted, it may move, and stop, and rebound; but how a
   mear power, which is nothing real, can move and stop, in inconceivable,
   and it is impossible to say a word about it without contradiction. The
   world is therefore an ideal one; and the Law of creating, and the
   succession, of these ideas is constant and regular.

   [28.] Coroll. 1. How impossible is it that the world should exist from
   Eternity, without a Mind.

   [30.] Coroll. 2. Since it is so, and that absolute Nothing is such a
   dreadful contradiction; hence we learn the necessity of the Eternal
   Existence of an All-comprehending Mind; and that it is the complication
   of all contradictions to deny such a mind.

   [34.] When we say that the World, i.e. the material Universe, exists no
   where but in the mind, we have got to such a degree of strictness and
   abstraction, that we must be exceedingly careful, that we do not
   confound and lose ourselves by misapprehension. That is impossible,
   that it should be meant, that all the world is contained in the narrow
   compass of a few inches of space, in little ideas in the place of the
   brain; for that would be a contradiction; for we are to remember that
   the human body, and the brain itself, exist only mentally, in the same
   sense that other things do; and so that, which we call place, is an
   idea too. Therefore things are truly in those places; for what we mean,
   when we say so, is only, that this mode of our idea of place appertains
   to such an idea. We would not therefore be understood to deny, that
   things are where they seem to be. For the principles we lay down, if
   they are narrowly looked into, do not infer that. Nor will it be found,
   that they at all make void Natural Philosophy, or the science of the
   Causes or Reasons of corporeal changes; for to find out the reasons of
   things, in Natural Philosophy, is only to find out the proportion of
   God's acting. And the case is the same, as to such proportions, whether
   we suppose the World only mental, in our sense, or no.

   Though we suppose, that the existence of the whole material Universe is
   absolutely dependent on Idea, yet we may speak in the old way, and as
   properly and truly as ever. God, in the beginning, created such a
   certain number of Atoms, of such a determinate bulk and figure, which
   they yet maintain and always will, and gave them such a motion, of such
   a direction, and of such a degree of velocity: from whence arise all
   the Natural changes in the Universe, for ever, in a continued series.
   Yet, perhaps all this does not exist any where perfectly, but in the
   Divine Mind. But then, if it be inquired, What exists in the Divine
   Mind; and how these things exist there? I answer, There is his
   determination, his care, and his design, that Ideas shall be united for
   ever, just so, and in such a manner, as is agreeable to such a series.
   For instance, all the ideas that ever were, or ever shall be to all
   eternity, in any created mind, are answerable to the existence of such
   a peculiar Atom in the beginning of the Creation, of such a determinate
   figure and size, and have such a motion given it: That is, they are all
   such, as Infinite Wisdom sees would follow, according to the series of
   nature, from such an Atom, so moved. That is, all ideal changes of
   creatures are just so, as if just such a particular Atom had actually
   all along existed even in some finite mind, and never had been out of
   that mind, and had, in that mind, caused these effects, which are
   exactly according to nature, that is, according to the nature of other
   matter, that is actually perceived by the mind. God supposes its
   existence; that is, he causes all changes to arise, as if all these
   things had actually existed in such a series, in some created mind, and
   as if created minds had comprehended all things perfectly. And,
   although created minds do not; yet, the Divine Mind doth; and he orders
   all things according to his mind, and his ideas. And these hidden
   things do not only exist in the Divine idea, but in a sense in created
   idea; for that exists in created idea, which necessarily supposes it.
   If a ball of lead were supposed to be let fall from the clouds, and no
   eye saw it, till it got within ten rods of the ground, and then its
   motion and celerity was perfectly discerned in its exact proportion; if
   it were not for the imperfection and slowness of our minds, the perfect
   idea of the rest of the motion would immediately, and of itself, arise
   in the mind, as well as that which is there. So, were our thoughts
   comprehensive and perfect enough, our view of the present state of the
   world would excite in us a perfect idea of all past changes.

   And we need not perplex our minds with a thousand questions and doubts
   that will seem to arise: as, To what purpose is this way of exciting
   ideas? and, What advantage is there in observing such a series? I
   answer, It is just all one, as to any benefit or advantage, any end
   that we can suppose was proposed by the Creator, as if the Material
   Universe were existent in the same manner as is vulgarly thought. For
   the corporeal would is to no advantage but to the spiritual; and it is
   exactly the same advantage this way as the other, for it is all one, as
   to any thing excited in the mind.

   [51.] It is hardly proper to say, that the dependence of ideas of
   sensation upon the organs of the body, is only the dependence of some
   of our ideas upon others. For the organs of our bodies are not our
   ideas, in a proper sense, though their existence be only mental. Yet
   there is no necessity of their existing actually in our minds, but they
   exist mentally, in the same manner as has been explained. See above,
   No. 34. The dependence of our ideas upon the organs, is the dependence
   of our ideas on our bodies, after the manner there explained, mentally
   existing. And if it be inquired, To what purpose is this way of
   exciting ideas? I answer, To exactly the same purpose as can be
   supposed, if our organs are actually existing, in the manner vulgarly
   conceived, as to any manner of benefit, or end, that can be mentioned.

   It is not proper at all, nor doth it express the thing we would, to say
   that bodies do not exist without the mind. For the scheme will not
   allow the mind to be supposed determined to any place, in such a manner
   as to make that proper; for Place itself is mental, and Within and
   Without are mere mental conceptions. Therefore, that way of expressing,
   will lead us into a thousand difficulties and perplexities. But when I
   say the Material Universe exists only in the mind, I mean, that it is
   absolutely dependent on the conception of the mind for its existence,
   and does not exist as Spirits do, whose existence does not consist in,
   nor in dependence on, the conception of other minds. We must be
   exceedingly careful, lest we confound ourselves in these by mere
   imagination. It is from hence I expect the greatest opposition. It will
   appear a ridiculous thing, I suppose, that the material world exists no
   where, but in the soul of man, confined within his skull; but we must
   again remember what sort of existence the head and brain have.--The
   soul, in a sense, has its seat in the brain; and so, in a sense, the
   visible world is existent out of the mind, for it certainly, in the
   most proper sense, exists out of the brain.

   [36.] Things, as to God, exist from all Eternity, alike; that is, the
   idea is always the same, and after the same mode. The existence of
   things, therefore, that are not actually in created minds, consists
   only in Power, or in the Determination of God, that such and such ideas
   shall be raised in created minds, upon such conditions.

   [40.] Since all material existence is only idea, this question may be
   asked, In what sense may those things be said to exist, which are
   supposed, and yet are in no actual idea of any Created minds? I answer,
   they existed only in Uncreated idea. But how do they exist, otherwise
   than they did from all Eternity, for they always were in Uncreated idea
   and Divine appointment? I answer, They did exist from all Eternity in
   Uncreated idea, as did every thing else, and as they do at present, but
   not in Created idea. But it may be asked, How do those things exist,
   which have an actual existence, but of which no created mind is
   conscious?--For instance, the Furniture of this room, when we are
   absent, and the room is shut up, and no created mind perceives it; How
   do these things exist?--I answer, There has been in times past such a
   course and succession of existences, that these things must be supposed
   to make the series complete, according to Divine appointment, of the
   order of things. And there will be innumerable things consequential,
   which will be out of joint, out of their constituted series, without
   the supposition of these. For, upon the supposition of these things,
   are infinite numbers of things otherwise than they would be, if these
   were not by God thus supposed. Yea, the whole Universe would be
   otherwise; such an influence have these things, by their attraction and
   otherwise. Yea, there must be a universal attraction, in the whole
   system of things, from the beginning of the world to the end; and, to
   speak more strictly and metaphysically, we must say, in the whole
   system and series of ideas in all Created minds; so that these things
   must necessarily be put in, to make complete the system of the ideal
   world. That is, they must be supposed, if the train of ideas be, in the
   order and course, settled by the Supreme mind. So that we may answer in
   short. That the existence of these things is in God's supposing of
   them, in order to the rendering complete the series of things, (to
   speak more strictly, the series of ideas,) according to his own settled
   order, and that harmony of things, which he has appointed.--The
   supposition of God, which we speak of, is nothing else but God's
   acting, in the course and series of his exciting ideas, as if they (the
   things supposed) were in actual idea.

   But you may object, But there are many things so infinitely small, that
   their influence is altogether insensible; so that, whether they are
   supposed or not, there will no alteration be made in the series of
   Ideas. Answer, But though the influence is so small, that we do not
   perceive, yet, who knows how penetrating other spirits may be, to
   perceive the minutest alterations. And whether the alterations be
   sensible, or not, at present, yet the effect of the least influence
   will be sensible, in time. For instance, Let there be supposed to be a
   Leaden Globe, of a mile in diameter, to be moving in a right line, with
   the swiftness of a cannon ball, in the Infinite Void, and let it pass
   by a very small Atom, supposed to be at rest. This Atom will somewhat
   retard this Leaden Globe in its motion, though at first, and perhaps
   for many ages, the difference is altogether insensible. But let it be
   never so little, in time it will become very sensible. For if the
   motion is made so much slower, that in a million of years it shall have
   moved one inch less than it would have done otherwise, in a million
   million it will have moved a million inches less. So now the least
   Atom, by its existence or motion, causes an alteration, more or less,
   in every other Atom in the Universe; so the alteration in time will
   become very sensible; so the whole Universe, in time, will become all
   over different from what it would otherwise have been. For if every
   other Atom is supposed to be either retarded, or accelerated, or
   diverted; every Atom, however small for the present, will cause great
   alterations, as we have shown already, of Retardation. The case is the
   same as to Acceleration; and so as to Diversion, or varying the
   direction of the motion. For let the course of the body be never so
   little changed, this course, in time, may carry it to a place immensely
   distant from what the other would have carried it to, as is evident
   enough. And the case is the same still, if the motion that before was
   never so slow is wholly stopped; the difference in time will be
   immense; for this slow motion would have carried it to an immense
   distance, if it were continued.

   But the Objector will say, I acknowledge it would be thus, if the
   bodies, in which these insensible alterations are made, were free, and
   alone, in an Infinite Void; but I do not know but the case may be far
   otherwise, when an insensible alteration is made in a body, that is
   among innumerable others, and subject to infinite jumbles among
   them.--Answer. The case is the same, whether the bodies be alone in a
   Void, or in a System of other bodies; for the influence of this
   insensible alteration continues as steadily for ever, through all its
   various interchanges and collisions with other bodies, as it would if
   it were alone in an Infinite Void: so that in time, a particle of
   matter, that shall be on this side of the Universe, might have been on
   the other. The existence and motion of every Atom, has influence, more
   or less, on the motion of all other bodies in the Universe, great or
   small, as is most demonstrable from the Laws of Gravity and Motion. An
   alteration, more or less, as to motion, is made on every Fixed Star,
   and on all its Planets, Primary and Secondary. Let the alteration made
   in the Fixed Stars be never so small, yet in time it will make an
   infinite alteration, from what otherwise would have been. Let the Fixed
   Stars be supposed, for instance, before to have been in perfect rest;
   let them now be all set in motion, and this motion be never so small,
   yet, continued for ever, where will it carry those immense bodies, with
   their Systems. Let a little alteration be made in the motion of the
   Planets, either Retardation or Acceleration; this, in time, will make a
   difference of many millions of Revolutions: and how great a difference
   will that make in the floating bodies of the Universe.

   Coroll. By this we may answer a more difficult question, viz. If
   material existence be only mental, than our bodies and organs are ideas
   only; and then in what sense is it true, that the Mind receives Ideas
   by the Organs of Sense; seeing that the Organs of Sense, themselves,
   exist no where but in the Mind?--Answer. Seeing our Organs, themselves,
   are ideas; the connexion, that our ideas have with such and such a mode
   of our Organs, is no other than God's constitution, that some of our
   ideas shall be connected with others, according to such a settled Law
   and Order, so that some ideas shall follow from others as their
   cause.--But how can this be, seeing that ideas most commonly arise from
   Organs, when we have no idea of the mode of Organs, or the manner of
   external objects being applied to them? I answer, Our Organs, and the
   motions in them and to them, exist in the manner explained above.

   "Plato, in his Subterranean Cave,' so famously known, and so elegantly
   described by him, supposes men tied with their backs towards the Light,
   placed at a great distance from them, so that they could not turn about
   their heads to it neither, and therefore could see nothing but the
   shadows of certain substances behind them, projected from it; which
   shadows they concluded to be the only substance and realities. And when
   they heard of sounds made by those bodies, that were betwixt the Light
   and them, or their reverberated echoes, they imputed them to those
   shadows which they say. All this is a description of the state of those
   men, who take Body to be the only Real and Substantial Thing in the
   world, and to do all that is done in it; and therefore often impute
   Sense, Reason, and Understanding, to nothing but Blood and Brains in
   us."

      CUDWORTH'S INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM.

   [9.] Space. Space, as has been already observed, is a necessary being,
   if it may be called a being; and yet we have also shown, that all
   existence is mental, that the existence of all exterior things is
   ideal. Therefore it is a necessary being, only as it is a necessary
   idea, so far as it is simple idea, that is necessarily connected with
   other simple exterior ideas, and is, as it were, their common substance
   or subject. It is in the same manner a necessary being, as any thing
   external is a being.

   Coroll. It is hence easy to see in what sense that is true, that has
   been held by some, That, when there is nothing between any two bodies,
   they unavoidably must touch.

   [13.] The real and necessary existence of Space, and its Infinity, even
   beyond the Universe, depend upon a like reasoning as the Extension of
   Spirits, and to the supposition of the reality of the existence of a
   Successive Duration, before the Universe: even the impossibility of
   removing the idea out of the mind. If it be asked, If there be Limits
   of the Creation, whether or no it be not possible that an Intelligent
   being shall be removed beyond the limits; and then whether or no there
   would not be distance between that Intelligent being and the limits of
   the Universe, in the same manner, and as properly, as there is between
   Intelligent beings and the parts of the Universe, within its limits; I
   answer, I cannot tell what the Law of Nature, or the Constitution of
   God, would be in this case.

   Coroll. There is, therefore, no difficulty in answering such questions
   as these, What cause was there why the Universe was placed in such a
   part of Space? and, Why was the Universe created at such a Time? for,
   if there be no Space beyond the Universe, it was impossible that it
   should be created in another place; and if there was no Time before, it
   was impossible it should be created at another time.

   The idea we have of Space, and what we call by that name, is only
   Coloured Space, and is entirely taken out of the mind, if Colour be
   taken away. And so all that we call Extension, Motion, and Figure, is
   gone, if Colour is gone. As to any idea of Space, Extension, Distance,
   or Motion, that a man born blind might form, it would be nothing like
   what we call by those names. All that he could have would be only
   certain sensations or feelings, that in themselves would be no more
   like what we intend by Space, Motion, &c. than the pain we have by the
   scratch of a pin, or that the ideas of taste and smell. And as to the
   idea of Motion, that such a one could have, it could be only a
   diversification of those successions in a certain way, by succession as
   to time. And then there would be an agreement of these successions of
   sensations, with some ideas we have by sight, as to number and
   proportions; but yet the ideas, after all, nothing akin to that idea we
   now give this name to.--And, as it is very plain, Colour is only in the
   mind, and nothing like it can be out of all mind. Hence it is manifest,
   there can be nothing like those things we call by the name of Bodies,
   out of the mind, unless it be in some other mind or minds.

   And, indeed, the secret lies here: That, which truly is the Substance
   of all Bodies, is the infinitely exact, and precise, and perfectly
   stable Idea, in God's mind, together with his stable Will, that the
   same shall gradually be communicated to us, and to other minds,
   according to certain fixed and exact established Methods and Laws: or
   in somewhat different language, the infinitely exact and precise Divine
   Idea, together with an answerable, perfectly exact, precise, and stable
   Will, with respect to correspondent communications to Created Minds,
   and effects on their minds.

   [61.] Substance. [104] It is intuitively certain, that , if Solidity be
   removed from Body, nothing is left but empty space. Now, in all things
   whatsoever, that which cannot be removed without removing the whole
   thing, that thing which is removed is the thing itself, except it be
   mere circumstance and manner of existence, such as Time and Place;
   which are in the general necessary, because it implies a contradiction
   to existence itself, to suppose that it exists at no time and in no
   place, and therefore in order to remove time and place in the general,
   we must remove the thing itself: So if we remove Figure and Bulk and
   Texture, in the general; which may be reduced to that necessary
   circumstance of Place.

   If, therefore, it implies a contradiction to suppose that body, or any
   thing appertaining to Body, beside Space, exists, when Solidity is
   removed; it must be, either because Body is nothing but Solidity and
   Space, or else, that Solidity is such a mere circumstance and relation
   of existence, which the thing cannot be without, because whatever
   exists must exist in some circumstances or other, as at some time or
   some place. But we know, and every one perceives, it to be a
   contradiction to suppose, that Body or Matter exists without Solidity,
   for all the notion we have of Empty Space, is Space without Solidity,
   and all the notion we have of Full Space, is Space Resisting.

   The reason is plain; for if it implies a contradiction to suppose
   Solidity absent, and the thing existing, it must be because Solidity is
   that thing, and so it is a contradiction to say the thing is absent
   from itself; or because it is such a mode, or circumstances, or
   relation, of the existence, as it is a contradiction to suppose
   existence at all without it, such as Time and Place, to which both
   Figure and Texture are reduced. For nothing can be conceived of so
   necessarily in an existence, that it is a contradiction to suppose it
   without it, but the Existence itself, and those general Circumstances
   or Relations of existence, which the very supposition of existence
   itself implies.

   Again, Solidity or Impenetrability is as much Action, or the immediate
   result of Action, as Gravity. Gravity by all will be confessed to be
   immediately from some active influence. Being a continual tendency in
   bodies to move, and being that, which will set them in motion though
   before at perfect rest, it must be the effect of something acting on
   that body. And it is as clear and evident, that action is as requisite
   to stop a body, that is already in motion, as in order to set bodies a
   moving, that are at perfect rest. Now we see continually, that there is
   a stopping of all motion, at the limits of such and such parts of
   Space, only this stoppage is modified and diversified according to
   certain Laws; for we get the idea and apprehension of Solidity, only
   and entirely, from the observation we make of that ceasing of motion,
   at the limits of some parts of Space, that already is, and that
   beginning of motion, that till now was not, according to a certain
   constant manner.

   And why is it not every whit as reasonable, that we should attribute
   this action, or effect, to the influence of some Agent, as that other
   action or effect which we call Gravity which is likewise derived from
   our observation of the beginning and ceasing of motion, according to a
   certain method? In either case, there is nothing observed, but the
   beginning, increasing, directing, diminishing, and ceasing of motion.
   And why is it not as reasonable to seek a reason, beside that general
   one, that it is something; which is no reason at all? I say, Why is it
   not as reasonable to seek a reason or cause of these actions, as will
   in one as in the other case? We do not think it sufficient to say, It
   is the nature of the unknown substance, in the one case; and why should
   we think it a sufficient explication of the same actions or effects, in
   the other. By Substance, I suppose it is confessed, we mean only
   Something; because of Abstract Substance we have no idea, that is more
   particular than only existence in general. Now why is it not as
   reasonable, when we see something suspended in the air, set to move
   with violence towards the Earth, to rest in attributing of it to the
   nature of the something that is there; as when we see that motion, when
   it comes to such limits, all on a sudden cease, for this is all that we
   observe in falling bodies. Their falling is the action we call Gravity:
   their stopping upon the surface of the Earth, the action whence we gain
   the idea of Solidity. It was before agreed on all hands, that there is
   something there, that supports that resistance. It must be granted now,
   that that Something is a Being, that acts there, as much as that Being,
   that causes bodies to descent towards the centre. Here is something in
   these parts of space, that of itself produces effects, without
   previously being acted upon; for that Being that lays an arrest on
   bodies in motion, and immediately stops them when they come to such
   limits and bounds, certainly does as much, as that Being that sets a
   body in motion, that before was at rest. Now this Being, acting
   altogether of itself, producing new effects, that are perfectly
   arbitrary, and that are no way necessary of themselves; must be
   Intelligent and Voluntary. There is no reason, in the nature of the
   thing itself, why a body, when set in motion, should stop at such
   limits, more than at any other. It must therefore be some arbitrary,
   active, and voluntary Being, that determines it. If there were but one
   body in the Universe, that always in time past had been at rest, and
   should now, without any alteration, be set i motion; we might certainly
   conclude, that some voluntary Being set it in motion, because it can
   certainly be demonstrated, that it can be for no other reason. So with
   just the same reason, in the same manner, we may conclude, if the body
   had hitherto been in motion, and is at a certain point of space now
   stopped. And would it not be every whit as reasonable to conclude, it
   must be from such an Agent, as if, in certain portions of space, we
   observed bodies to be attracted a certain way, and so at once to be set
   into motion, or accelerated in motion. And it is not at all the less
   remarkable, because we receive the ideas of light and colours from
   those spaces; for we know that light and colours are not there, and are
   made entirely by such a resistance, together with attraction, that is
   antecedent to these qualities, and would be a necessary effect of a
   mere resistance of space without other substance.

   The whole of what we any way observe, whereby we get the idea of
   Solidity, or Solid Body, are certain parts of Space, from whence we
   receive the ideas of light and colours; and certain sensations by the
   sense of feeling; and we observe that the places, whence we receive
   these sensations, are not constantly the same, but are successively
   different and this light and colours are communicated from one part of
   space to another. And we observe that these parts of Space, from whence
   we receive these sensations, resist and stop other bodies, which we
   observe communicated successively through the parts of Space adjacent;
   and that those that there were before at rest, or existing constantly
   in one and the same part of Space, after this exist successively in
   different parts of Space, and these observations are according to
   certain stated rules. I appeal to any one that takes notice and asks
   himself, whether his be not all that ever be experienced in the world,
   whereby he got these ideas; and that this is all that we have or can
   have any idea of, in relation to bodies. All that we observe of
   Solidity is, that certain parts of Space, from whence we receive the
   ideas of light and colours, and a few other sensations, do likewise
   resist any thing coming within them. It therefore follows, that if we
   suppose there be any thing else, than what we thus observe, it is but
   only by way of Inference.

   I know that it is nothing but the Imagination will oppose me in this: I
   will therefore endeavour to help the Imagination thus. Suppose that we
   receive none of the sensible qualities of light, colours, &c. from the
   resisting parts of Space, (we will suppose it possible for resistance
   to be without them,) and they were, to appearance, clear and pure; and
   all that we could possibly observe, was only and merely Resistance; we
   simply observed that Motion was resisted and stopped, here and there,
   in particular parts of Infinite Space. Should we not then think it less
   unreasonable to suppose, that such effects should be produced by some
   Agent, present in those parts of Space, though Invisible. If we, when
   walking upon the face of the Earth, were stopped at certain limits, and
   could not possible enter into such a part of Space, nor make any body
   enter into it; and we could observe no other difference, no way, nor at
   any time, between that and other parts of clear space: should we not be
   ready to say, What is it stops us? What is it hinders all entrance into
   that place?

   The reason why it is so exceedingly natural to men to suppose that
   there is some Latent Substance, or Something that is altogether hid,
   that upholds the properties of bodies, is, because all see at first
   sight, that the properties of bodies are such as need some Cause, that
   shall every moment have influence to their continuance, as well as a
   Cause of their first existence. All therefore agree, that there is
   Something that is there, and upholds these properties. And it is most
   true, there undoubtedly is; but men are wont to content themselves in
   saying merely, that it is Something; but that Something is He "by whom
   all things consist."

   [25.] The distribution of the objects of our thoughts, into Substances
   and Modes, may be proper; if, by Substance, we understand, a complexion
   of such ideas, which we conceive of as subsisting together, and by
   themselves; and, by Modes, those simple ideas which cannot be by
   themselves, or subsist in our mind alone.

   [38.] Body infinite? If we dispute, whether Body is capable of being
   Infinite; let us in the first place put the question, Whether motion
   can be infinite; that is, Whether there can be a motion infinitely
   swift. I suppose that every one will see, that, if a body moved with
   infinite swiftness, it would be in every part of the distance passed
   through exactly at once, and therefore it could not be said to move
   from one part of it to another. Infinite motion is therefore a
   contradiction. Supposing therefore a Body were infinitely great, it
   could doubtless be moved by Infinite Power, and turned round some point
   or axis. But if that were possible, it is evident that some part of
   that Infinite Body would move with Infinite Swiftness; which we have
   seen is a contradiction. Body therefore cannot be infinite.

   [21.] Matter thought. It has been a question with some, Whether or no
   it was not possible with God, to the other properties or powers of
   Matter to add that of Thought; whether he could not, if he had pleased,
   have added Thinking, and the power of Perception, to those other
   properties of Solidity, Mobility, and Gravitation. The question is not
   here, Whether the Matter that now is, without the addition of any new
   primary property, could not be so contrived and modelled, so
   attenuated, wrought, and moved, as to produce thought: but, whether any
   Lump of matter, a solid Atom, for instance, is not capable of
   receiving, by the Almighty Power of God, in addition to the rest of its
   powers, a new power of thought.

   Here, if the question be, Whether or no God cannot cause the faculty of
   thinking to be so added to any parcel of matter, so as to be in the
   same place, (if thought can be in place,) and that inseparably, where
   that matter is, so that by a fixed law, that thought should be where
   that matter is, and only there, being always bound to solid extension,
   mobility, and gravity; I do not deny it. But that seems to me quite a
   different thing from the question, Whether Matter can think; or,
   Whether God can make Matter think; and is not worth the disputing. For
   if Thought be in the same place where Matter is, yet, if there be no
   manner of communication, or dependence, between that and any thing that
   is material; that is, any of that collection of properties that we call
   Matter; if none of those properties of Solidity, Extension, &c. wherein
   Materiality consists;--which are Matter or, at least whereby Matter is
   Matter;--have any manner of influence towards the exerting of Thought;
   and if that Thought be no way dependent on Solidity or Mobility, and
   they no way help the matter, but Thought could be as well without those
   properties; then Thought is not properly in Matter, though it be in the
   same place. All the properties, that are properly said to be in Matter,
   depend on the other properties of Matter, so that they cannot be
   without them. Thus Figure is in Matter: it depends on Solidity and
   Extension; and so doth Motion; so doth Gravity; and Extension itself
   depends on Solidity, in that it is the extension of the Solidity; and
   Solidity on Extension, for nothing can be solid except it be extended.
   These ideas have a dependence on one another; but there is no manner of
   connexion between the ideas of Perception and Solidity, or Motion, or
   Gravity. They are simple ideas, of which we can have a perfect view;
   and we know there is no dependence. Nor can there be any dependence,
   for the ideas in their own nature are independent and alien one to
   another. All the others either include the rest, or are included in
   them: and, except the the property of Thought be included in the
   properties of Matter, I think it cannot properly be said, that Matter
   has Thought, or if it can, I see not a possibility of Matter, in any
   other sense, having Thought.--If Thought's being so fixed to Matter, as
   to be in the same place where Matter is, be for Thought to be in
   Matter; Thought not only can be in Matter, but actually is, as much as
   Thought can be, in place. It is so connected with the Bodies of men,
   or, at least, with some parts of their bodies, and will be for ever
   after the Resurrection.

   [65.] Motion. If Motion be only mental, it seems to follow that there
   is no difference between Real and Apparent motion, or that Motion is
   nothing else but the change of position between bodies; and then of two
   bodies that have their position changed, Motion may with equal reason
   be ascribed to either of them, and the Sun may as properly be said to
   move as the Earth. And then returns this difficulty. If it be so, how
   comes it to pass that the Laws of Centrifugal Force are observed to
   take place, with respect to the Earth, considered as moving round the
   Sun, but not with respect to the Sun, considered as moving round the
   Earth?--I answer, it would be impossible it should be so, and the Laws
   of gravitation be observed. The Earth cannot be kept at a distance from
   a body, so strongly attracting it as the Sun, any other way than by
   such a motion as is supposed. That body therefore must be reputed to
   move, that can be supposed so to do, according to the Laws of Nature
   universally observed in other things. It is upon them that God
   impresses that Centrifugal Force.

   n.b. This answers the objection that might be raised from what Newton
   says of Absolute, and Relative, Motion, and that distinguishing
   property of absolute Circular Motion, that there was a Centrifugal
   Force in the body moved; for God causes a Centrifugal Force in that
   body, that can be supposed to move circularly, consistently with the
   Laws of Motion, in that and in all other things, on which it has a
   near, or a remote, dependence, and which must be supposed to move in
   order to the observance of those Laws in the Universe. For instance,
   when a bushel, with water in it, is violently whirled round, before the
   water takes the impression, there is a continual change of position
   between the water and the parts of the bushel; but yet that must not be
   supposed to move as fast as that position is altered; because if we
   follow it, it will not hold out consistent with the Laws of motion in
   the Universe, for if the Water moves, then the bushel does not move;
   and if the Bushel does not move, then the Earth moves round the bushel,
   every time that seems to turn round; but there can be no such
   alteration in the motion of the Earth created naturally, or in
   observance of the Laws of Nature.

   [2.] Place of minds. Our common way of conceiving of what is Spiritual,
   is very gross, and shadowy, and corporeal, with dimensions and figure,
   &c. though it be supposed to be very clear, so that we can see through
   it. If we would get a right notion of what is Spiritual, we must think
   of Thought, or Inclination, or Delight. How large is that thing in the
   Mind which they call Thought? Is Love square, or round? Is the surface
   of Hatred rough, or smooth? Is Joy an inch, or a foot, in diameter?
   These are Spiritual things, and why should we then form such a
   ridiculous idea of Spirits, as to think them so long, so thick, or so
   wide; or to think there is a necessity of their being square, or round,
   or some other certain figure?

   Therefore Spirits cannot be in place, in such a sense, that all, within
   the given limits, shall be where the Spirit is, and all without such a
   circumscription, where he is not; but in this sense only, that all
   created Spirits have clearer and more strongly impressed ideas of
   things, in one place than in another, or can produce effects here, and
   not there; and as this place alters, so Spirits move. In Spirits united
   to bodies, the Spirit more strongly perceives things where the body is,
   and can there immediately produce effects; and in this sense the soul
   can be said to be in the same place where the body is. And this law is,
   that we call the Union between soul and body. So the soul may be said
   to be in the brain; because ideas, that come by the body, immediately
   ensue, only on alterations that are made there; and the soul most
   immediately produces effects no where else.

   No doubt that all Finite Spirits, united to bodies or not, are thus in
   place; that is, that they perceive, or passively receive, ideas, only
   of created things, that are in some particular place at a given time.
   At least a Finite Spirit cannot thus be in all places at a time,
   equally. And doubtless the change of the place, where they perceive
   most strongly and produce effects immediately, is regular and
   successive; which is the motion of Spirits.

   [31.] From what is said above, we learn, that the seat of the Soul is
   not in the Brain, any otherwise, than as to its immediate operations,
   and the immediate operation of things on it. The Soul may also be said
   to be in the Heart, or the Affections, for its immediate operations are
   there also. Hence we learn the propriety of the Scriptures calling the
   soul, the Heart, when considered with respect to the Will and the
   Affections.

   We seem to think in our heads, because most of the ideas, of which our
   thoughts are constituted, or about which they are conversant, come by
   the sensories that are in the head, especially the sight and hearing,
   or those ideas of Reflection, that arise from hence; and partly because
   we feel the effects of thought and study in our head.

   [35.]Seeing the Brain exists only mentally, I therefore acknowledge,
   that I speak improperly, when I say, the Soul is in the Brain, only as
   to its operations. For, to speak yet more strictly and abstractly, tis
   nothing but the connexion of the operations of the Soul with these, and
   those modes of its own ideas, or those mental acts of the Deity; seeing
   the Brain exists only in idea. But we have got so far beyond those
   things for which language was chiefly contrived, that unless we use
   extreme caution, we cannot speak, except we speak exceeding
   unintelligibly, without literally contradicting ourselves.--

   Coroll. No wonder, therefore, that the high and abstract mysteries of
   the Deity, the prime and most abstract of all beings, imply so many
   seeming contradictions.

   [32.] Seeing Human Souls and Finite Spirits are said to be in this
   place or that, only because they are so as to mutual communications; it
   follows that the Scripture, when it speaks of God being in heaven, of
   his dwelling in Israel, of his dwelling in the hearts of his people,
   does not speak so improperly as has been thought.

   [4.] Union of mind with body. The Mind is so united with the Body, that
   an alteration is caused in the Body, it is probable, by every action of
   the Mind. By those acts that are very vigorous, a great alteration is
   very sensible; at some times, when the vigor of the body is impaired by
   disease, especially in the head, almost every action causes a sensible
   alteration of the Body.

   [3.] Perception of separate minds. Our perceptions, or ideas that we
   passively receive by our bodies, are communicated to us immediately by
   God, while our minds are united with our bodies; but only we in some
   measure know the rule. We know that, upon such alterations in our
   minds, there follow such ideas in the mind. It need, therefore, be no
   difficulty with us, how we shall perceive things when we are Separate.
   They will be communicated then, also, and according to some rule, no
   doubt, only we know not what.

   [68.] Reason. A person may have a strong Reason and yet not a good
   Reason. He may have a strength of mind to drive an argument, and yet
   not have even balances. It is not so much from a defect of the
   reasoning powers, as from a fault of the disposition. When men of
   strong Reason do not form an even and just judgment, tis for one of
   these two reasons: either a liableness to Prejudice, through natural
   temper, or education, or circumstances; or, for want of a great love to
   Truth, and of fear of Error, that shall cause a watchful
   circumspection, that nothing, relative to the case in question of any
   weight, shall escape the observation and just estimation, to
   distinguish with great exactness between what is real and solid, and
   what is only colour, and shadow, and words.

   Persons of mean capacities may see the Reason of that, which requires a
   nice and exact attention, and a long discourse, to explain--as the
   reason why Thunder should be so much feared; and many other things that
   might be mentioned.

   [16.] Consciousness is the minds' perceiving what is in itself,--ideas,
   actions, passions, and every thing that is there perceptible. It is a
   sort of feeling within itself. The mind feels when it thinks; so it
   feels when it discerns, feels when it loves, and feels when it hates.

   [69.] Memory is the identity, in some degree, of Ideas that we formerly
   had in our minds, with a consciousness that we formerly had them, and a
   supposition that their former being in the mind is the cause of their
   being in us at present. There is not only the presence of the same
   ideas, that were in our minds formerly, but also, an act of the
   judgment, that they were there formerly, and that judgment, not
   properly from proof, but from natural necessity, arising from a Law of
   nature which God hath fixed.

   In Memory, in mental principles, habits, and inclinations, there is
   something really abiding in the mind, when there are no acts or
   exercises of them: much in the same manner, as there is a chair in this
   room, when no mortal perceives it. For when we say, There are chairs in
   this room, when none perceives it, we mean, that minds would perceive
   chairs here, according to the Law of Nature in such circumstances. So
   when we say, A person has these and those things, laid up in his
   memory, we mean, they would actually be repeated in his mind, upon some
   certain occasions, according to the Law of Nature; though we cannot
   describe, particularly, the Law of Nature about these mental acts, so
   well as we can about other things.

   [11.] Personal identity. Well might Mr. Locke say, that Identity of
   person consisted in identity of consciousness; for he might have said
   that identity of spirit, too, consisted in the same consciousness; for
   a mind or spirit is nothing else but consciousness, and what is
   included in it. The same consciousness is, to all intents and purposes,
   individually, the very same spirit, or substance; as much as the same
   particle of matter can be the same with itself, at different times.

   [72.] Identity of person is what seems never yet to have been
   explained. It is a mistake, that it consists in sameness, or identity,
   of consciousness--if, by sameness of consciousness, be meant, having
   the same ideas hereafter, that I have now, with a notion or
   apprehension that I had had them before; just in the same manner as I
   now have the same ideas, that I had in time past, by memory. It is
   possible, without doubt, in the nature of things, for God to annihilate
   me, and after my annihilation to create another being that shall have
   the same ideas in his mind that I have, and with the like apprehension
   that he had had them before, in like manner as a person has by memory;
   and yet I be in no way concerned in it, having no reason to fear what
   that being shall suffer, or to hope for what he shall enjoy.--Can any
   one deny, that it is possible, after my annihilation, to create two
   beings in the Universe, both of them having my ideas communicated to
   them, with such a notion of their having had them before, after them
   manner of memory, and yet be ignorant one of another; and, in such
   case, will any one say, that both these are one and the same person, as
   they must be, if they are both the same person with me. It is possible
   there may be two such beings, each having all the ideas that are now in
   my mind, in the same manner that I should have by memory, if my own
   being were continued; and yet these two beings not only be ignorant one
   of another, but also be in a very different state, one in a state of
   enjoyment and pleasure, and the other in a state of great suffering and
   torment. Yea, there seems to be nothing of impossibility in the Nature
   of things, but that the Most High could, if he saw fit, cause there to
   be another being, who should begin to exist in some distant part of the
   Universe, with the same ideas I now have, after the manner of memory:
   and should henceforward co-exist with me; we both retaining a
   consciousness of what was before the moment of his first existence, in
   like manner; but thenceforward should have a different train if ideas.
   Will any one say, that he, in such a case, is the same person with me,
   when I know nothing of his sufferings, and am never the better for his
   joys.

   [29.] Power. We have explained a Cause to be that, after, or upon, the
   Existence of which, or its Existence is such a manner, the existence of
   another thing follows. The Connexion between these two existences, or
   between the Cause and Effect, is what we call Power. Thus the Sun,
   above the Horizon, enlightens the Atmosphere. So we say the Sun has
   power to enlighten the Atmosphere. That is, there is such a connexion
   between the Sun, being above the Horizon, after such a manner, and the
   Atmosphere being enlightened, that one always follows the other. So the
   Sun has power to melt wax: That is, the Sun and wax so existing, the
   melting of the wax follows. There is a connexion between one and the
   other. So Man has power to do this or that: That is, if he exists after
   such a manner, there follows the existence of another thing: if he
   wills this or that, it will be so. God has power to do all things,
   because there is nothing but what follows upon his willing of it. When
   Intelligent beings are said to have power to do this or that; by it is
   meant, the Connexion between this or that, upon this manner of their
   existing, their willing: in which sense they have power to do many
   things that they never shall will.

   Coroll. Hence it follows, that men, in a very proper sense, may be said
   to have power to abstain from sin, and to repent, to do good works and
   to live holily; because it depends on their Will.

   [59.] Judgment. The mind passes a judgment, in multitudes of cases,
   where it has learned to judge by perpetual experience, not only
   exceedingly quick, as soon as one thought can follow another, but
   absolutely without any reflection at all, and at the same moment,
   without any time intervening. Though the thing is not properly
   self-evident, yet it judges without any ratiocination, merely by force
   of habit. Thus, when I hear such and such sounds, or see such letters,
   I judge that such things are signified without reasoning. When I have
   such ideas coming in by my sense of seeing, appearing after such a
   manner, I judge without any reasoning, that the things are further off,
   than others that appear after such a manner. When I see a globe, I
   judge it to be a globe, though the image impressed on my sensory is
   only that of a flat circle, appearing variously in various parts. And
   in ten thousand other cases, the ideas are habitually associated
   together, and they come into the mind together.--So likewise, in
   innumerable cases, men act without any proper act of the Will at that
   time commanding, through habit. As when a man is walking, there is not
   a new act of the Will every time a man takes up his foot and sets it
   down.

   Coroll. Hence there is no necessity of allowing reason to Beasts, in
   many of those actions, that many are ready to argue are rational
   actions. As cattle in a team are wont to act as the driver would have
   them, upon his making such and such sounds, either to stop or go along,
   or turn hither or thither, because they have been forced to do it, by
   the whip, upon the using of such words. It is become habitual, so that
   they never do it rationally, but either from force or from habit. So of
   all the actions that beasts are taught to perform, dogs, and horses,
   and parrots, &c. And those, that they learn of themselves to do, are
   merely by virtue of appetite and habitual association of ideas. Thus a
   horse learns to perform such actions for his food, because he has
   accidentally had the perceptions of such actions, associated with the
   pleasant perceptions of taste: and so his appetite makes him perform
   the action, without any reason or judgment.

   The main difference between Men and Beasts is, that Men are capable of
   reflecting upon what passes in their own minds. Beasts have nothing but
   direct consciousness. Men are capable of viewing what is in themselves,
   contemplatively. Man was made for spiritual exercises and enjoyments,
   and therefore is made capable, by reflection, to behold and contemplate
   spiritual things. Hence it arises that Man is capable of Religion.

   A very great difference between Men and Beasts is, that Beasts have no
   voluntary actions about their own thoughts; for it is in this only,
   that reasoning differs from mere perception and memory. It is the act
   of the Will, in bringing its ideas into Contemplation, and ranging and
   comparing of them in Reflection and Abstraction. The minds of Beasts,
   if I may call them minds, are purely passive with respect to all their
   ideas. The minds of Men are not only passive, but abundantly active.
   Herein probably is the most distinguishing difference between Men and
   Beasts. Herein is the difference between Intellectual, or Rational,
   Will, and mere Animal Appetite, that the latter is a simple Inclination
   to, or Aversion from, such and such Sensations, which are the only
   ideal that they are capable of, that are not active about their ideas:
   for former is a Will that is active about its own ideas, in disposing
   of them among themselves, or Appetite towards those ideas that are
   acquired by such action.

   The Association of ideas in Beasts, seems to be much quicker and
   stronger than in Men: at least in many of them.

   It would not suppose any exalted faculty in Beasts, to suppose that
   like ideas in them, if they have any, excite one another. Nor can I
   think why it should be so any the less for the weakness and narrowness
   of their faculties; in such things, where to perceive the argument of
   ideas, requires neither attention nor comprehension. And experience
   teaches us, that what we call thought in them, is thus led from one
   thing to another.

   [17.] Logic. One reason why, at first, before I knew other Logic, I
   used to be mightily pleased with the study of the Old Logic, was,
   because it was very pleasant to see my thoughts, that before lay in my
   mind jumbled without any distinction, ranged into order and distributed
   into classes and subdivisions, so that I could tell where they all
   belonged, and run them up to their general heads. For this Logic
   consisted much in Distributions and Definitions; and their maxims gave
   occasion to observe new and strange dependencies of ideas, and a
   seeming agreement of multitudes of them in the same thing, that I never
   observed before.

   [66.] Ideas. All sorts of ideas of things are but the repetitions of
   those very things over again--as well the ideas of colours, figures,
   solidity, tastes, and smells, as the ideas of thought and mental acts.

   [67.] Love is not properly said to be an idea, any more than
   Understanding is said to be an idea. Understanding and Loving are
   different acts of the mind entirely; and so Pleasure and Pain are not
   properly ideas.

   Though Pleasure and Pain may imply perception in their nature, yet it
   does not follow, that they are properly ideas. There is an Act of the
   mind in it. An idea is only a perception, wherein the mind is passive,
   or rather subjective. The Acts of the mind are not merely ideas. All
   Acts of the mind, about its ideas, are not themselves mere ideas.

   Pleasure and Pain have their seat in the Will, and not in the
   Understanding. The Will, Choice, &c. is nothing else, but the mind's
   being pleased with an idea, or having a superior pleasedness in
   something thought of, or a desire of a future thing, or a pleasedness
   in the thought of our union with the thing, or a pleasedness in such a
   state of ourselves, and a degree of pain while we are not in that
   state, or a disagreeable conception of the contrary state at that time
   when we desire it.

   [7.] Genus. The various distributing and ranking of things, and tying
   of them together, under one common abstract idea, is, although
   arbitrary, yet exceedingly useful, and indeed absolutely necessary: for
   how miserable should we be, if we could think of things only
   individually, as the beasts do; how slow, narrow, painful, and endless
   would be the exercise of thought.

   What is this putting and tying things together, which is done in
   abstraction? It is not merely a tying of them under the same name; for
   I do believe, that deaf and dumb persons abstract and distribute things
   into kinds. But it is so putting of them together, that the mind
   resolves hereafter to think of them together, under a common notion, as
   if they were a collective substance; the mind being as sure, in this
   proceeding, of reasoning well, as if it were of a particular substance;
   for it has abstracted that which belongs alike to all, and has a
   perfect idea, whose relations and properties it can behold, as well as
   those of the idea of one individual. Although this ranking of things be
   arbitrary, yet there is much more foundation for some distributions
   than others. Some are much more useful, and much better serve the
   purposes of abstraction.

   [24.] There is really a difference that the mind makes, in the
   consideration of an Universal, absolutely considered, and a Species.
   There is a difference in the two ideas, when we say Man, including
   simply the abstract idea; and when we say, the Human Sort of Living
   Creature. There is reference had to an idea more abstract. And there is
   this act of the mind in distributing an Universal into Species. It ties
   this abstract idea to two or more less abstract ideas, and supposes it
   limited by them.

   It is not every property that belongs to all the particulars included
   in, and proper to, a Genus, and that men generally see to be so, that
   is a part of that complex abstract idea, that represents all the
   particulars, or that is a part of that nominal essence. But so much is
   essential, which, if men should see any thing less, they would not call
   it by the name, by which they call the Genus. This indeed is uncertain,
   because men never agreed upon fixing exact bounds.

   [25.] A part, is one of those many ideas, which we are wont to think of
   together. A whole, is an idea containing many of these.

   [47.] the foundation of the most considerable Species or Sorts, in
   which things are ranked, is the order of the world--the designed
   distribution of God and nature. When we, in distributing things, differ
   from that design, we don't know the true essences of things. If the
   world had been created without any order, or design, or beauty, indeed,
   all species would be merely arbitrary. There are certain multitudes of
   things, that God has made to agree, very remarkably in something,
   either as to their outward appearance, manner of acting, the effects
   they produce, or that other things produce on them, the manner of their
   production, or God's disposal concerning them, or some peculiar
   perpetual circumstances that they are in. Thus diamonds agree in shape;
   pieces of gold, in that they will be divided in aqua regia; loadstones,
   in innumerable strange effects that they produce; many plants, in the
   peculiar effects they produce on animal bodies; men, in that they are
   to remain after this life. That inward conformation, that is the
   foundation of an agreement in these things, is the real essence of the
   thing. For instance, that disposition of parts, or whatever it be, in
   the matter of the loadstone, from whence arises the verticity to the
   poles, and its influence on other loadstones and iron, is the real
   essence of the loadstone that is unknown to us.

   [41.] As there is great foundation in Nature for those abstract ideas,
   which we call Universals; so there is great foundation in the common
   circumstances and necessities of mankind, and the constant method of
   things proceeding, for such a tying of simple modes together to the
   constituting such mixed modes. This appears from the agreement of
   languages; for language is very much made up of the names of Mixed
   Modes; and we find that almost all those names, in one language, have
   names that answer to them in other languages. The same Mixed Mode has a
   name given to it by most nations. Whence it appears that most of the
   inhabitants of the Earth have agreed upon putting together the same
   Simple Modes into Mixed ones, and in the same manner. The learned and
   polished have indeed many more than others: and herein chiefly it is,
   that languages do not answer one to another.

   [42.] The agreement or similitude of Complex ideas, mostly consists in
   their precise identity, with respect to some third idea of some of the
   simples they are compounded of. But it there be any similitude or
   agreement between simple ideas themselves, it cannot consist in the
   identity of a third idea that belongs to both; because the ideas are
   simple; and if you take any thing that belongs to them, you take all.
   Therefore no agreement between simple ideas can be resolved into
   Identity, unless it be the identity of Relations. But there seems to be
   another infallible agreement between simple ideas. Thus some Colours
   are more like one to another than others, between which there is yet a
   very manifest difference. So between Sounds, Smells, Tastes, and other
   Sensations. And what is that common agreement of all these ideas we
   call colours, whereby we know immediately that that name belongs to
   them. Certainly all colours have an agreement one to another, that is
   quite different from any agreement that Sounds can have to them. So is
   there some common agreement to all Sounds, that Tastes cannot have to
   any Sound. It cannot be said that the agreement lies only in this, that
   these simple ideas come all by the ear; so that their agreement
   consists only in their relation they have to that organ. For if it
   should have been so that we had lived in the world, and had never found
   out the way we got these ideas we call Sounds, and never once thought
   or considered any thing about it, and should hear some new simple
   sound, I believe nobody would question, but that we should immediately
   perceive an agreement with other ideas, that used to come by that
   sense, though we knew not which way one of them came, and should
   immediately call it a Sound; and say we had heard a strange Noise. And
   if we had never had any such sensation as the Headache, and should have
   it, I do not think we should call that a new Sound; for there would be
   so manifest a disagreement between those simple ideas, of another kind
   from what simple ideas have one with another.

   I have thought, whether or no the agreement of Colours did not consist,
   in a Relation they had to the idea of Space; and whether Colour in
   general might not be defined, that idea that filled Space. But I am
   convinced, that there is another sort of agreement beside that; and the
   more, because there can no such common relation be thought of, with
   respect to different Sounds. It is probable that this agreement may be
   resolved into Identity. If we follow these ideas to their original in
   their Organs, like sensations may be caused from like motions in the
   Animal Spirits. Herein the likeness is perceived, after the same manner
   as the harmony in a simple colour; but if we consider the ideas
   absolutely, it cannot be.

   Coroll. All Universals, therefore, cannot be made up of ideas,
   abstracted from Particulars; for Colour and Sound are Universals, as
   much as Man or Horse. But the idea of Colour, or Sound, in general
   cannot be made up of ideas, abstracted from particular Colours, or
   Sounds; for from simple ideas nothing can be abstracted. But these
   Universals are thus formed. The mind perceives that some of its ideas
   agree, in a manner very different from all its other ideas. The mind
   therefore is determined to rank those ideas together in its thoughts;
   and all new ideas, it receives with the like agreement, it naturally,
   and habitually, and at once, places to the same rank and order, and
   calls them by the same name; and by the nature, determination, and
   habit of the mind, the idea of one excites the idea of others.

   [43.] Many of our Universal ideas are not Arbitrary. The tying of ideas
   together, in Genera and Species, is not merely the calling of them by
   the same name, but such an union of them, that the consideration of one
   shall naturally excite the idea of others. But the union of ideas is
   not always arbitrary, but unavoidably arising from the nature of the
   Soul; which is such, that the thinking of one thing, of itself, yea,
   against our wills, excites the thought of other things that are like
   it. Thus, if a person, a stranger to the Earth, should see and converse
   with a man, and a long time after should meet with another man, and
   converse with him; the agreement would immediately excite the idea of
   that other man, and those two ideas would be together in his mind, for
   the time to come, yea, in spite of him. So if he should see a third,
   and afterwards should find multitudes, there would be a Genus, or
   Universal Idea, formed in his mind, naturally, without his counsel or
   design. So I cannot doubt but, if a person had been born blind, and
   should have his eyes opened, and should immediately have blue placed
   before his eyes, and then red. Then green, then yellow; I doubt not,
   they would immediately get into one General Idea--they would be united
   in his mind without his deliberation.

   Coroll. So that God has not only distributed things into species, by
   evidently manifesting, by his making such an agreement in things, that
   he designed such and such particulars to be together in the mind; but
   by making the Soul of such a nature, that those particulars, which he
   thus made to agree, are unavoidably together in the mind, one naturally
   exciting and including the others.

   [37.] Genus and Species, indeed, is a mental thing; yet, in a sense,
   Nature has distributed many things into Species without our minds. That
   is, God evidently designed such Particulars to be together in the mind,
   and in other things. But tis not so indeed, with respect to all genera.
   Some therefore may be called Arbitrary Genera, others Natural. Nature
   has designedly made a distribution of some things; other distributions
   are of a mental original.

   [56.] Number is a train of differences of ideas, put together in the
   mind's consideration in orderly succession, and considered with respect
   to their relations one to another, as in that orderly mental
   succession. This mental succession is the succession of Time. One may
   make which they will the first, if it be but the first in
   consideration. The mind begins where it will, and runs through them
   successively one after another. It is a collection of differences; for
   it is its being another, in some respect, that is the very thing that
   makes it capable of pertaining to multiplicity. They must not merely be
   put together, in orderly succession; but it's only their being
   considered with reference to that relation, they have one to another as
   differences, and in orderly mental succession, that denominates it
   Number.--To be of such a particular number, is for an idea to have such
   a particular relation, and so considered by the mind, to other
   differences put together with it, in orderly succession.--So that there
   is nothing inexplicable in the nature of Number, but what Identity and
   Diversity is, and what Succession, or Duration, or Priority and
   Posteriority, is.

   [57.] Duration. Pastness, if I may make such a word, is nothing but a
   Mode of ideas. This Mode, perhaps, is nothing else but a certain
   Veterascence, attending our ideas. When it is, as we say, Past, the
   idea, after a particular manner, fades and grows old. When an idea
   appears with this mode, we say it is Past, the idea, and according to
   the degree of this particular inexpressible mode, so we say the thing
   is longer or more lately past. As in distance, it is not only by a
   natural trigonometry of the eyes, or a sort of parallax, that we
   determine it; because we can judge of distances, as well with one eye,
   as with two. Nor is it by observing the parallelism or aperture of the
   rays, for the mind judges by nothing, but the difference it observes in
   the idea itself, which alone the mind has any notice of. But it judges
   of distance, by a particular mode of indistinctness, as has been said
   before. So it is with respect to distance of time, by a certain
   peculiar inexpressible mode of fading and indistinctness, which I call
   Veterascence.

   [65.] I think we find by experience, that when we have been in a sound
   sleep, for many hours together, if we look back to the time when we
   were last awake, the ideas seem farther off to us, than when we have
   only ceased thinking a few minutes: which cannot be because we see a
   longer train of intermediate ideas in one case, than in the other; for
   I suppose we see none in neither. But there is a sort of Veterascence
   of ideas, that have been a longer time in the mind. When we look upon
   them, they do not look just as those that are much nearer. This
   Veterascence consists, I think, in blotting out the little
   distinctions, the minute parts, and fine strokes of it. This is one way
   of judging of the distance of Visible objects. In this respect, a
   house, a tree, do not look at a little distance, as they do very near.
   They not only do not appear so big; but a multitude of the little
   distinctions vanish, that are plain when we are near.

   [53.] Sensation. Our Senses, when sound, and in ordinary circumstances,
   are not properly fallible in any thing: that is, we mean our Experience
   by our Senses. If we mean any thing else, neither fallibility nor
   certainty in any thing at all, any other way, than by constant
   experience by our Senses. That is, when our Senses make such or such
   representations, we constantly experience, that things are in
   themselves thus or thus. So, when a thing appears after such a manner,
   I judge it to be at least two rods off, at least two feet broad; but I
   only know, by constant experience, that a thing, that makes such a
   representation, is so far off, and so big. And so my senses are as
   certain in every thing, when I have equal opportunity and occasion to
   experience. And our senses are said to deceive us in some things,
   because our situation does not allow us to make trial, or our
   circumstances do not lead us to it, and so we are apt to judge by our
   experience, in other and different cases. Thus, our Senses make us
   think, that the Moon is among the clouds, because we cannot try it so
   quick, easily, and frequently, as we do the distance of things, that
   are nearer. But the Senses of an Astronomer, who observes the Parallax
   of the Moon, do not deceive him, but lead him to the truth. Though the
   idea of the Moon's distance will never be exercised, so quick and
   naturally, upon every occasion, because of the tediousness and
   infrequency of the trial; and there are not so many ways of trial, so
   many differences in the Moon's appearance, from what a lesser thing
   amongst the clouds would have, as there are in things nearer. I can
   remember when I was so young, that seeing two things in the same
   building, one of which was twice so far off as the other, yet seeing
   one over the other, I thought they had been of the same distance, one
   right over the other. My senses then were deceitful in that thing,
   though they made the same representations as now, and yet now they are
   not deceitful. The only difference is in experience. Indeed, in some
   things, our senses make no difference in the representation, where
   there is a difference in the things. But in those things, our
   experience by our Senses will lead us not to judge at all, and so they
   will deceive. We are in danger of being deceived by our Senses, in
   judging of appearances, by our experience in different things, or by
   judging where we have had no experience, or the like.

   [19.] Things, that we know by immediate Sensation, we know intuitively;
   and they are properly self-evident truths: as, Grass is green; The Sun
   shines; Honey is sweet. When we say that Grass is green, all that we
   can be supposed to mean by it, is--that, in a constant course, when we
   see Grass, the idea of green is excited by it; and this we know
   self-evidently.

   [55.] Appetite of the Mind. As all ideas are wholly in the mind, so is
   all Appetite. To have Appetite towards a thing is as remote from the
   nature of Matter, as to have Thought. There are some of the Appetites,
   that are called Natural Appetites, that are not indeed natural to the
   Soul; as the Appetite to meat and drink. I believe when the Soul has
   that sort of pain, which is in hunger and thirst, if the Soul never had
   experienced that food and drink remove that pain, it would create no
   Appetite to any thing. A man would be just as incapable of such an
   Appetite, as he is to food he never smelt nor tasted. So the Appetite
   of scratching when it itches.

   [15.] Truth. After all that had been said and done, the only adequate
   definition of Truth is, The agreement of our ideas with existence. To
   explain what this existence is, is another thing. In abstract ideas, it
   is nothing but the ideas themselves; so their truth is their
   consistency with themselves. In things that are supposed to be without
   us, it is the determination and fixed mode of God's exciting ideas in
   us. So that Truth, in these things, is an agreement of our ideas with
   that series in God. It is existence; and that is all that we can say.
   It is impossible that we should explain a perfectly abstract and mere
   idea of existence; only we always find this, by running of it up, that
   God and Real Existence are the same.

   Coroll. Hence we learn how properly it may be said, that God is, and
   that there is none else; and how proper are these names of the Deity,
   jehovah, and i am that i am.

   [6.] Truth is The perception of the relations there are between ideas.
   Falsehood is The supposition of relations between ideas that are
   inconsistent with those ideas themselves; not their disagreement with
   things without. All truth is in the mind, and only there. It is ideas,
   or what is in the mind, alone, that can be the object of the mind; and
   what we call Truth, is a consistent supposition of relations, between
   what is the object of the mind. Falsehood is an inconsistent
   supposition of relations. The Truth, that is in a mind, must be in that
   mind as to its object, and every thing pertaining to it. The only
   foundation of Error is inadequateness and imperfection of ideas; for,
   if the idea were perfect, it would be impossible but that all its
   relations should be perfectly perceived.

   [10.] Truth, in the general, may be defined, after the most strict and
   metaphysical manner, The consistency and agreement of our ideas with
   the ideas of God. I confess this, in ordinary conversation, would not
   half so much tend to enlighten one in the meaning of the word, as to
   say, The agreement of our ideas with the things as they are. But it
   should be inquired, What is it for our ideas to agree with things as
   they are? seeing that corporeal things exist no otherwise than
   mentally; and as for most other things, they are only abstract ideas.
   Truth, as to external things, is the consistency of our ideas with
   those ideas, or that train and series of ideas, that are raised in our
   minds, according to God's stated order and law.

   Truth, as to abstract ideas, is the consistency of our ideas with
   themselves. As when our idea of a circle, or a triangle, or any of
   their parts, is agreeable to the idea we have stated and agreed to call
   by the name of a circle, or a triangle. And it may still be said, that
   Truth is, the consistency of our ideas with themselves. Those ideas are
   false, that are not consistent with the series of ideas, that are
   raised in our minds, by according to the order of nature.

   Coroll. 1. Hence we see, in how strict a sense it may be said, that God
   is Truth, itself.

   Coroll. 2. Hence it appears, that Truth consists in having perfect and
   adequate ideas of things: For instance, if I judge truly how far
   distant the Moon is from the Earth, we need not say, that this Truth
   consists, in the perception of the relation, between the two ideas of
   the Moon and the Earth, but in the adequateness.

   Coroll. 3. Hence Certainty is the clear perception of this perfection.
   Therefore, if we had perfect ideas of all things at once, that is,
   could have all in one view, we should know all truth at the same
   moment, and there would be no such thing as Ratiocination, or finding
   our Truth. And Reasoning is only of use to us, in consequence of the
   paucity of our ideas, and because we can have but very few in view at
   once.--Hence it is evident, that all things are self-evident to God.

   [5.] certainty. Determined that there are many degrees of certainty,
   though not indeed of absolute certainty; which is infinitely strong. We
   are certain of many things upon demonstration, which yet we may be made
   more certain of by more demonstration; because although, according to
   the strength of the mind, we see the connexion of the ideas, yet a
   stronger mind would see the connexion more perfectly and strongly,
   because it would have the ideas more perfect. We have not such strength
   of mind, that we can perfectly conceive of but very few things; and
   some little of the strength of an idea is lost, in a moment of time, as
   we, in the mind, look successively on the train of ideas in a
   demonstration.

   [8.] rules of reasoning. It is no matter how abstracted our notions
   are--the farther we penetrate and come to the prime reality of the
   thing, the better; provided we can go to such a degree of abstraction,
   and carry it out clear. We may go so far in abstraction, that, although
   we may thereby, in part, see Truth and Reality, and farther than ever
   was seen before, yet we may not be able more than just to touch it, and
   to have a few obscure glances. We may not have strength of mind to
   conceive clearly of the Manner of it. We see farther indeed, but it is
   very obscurely and indistinctly. We had better stop a degree or two
   short of this, and abstract no farther than we can conceive of the
   thing distinctly, and explain it clearly: otherwise we shall be apt to
   run into error, and confound our minds.

   [54.] Reasoning. We know our own existence, and the existence of every
   thing, that we are conscious of in our own minds intuitively; but all
   our reasoning, with respect to Real Existence, depends upon that
   natural, unavoidable, and invariable disposition of the mind, when it
   sees a thing begin to be, to conclude certainly, that there is a Cause
   of it; or if it sees a thing to be in a very orderly, regular, and
   exact manner, to conclude that some Design regulated and disposed it.
   That a thing that begins to be should make itself, we know implies a
   contradiction; for we see intuitively, that the ideas, that such an
   expression excites, are inconsistent. And that any thing should start
   up into being, without any cause at all, itself, or any thing else, is
   what the mind, do what we will, will for ever refuse to receive, but
   will perpetually reject. When we therefore see any thing begin to be,
   we intuitively know there is a cause of it, and not by ratiocination,
   or any kind of argument. This is an innate principle, in that sense,
   that the soul is born with it--a necessary, fatal propensity, so to
   conclude, on every occasion.

   And this is not only true of every new existence of those we call
   Substances, but of every alteration that is to be seen: any new
   existence of any new mode, we necessarily suppose to be from a cause.
   For instance, if there had been nothing but one globe of solid matter,
   which in time past had been at perfect rest; if it starts away into
   motion, we conclude there is some cause of that alteration. Or if that
   globe, in time past, had been moving in a straight line, and turns
   short about at right angles with its former direction: or if it had
   been moving with such a degree of celerity, and all at once moves with
   but half that switfness. And it is all one, whether these alterations
   be in Bodies, or in Spirits, there is in a Spirit, after it is created,
   let it be an alteration in what it will; and so the rest. So, if a
   Spirit always, in times past, had had such an inclination, for
   instance, always loved and chosen sin, and then has a quite contrary
   inclination, and loves and chooses holiness; the beginning of this
   alteration, or the first new existence in that Spirit towards it,
   whether it were some action, or whatsoever, had some cause.

   And, indeed, it is no mater, whether we suppose a being has a beginning
   or no, if we see it exists in a particular manner, for which way of
   existing we know that there is no more reason, as to any thing in the
   thing itself, than any other different manner; the mind necessarily
   concludes, that there is some cause of its existing, more than any
   other way. For instance, if there is but one piece of mater existing
   from all eternity, and that be a square; we unavoidably conclude, there
   is some cause why it is square, seeing there is nothing in the thing
   itself that more inclines it to that figure, than to an infinite number
   of other figures. The same may be said as to rest, or motion, or the
   manner of motion; and for all other bodies existing, the mind seeks a
   Cause why.

   When the mind sees a being existing very regularly, and in most exact
   order, especially if the order consists in the exact regulation of a
   very great multitude of particulars, if it be the best order, as to use
   and beauty, that the mind can conceive of, that it could have been, the
   mind unavoidably concludes, that its Cause was a being that had design:
   for instance, when the mind perceives the beauty and contrivance of the
   world; for the world might have been one infinite number of confusions,
   and not have been disposed beautifully and usefully; yea, infinite
   times an infinite number, and so, if we multiply infinite by infinite,
   in infinitum. So that, if we suppose the world to have existed from all
   eternity, and to be continually all the while without the guidance of
   design, passing under different changes; it would have been, according
   to such a multiplication, infinite to one, whether it would ever have
   hit upon this form or no. Note--This way of concluding is a sort or
   ratiocination.

   [58.] Reasoning does not absolutely differ from Perception, any further
   than there is the act of the will about it. It appears to be so in
   demonstrative Reasoning. Because the knowledge of a self-evident truth,
   it is evident, does not differ from Perception. But all demonstrative
   knowledge consists in, and may be resolved into, the knowledge of
   self-evident truths. And it is also evident, that the act of the mind,
   in other reasoning, is not of a different nature from demonstrative
   Reasoning.

   [71.] Knowledge is not the perception of the agreement, or
   disagreement, of ideas, but rather the perception of the union, or
   disunion, of ideas--or the perceiving whether two or more ideas belong
   to one another.

   Coroll. Hence it is not impossible to believe, or know, the Truth of
   mysteries, or propositions that we cannot comprehend, or see the manner
   how the several ideas, that belong to the proposition, are united.
   Perhaps it cannot properly be said, that we see the agreement of the
   ideas, unless we see how they agree. But we may perceive that they are
   united, and know that they belong one to another; though we do not know
   the manner how they are tied together.

   [22.] Prejudice. Those ideas, which do not pertain to the prime essence
   of things,--such as all colours that are every where objected to our
   eyes; and sounds that are continually in our ears: those that affect
   the touch, as cold and heats; and all our sensations,--exceedingly clog
   the mind, in searching into the innermost nature of things, and cast
   such a mist over things, that there is need of a sharp sight to see
   clearly through; for these will be continually in the mind, and
   associated with other ideas, let us be thinking of what we will; and it
   is a continual care and pains to keep clear of their entanglements, in
   our scrutinies into things. This is one way, whereby the body and the
   senses observe the views of the mind. The world seems so differently to
   our eyes, to our ears, and other senses, from the idea we have of it by
   reason, that we can hardly realize the latter.

   [18.] Words. We are used to apply the same words a hundred different
   ways; and ideas being so much tied and associated with the words, they
   lead us into a thousand real mistakes; for where we find that the words
   may be connected, the ideas being by custom tied with them, we think
   the ideas may be connected likewise, and applied every where, and in
   every way, as the Words.

   [23.] The reason why the names of Spiritual things are all, or most of
   them, derived from the names of Sensible or Corporeal ones--as
   Imagination, Conception, Apprehend, &c.--is, because there was no other
   way of making others readily understand men's meaning, when they first
   signified these things by sounds, than by giving of them the names of
   things sensible, to which they had an analogy. They could thus point it
   out with the finger, and so explain themselves as in sensible things.

   [48.] Definition. That is not always a true Definition, that tends most
   to give us to understand the meaning of a word; but that, which should
   give any one the clearest notion of the meaning of the word, if he had
   never been in any way acquainted with the thing signified by that word.
   For instance, if I was to explain the meaning of the word Motion, to
   one that had seen things move, but was not acquainted with the word;
   perhaps I should say, Motion is a things' going from one place to
   another. But, if I was to explain it to one, who had never seen any
   thing move, (if that could be,) I should say, Motion is a Body's
   existing successively in all the immediately contiguous parts of any
   distance, without continuing any time in any.

   [20.] Inspiration. The evidence of immediate Inspiration that the
   prophets had, when they were immediately inspired by the Spirit of God
   with any truth, is an absolute sort of certainty; and the knowledge is
   in a sense intuitive--much in the same manner as Faith, and Spiritual
   Knowledge of the truth of Religion. Such bright ideas are raised, and
   such a clear view of a perfect agreement with the excellencies of the
   Divine Nature, that it is known to be a communication from him. All the
   Deity appears in the thing, and in every thing pertaining to it. The
   prophet has so divine a sense, such a divine disposition, such a divine
   pleasure; and sees so divine an excellency, and so divine a power, in
   what is revealed, that he sees as immediately that God is there, as we
   perceive one another's presence, when we are talking together face to
   face. And our features, our voice, and our shapes, are not so clear
   manifestations of us, as those spiritual resemblances of God, that are
   in the Inspiration, are manifestations of him. But yet there are
   doubtless various degrees in Inspiration.

   [21.] The Will. It is not that which appears the greatest good, or the
   greatest apparent good, that determines the Will. It is not the
   greatest good apprehended, or that which is apprehended to be the
   greatest good; but the Greatest Apprehension of good. It is not merely
   by judging that any thing is a great good, that good is apprehended, or
   appears. There are other ways of apprehending good. The having a clear
   and sensible idea of any good, is one way of good's appearing, as well
   as judging that there is good. Therefore, all those things are to be
   considered--the degree of the judgment, by which a thing is judged to
   be good, and the contrary evil; the degree of goodness under which it
   appears, and the evil of the contrary; and the clearness of the idea
   and strength of the conception of the goodness and of the evil. And
   that Good, of which there is the greatest apprehension or sense, all
   those things being taken together, is chosen by the Will. And if there
   be a greater apprehension of good to be obtained, or evil escaped, by
   doing a thing, than in letting it alone, the Will determines to the
   doing it. The mind will be for the present most uneasy in neglecting
   it, and the mind always avoids that, in which it would be for the
   present most uneasy. The degree of apprehension of good, which I
   suppose to determine the Will, is composed of the degree of good
   apprehended, and the degree of apprehension. The degree of
   apprehension, again, is composed of the strength of the conception, and
   the judgment.

   [60.] Will, Its Determination. The greatest mental existence of Good,
   the greatest degree of the mind's sense of Good, the greatest degree of
   apprehension, or perception, or idea of own Good, always determines the
   Will. Where three things are to be considered, that make up the
   proportion of mental existence of own good; for it is the proportion
   compounded of these three proportions that always determines the Will.
   1. The degree of good apprehended, or the degree of good represented by
   idea. This used to be reckoned by many the only thing that determined
   the Will.--2. The proportion or degree of apprehension or
   perception--the degree of the view the mind has of it, or the degree of
   the ideal perceptive presence of the good in the mind. This consists in
   two things. (1.) In the degree of the judgment. This is different from
   the first thing we mentioned, which was the judgment of the degree of
   good; but we speak now of the degree of that judgment, according to the
   degree of assurance or certainty. (2.) The Deepness of the sense of the
   goodness; or the clearness, liveliness, and sensibleness of the
   goodness or sweetness, or the strength of the impression on the mind.
   As one, that has just tasted honey, has more of an idea of its
   goodness, than one that never tasted, though he also fully believes
   that it is very sweet, yea as sweet as it is. And he that has seen a
   great beauty, has a far more clear and strong idea of it, than he that
   never saw it. Good, as it is thus most clearly and strongly present to
   the mind, will proportionally more influence the mind to incline and
   will.--3. There is to be considered the proportion or degree of the
   mind's apprehension of the Propriety of the good, or of its Own
   Concernment in it. Thus the soul has a clearer and stronger
   apprehension of a pleasure, that it may enjoy the next hour, than of
   the same pleasure that it is sure it may enjoy ten years hence, though
   the latter doth really as much concern it as the former. There are
   usually other things concur, to make men choose present, before future,
   good. They are generally more certain of the good, and have a stronger
   sense of it. But if they were equally certain, and it were the very
   same good, and they were sure it would be the same, yet the soul would
   be most inclined to the nearest, because they have not so lively an
   apprehension of themselves, and of the good, and of the whole matter.
   And then there is the pain and uneasiness of enduring such an appetite
   so long a time, that generally comes in. But yet this matter wants to
   be made something more clear, why the soul is more strongly inclined to
   near than distant good.

   It is utterly impossible but that it should be so, that the inclination
   and choice of the mind should always be determined by Good, as mentally
   or ideally existing. It would be a contradiction to suppose otherwise,
   for we mean nothing else by Good, but that which agree with the
   inclination and disposition of the mind. And surely that, which agrees
   with it, must agree with it. And it also implies a contradiction, to
   suppose that that good, whose mental or ideal being is greatest, does
   not always determine the Will; for we mean nothing else, by Greatest
   Good, but that which agrees most with the inclination and disposition
   of the soul. It is ridiculous to say, that the soul does not incline to
   that most, which is most agreeable to the inclination of the soul.--I
   think I was not mistaken when I said that nothing else is meant by
   Good, here, but that that agrees with the Inclination and Disposition
   of the mind. If they do not mean that that strikes the mind, that that
   is agreeable to it, that that pleases it, and falls in with the
   disposition of its nature; then I would know, What is meant.

   The Will is no otherwise different from the Inclination, than that we
   commonly call that the Will, that is the Mind's Inclination, with
   respect to its own Immediate Actions.

   [70.] that it is not Uneasiness, in our present circumstances, that
   always determines the Will, as Mr. Locke supposes, is evident by this,
   that there may be an Act of the Will, in choosing and determining to
   forbear to act, or move, when some action is proposed to a man; as well
   as in choosing to act. Thus, if a man be put upon rising from his seat,
   and going to a certain place; his voluntary refusal is an act of the
   Will, which does not arise from any uneasiness in his present
   circumstances certainly. An act of voluntary refusal is as truly an act
   of the Will, as an act of refusal. The Will chooses to neglect: it
   prefers the opposite of that which is refused.

   [39.] Conscience. Beside the two sorts of Assent of the mind, called
   Will and Judgment, there is a third, arising from a sense of the
   General Beauty and Harmony of things, which is Conscience. There are
   some things, which move a kind of horror in the mind, which yet the
   mind wills and chooses; and some, which are agreeable in this way to
   its make and constitution, which yet it chooses not. These Assents of
   Will and Conscience have indeed a common object, which is Excellency.
   Still they differ. The one is always General Excellency: that is
   Harmony, taking in its relation to the Whole System of beings. The
   other, that Excellency which most strongly effects, whether the
   Excellency be more general or particular. But the degree, wherein we
   are affected by any Excellency, is in proportion compounded of the
   Extensiveness, and the Intensiveness, of our view of that Excellency.

   [1.] Excellency. There has nothing been more without a definition, than
   Excellency; although it be what we are more concerned with than any
   thing else whatsoever; yea, we are concerned with nothing else. But
   what is this Excellency? Wherein is one thing excellent, and another
   evil; one beautiful, and another deformed? Some have said that all
   Excellency is Harmony, symmetry, or Proportion; but they have not yet
   explained it. We would know, Why Proportion is more excellent than
   Disproportion; that is, why Proportion is pleasant to the mind, and
   Disproportion unpleasant? Proportion is a thing that may be explained
   yet further. It is an Equality, or Likeness of ratios; so that it is
   the Equality that makes the Proportion. Excellency therefore seems to
   consist in Equality. Thus, if there be two perfect equal circles, or
   globes, together, there is something more of beauty than if they were
   unequal, disproportionate magnitudes. And if two parallel lines be
   drawn, the beauty is greater, than if they were obliquely inclined
   without proportion, because there is equality of distance. And if
   betwixt two parallel lines, two equal circles be placed, each at the
   same distance from each parallel line, as in Fig. 1, the beauty is
   greater, than if they stood at irregular

   1

   2

   3

   4

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   O

   distances from the parallel lines. If they stand, each in a
   perpendicular line, going from the parallel lines (Fig. 2,) it is
   requisite that they should each stand at an equal distance from the
   perpendicular line next to them; otherwise there is no beauty. If there
   be three of these circles between two parallel lines, and near to a
   perpendicular line run between them, (Fig. 3,) the most beautiful form
   perhaps, that they could be placed in, is in an equilateral triangle
   with the cross line, because there are most equalities. The distance of
   the two next to the cross line is equal from that, and also equal from
   the parallel lines. The distance of the third from each parallel is
   equal, and its distance from each of the other two circles is equal,
   and is also equal to their distance from one another, and likewise
   equal to their distance from each end of the cross line. There are two
   equalateral triangles: one made by the three circles, and the other
   made by the cross line and two of the sides of the first protracted
   till they meet that line. And if there be another like it, on the
   opposite side, to correspond with it, and it be taken altogether, the
   beauty is still greater, where the distances from the lines, in the
   cone are equal to the distances in the other; also the two next to the
   cross lines are at equal distances from the other two; or, if you go
   crosswise, from corner to corner. The two cross lines are also
   parallel, so that all parts are at an equal distance, and innumerable
   other equalities might be found.

   This simple Equality, without Proportion, is the lowest kind of
   Regularity, and may be called Simple Beauty. All other beauties and
   excellencies may be resolved into it. Proportion is Complex Beauty.
   Thus, if we suppose that there are two points, A B, placed at two
   inches distance, and the next, C, one inch farther; (Fig. 1,)

   Fig. 1

   Fig. 2

   Â·

   Â·

   Â·

   Â·

   I

   I

   I

   A

   B

   C

   D

   A

   B

   C

   it is requisite, in order to regularity and beauty, if there be
   another, D, that it should be at half an inch distance; otherwise there
   is no regularity, and the last, D, would stand out of its proper place;
   because now the relation that the space C D bears to B C, is equal to
   the relation that B C bears to A C; so that B C D is exactly similar to
   A B C. It is evident, this is a more complicated excellency than that
   which consisted in Equality, because the terms of the relation are here
   complex, and before were simple. When there are three points set in a
   right line, it is requisite, in order to regularity, that they should
   be set at an equal distance, as A B C (Fig. 2,) where A B is similar to
   B C, or the relation of C to B is the same as of B to A. But in the
   other are three terms necessary in each of the parts, between which is
   the relation, B C D is as A B C: so that here more simple beauties are
   omitted, and yet there is a general complex beauty: that is, B C is not
   as A B nor is C D as B C, but yet B C D is as A B C. It is requisite
   that the consent or regularity of C D to B C be omitted, for the sake
   of the harmony of the whole. For although, if C D were perfectly equal
   to B C, there would be regularity and beauty with respect to them two;
   yet, if A B be taken into the idea, there is nothing but confusion. And
   it might be requisite, if these stood with others, even to omit this
   proposition, for the sake of one more complex still. Thus, if they
   stood with other points, where B stood at four inches distance from A,
   C at two from B, and D at six from C: the place where D must stand in,
   if A, B, C, D, were alone, viz. one inch from C, must be so as to be
   made proportionate with the other points beneath;

   A B C D

   | I | I | I | I | I | I |

   | I | I | I | I | I | I | I | I | I | I | I | I

   A B C D

   So that although A, B, C, D, are not proportioned, but are confusion
   among themselves; yet taken with the whole they are proportioned and
   beautiful.

   All beauty consists in similarness or identity of relation. In identity
   of relation consists all likeness, and all identity between two
   consists in identity of relation. Thus, when the distance between two
   is exactly equal, their distance is their relation one to another, the
   distance is the same, the bodies are two; wherefore this is their
   correspondency and beauty. So bodies exactly of the same figure, the
   bodies are two, the relation between the parts of the extremities is
   the same, and this is their agreement with them. But if there are two
   bodies of different shapes, having no similarness of relation between
   the parts of the extremities; this, considered by itself, is a
   deformity, because being disagrees with being, which must undoubtedly
   be disagreeable to perceiving being; because what disagrees with Being,
   must necessarily be disagreeable to Being in general, to every thing
   that partakes of Entity, and of course to perceiving being; and what
   agrees with Being, must be agreeable to Being in general, and therefore
   to perceiving being. But agreeableness of perceiving being is pleasure,
   and disagreeableness is pain. Disagreement or contrariety to Being, is
   evidently an approach to Nothing, or a degree of Nothing; which is
   nothing else but disagreement or contrariety of Being, and the greatest
   and only evil: And Entity is the greatest and only good. And by how
   much more perfect Entity is, that is without mixture of Nothing, by so
   much the more Excellency. Two beings can agree one with another in
   nothing else but Relation; because otherwise the notion of their
   twoness (duality) is destroyed, and they become one.

   And so, in every case, what is called Correspondency, Symmetry,
   Regularity, and the like, may be resolved into Equalities; though the
   Equalities in a beauty, in any degree complicated, are so numerous,
   that it would be a most tedious piece of work to enumerate them. There
   are millions of these Equalities. Of these consist the beautiful shape
   of flowers, the beauty of the body of man, and of the bodies of other
   animals. That sort of beauty which is called Natural, as of vines,
   plants, trees, &c. consists of a very complicated harmony; and all the
   natural motions, and tendencies, and figures of bodies in the Universe
   are done according to proportion, and therein is their beauty.
   Particular disproportions sometimes greatly add to the general beauty,
   and must necessarily be, in order to a more universal proportion.--So
   much equality, so much beauty; though it may be noted that the quantity
   of equality is not to be measured only by the number, but the
   intenseness, according to the quantity of being. As bodies are shadows
   of being, so their proportions are shadows of proportion.

   The pleasures of the senses, where harmony is not the object of
   judgment, are the result of equality. Thus in Music, not only in the
   proportion which the several notes of a tune bear one among another,
   but in merely two notes there is harmony; whereas it is impossible
   there should be proportion between only two terms. But the proportion
   is in the particular vibrations of the air, which strike on the ear.
   And so, in the pleasantness of light, colours, tastes, smells, and
   touch, all arise from proportion of motion. The organs are so contrived
   that, upon the touch of such and such particles, there shall be a
   regular and harmonious motion of the animal spirits.

   Spiritual harmonies are of vastly larger extent: i.e. the proportions
   are vastly oftener redoubled, and respect mere beings, and require a
   vastly larger view to comprehend them; as some simple notes do more
   effect one, who has not a comprehensive understanding of Music.

   The reason why Equality thus pleases the mind, and Inequality is
   unpleasing, is because Disproportion, or Inconsistency, is contrary to
   Being. For Being, if we examine narrowly, is nothing else but
   Proportion. When one being is inconsistent with another being, then
   Being is contradicted. But contradiction to Being, is intolerable to
   perceiving being, and the consent to Being, most pleasing.

   Excellency consists in the Similarness of one being to another--not
   merely Equality and Proportion, but any kind of Similarness--thus
   Similarness of direction. Supposing many globes moving in right lines,
   it is more beautiful, that they should move all the same way, and
   according to the same direction, than if they moved disorderly; one,
   one way, and another, another. This is a universal definition of
   Excellency:--The Consent of Being to Being, or Being's Consent to
   Entity. The more the Consent is, and the more extensive, the greater is
   the Excellency.

   How exceedingly apt are we, when we are sitting still, and accidentally
   casting our eye upon some marks or spots in the floor or wall, to be
   ranging of them into regular parcels and figures: and, if we see a mark
   out of its place, to be placing of it right, by our imagination; and
   this, even while we are meditating on something else. So we may catch
   ourselves at observing the rules of harmony and regularity, in the
   careless motions of our heads or feet, and when playing with our hands,
   or walking about the room.

   Pleasedness, in perceiving Being, always arises, either from a
   perception of Consent to Being in general, or of Consent to that Being
   that perceives. As we have shown, that Agreeableness to Entity must be
   agreeable to perceiving Entity; it is as evident that it is necessary
   that Agreeableness to that Being must be pleasing to it, if it
   perceives it. So that Pleasedness does not always arise from a
   perception of Excellency; [in general;] but the greater a Being is, and
   the more it has of Entity, the more will Consent to Being in general
   please it. Him, become the same; for so far as a thing consents to
   Being in general, so far it consents to Him; and the more perfect
   Created Spirits are, the nearer do they come to their Creator, in this
   regard.

   That, which is often called Self-Love, is exceedingly improperly called
   Love, for they do not only say that one loves himself, when he sees
   something amiable in himself, the view of which begets delight. But
   merely an inclination to pleasure, and averseness to pain, they call
   Self-Love; so that the devils, and other damned spirits, love
   themselves, not because they see any thing in themselves which they
   imagine to be lovely, but merely because they do not incline to pain
   but to pleasure; for pain and pleasure include an inclination to
   agreeableness, and an aversion to disagreeableness. Now how improper is
   it to say, that one loves himself, because what is agreeable to him is
   agreeable to him, and what is disagreeable to him is disagreeable to
   him: which mere Entity supposes. So that this, that they call
   Self-Love, is no affection, but only the Entity of the thing, or his
   being what he is.

   One alone, without any reference to any more, cannot be excellent; for
   in such case, there can be no manner of relation no way, and therefore
   no such thing as Consent. Indeed what we call One may be excellent
   because of a consent of parts, or some consent of those in that being,
   that are distinguished into a plurality some way or other. But in a
   being that is absolutely without any plurality, there cannot be
   Excellency, for there can be no such thing as consent or agreement.

   One of the highest excellencies is Love. As nothing else has a proper
   being but Spirits, and as Bodies are but the shadow of being, therefore
   the consent of bodies one to another, and the harmony that is among
   them, is but the shadow of Excellency. The highest Excellency therefore
   must be the consent of Spirits one to another. But the consent of
   Spirits consists half in their mutual love one to another. And the
   sweet harmony between the various parts of the Universe, is only an
   image of mutual love. But yet a lower kind of love may be odious,
   because it hinders, or is contrary to, a higher and more general. Even
   a lower proportion is often a deformity, because it is contrary to a
   more general proportion.

   Coroll. 1. If so much of the beauty and excellency of Spirits consist
   in Love, then the deformity of evil spirits consists as much in hatred
   and malice.

   Coroll. 2. The more any doctrine, or institution, brings to light of
   the Spiritual World, the more will it urge to Love and Charity.

   Happiness strictly consists in the perception of these three things: of
   the consent of being to its own being; of its own consent to being; and
   of being's consent to being.

   [14.] Excellence, to put it in other words, is that which is beautiful
   and lovely. That which is beautiful, considered by itself separately,
   and deformed, considered as a part of something else more extended; or
   beautiful, only with respect to itself and a few other things, and not
   as a part of that which contains all things--the Universe;--is false
   beauty and a confined beauty. That which is beautiful, with respect to
   the university of things, has a generally extended excellence and a
   true beauty; and the more extended, or limited, its system is, the more
   confined or extended is its beauty.

   [62.] As Bodies, the objects of our external senses are but the shadows
   of beings; that harmony, wherein consists sensible excellency and
   beauty, is but the shadow of excellency. That is, it is pleasant to the
   mind, because it is a shadow of love. When one thing sweetly harmonizes
   with another, as the Notes in music, the notes are so conformed, and
   have such proportion one to another, that they seem to have respect one
   to another, as if they loved one another. So the beauty of figures and
   motions is, when one part has such consonant proportion with the rest,
   as represents a general agreeing and consenting together; which is very
   much the image of Love, in all the parts of a Society, united by a
   sweet consent and charity of heart. Therein consists the beauty of
   figures, as of flowers drawn with a pen; and the beauty of the body,
   and of the features of the face.

   There is no other way, that sensible things can consent one to another
   but by Equality, or by Likeness, or by Proportion. Therefore the lowest
   or most simple kind of beauty is equality or likeness; because by
   equality or likeness, one part consents with but one part; but by
   Proportion one part may sweetly consent to ten thousand different
   parts; all the parts may consent with all the rest; and not only so,
   but the parts, taken singly, may consent with the whole taken together.
   Thus, in the figures or flourishes drawn by an acute penman, every
   stroke may have such a proportion, both by the place and distance,
   direction, degree of curvity, &c. that there may be a consent, in the
   parts of each stroke, one with another, and a harmonious agreement with
   all the strokes, and with the various parts, composed of many strokes,
   and an agreeableness to the whole figure taken together.

   There is a beauty in Equality, as appears very evident by the very
   great respect men show to it, in every thing they make or do. How
   unbeautiful would be the body, if the parts on one side were unequal to
   those on the other; how unbeautiful would writing be, if the letters
   were not of an equal height, or the lines of an equal length, or at an
   equal distance, or if the pages were not of an equal width or height;
   and how unbeautiful would a building be, if no equality were observed
   in the correspondent parts.

   Existence or Entity is that, into which all Excellency is to be
   resolved. Being or Existence is what is necessarily agreeable to Being;
   and when Being perceives it, it will be an agreeable perception; and
   any contradiction to Being or Existence is what Being, when it
   perceives, abhors. If Being, in itself considered, were not pleasing,
   Being's consent to Being would not be pleasing, nor would Being's
   disagreeing with Being be displeasing. Therefore, not only may
   Greatness be considered as a capacity of Excellency; but a Being, by
   reason of his greatness considered alone, is the more excellent,
   because he partakes more of Being. Though if he be great, if he
   dissents from more general and extensive Being, or from Universal
   Being; he is the more odious for his greatness, because the dissent or
   contradiction to Being in general is so much the greater. It is more
   odious for his greatness, because the dissent or contradiction to Being
   in general is so much the greater. It is more grating to see much Being
   dissent from Being than to see little; and his greatness, or the
   quantity of Being he partakes of, does nothing towards bettering his
   dissent from Being in general, because there is no proportion between
   Finite Being, however great, and Universal Being.

   Coroll. 1. Hence it is impossible that God should be any otherwise than
   excellent; for he is the Infinite, Universal, and All-comprehending
   Existence.

   2. Hence God infinitely loves himself, because his Being is Infinite.
   He is in himself, if I may so say, an Infinite Quantity of Existence.

   3. Hence we learn one reason, why persons, who view Death merely as
   Annihilation, have a great abhorrence of it, though they live a very
   afflicted life.

   [63.] Sensible Things, by virtue of the harmony and proportion that is
   seen in them, carry the appearance of perceiving and willing being.
   They evidently show at first blush, the action and governing of
   understanding and volition. The Notes of a tune or the strokes of an
   acute penman, for instance, are placed in such exact order, having such
   mutual respect one to another, that they carry with them, into the mind
   of him that sees or hears, the conception of an understanding and will
   exerting itself in these appearances: and were it not that we, by
   reflection and reasoning, are led to an extrinsic intelligence and
   will, that was the cause, it would seem to be in the Notes and Strokes
   themselves. They would appear like a society of so many perceiving
   beings, sweetly agreeing together. I can conceive of no other reason
   why Equality and Proportion should be pleasing to him that perceives,
   but only that it has an appearance of Consent.

   [64.] Excellency may be distributed into Greatness and Beauty. The
   former is the Degree of Being; the latter is Beings' Consent to Being.

   [49.] It is reasonable to suppose that the mere perception of Being is
   agreeable to perceiving Being, as well as Being's consent to Being. If
   absolute Being were not agreeable to perceiving Being, the
   contradiction of Being to Being would not be unpleasant. Hence there is
   in the mind an inclination to perceive the things that are, or the
   Desire of Truth. The exercise of this disposition of the soul, to a
   high degree, is the passion of admiration. When the mind beholds a very
   uncommon object, there is the pleasure of a new perception, with the
   excitation of the appetite of knowing more of it, as the causes and
   manner of production and the like, and the uneasiness arising from its
   being so hidden. These compose that emotion called Admiration.

   [45.] Excellence. 1. when we spake of Excellence in Bodies, we were
   obliged to borrow the word, Consent, from Spiritual things; but
   Excellence in and among Spirits is, in its prime and proper sense,
   Being's consent to Being. There is no other proper consent but that of
   Minds, even of their Will; which, when it is of Minds towards Minds, it
   is Love, and when of Minds towards other things, it is Choice.
   Wherefore all the Primary and Original beauty or excellence, that is
   among Minds, is Love; and into this may all be resolved that is found
   among them.

   2. When we spake of External excellency, we said that Being's consent
   to being must needs be agreeable to Perceiving Being. But now we are
   speaking of Spiritual things, we may change the phrase, and say, that
   Mind's love to Mind must needs be lovely to Beholding Mind; and Being's
   love to Being, in general, must needs be agreeable to Being that
   perceives it, because itself is a participation of Being in general.

   3. As to the proportion of this Love;--to greater Spirits, more, and to
   less, less;--it is beautiful, as it is a manifestation of love to
   Spirit or Being in general. And the want of this proportion is a
   deformity, because it is a manifestation of a defect of such a love. It
   shows that it is not Being, in general, but something else, that is
   loved, when love is not in proportion to the Extensiveness and
   Excellence of Being.

   4. Seeing God has so plainly revealed himself to us; and other minds
   are made in his image, and are emanations from him; we may judge what
   is the Excellence of other minds, by that is his, which we have shown
   is Love, His Infinite Beauty, is His Infinite mutual Love of Himself.
   Now God is the Prime and Original Being, the First and Last, and the
   Pattern of all, and has the sum of all perfection. We may therefore,
   doubtless, conclude, that all that is the perfection of Spirits may be
   resolved into that which is God's perfection, which is Love.

   5. There are several degrees of deformity or disagreeableness of
   dissent from Being. One is, when there is only merely a dissent from
   Being. This is disagreeable to Being, (for Perceiving Being only is
   properly Being). Still more disagreeable is a dissent to very excellent
   Being, or, as we have explained, to a Being that consents in a high
   degree to Being, because such a Being by such a consent becomes bigger;
   and a dissenting from such a Being includes, also, a dissenting from
   what he consents with, which is other Beings, or Being in general.
   Another deformity, that is more odious than mere dissent from Being,
   is, for a Being to dissent from, or not to consent with, a Being who
   consents with his Being. It is a manifestation of a greater dissent
   from Being than ordinary; for the Being perceiving, knows that it is
   natural to Being, to consent with what consents with it, as we have
   shown It therefore manifests an extraordinary dissent, that consent to
   itself will not draw its consent. The deformity, for the same reason,
   is greater still, if there be dissent from consenting Being. There are
   such contrarieties and jars in Being, as must necessarily produce
   jarring and horror in perceiving Being.

   6. Dissent from such Beings, if that be their fixed nature, is a
   manifestation of Consent to Being in general; for consent to being is
   dissent from that which dissents from Being.

   7. Wherefore all Virtue, which is the Excellency of minds, is resolved
   into Love to Being; and nothing is virtuous or beautiful in Spirits,
   any otherwise than as it is an exercise, or fruit, or manifestation, of
   this love; and nothing is sinful or deformed in Spirits, but as it is
   the defect of, or contrary to, these.

   8. When we speak of Being in general, we may be understood of the
   Divine Being, for he is an Infinite Being; therefore all others must
   necessarily be considered as nothing. As to Bodies, we have shown in
   another place, that they have no proper Being of their own. And as to
   Spirits, they are the communications of the Great Original Spirit; and
   doubtless, in metaphysical strictness and propriety, He is, as there is
   none else. He is likewise Infinitely Excellent, and all Excellence and
   Beauty is derived from him, in the same manner as all being. And all
   other Excellence, is, in strictness only, a shadow of his. We proceed,
   therefore, to show how all Spiritual Excellence is resolved into Love.

   9. As to God's Excellence, it is evident it consists in the Love of
   himself; for he was as excellent before he created the Universe, as he
   is now. But if the Excellence of Spirits consists in their disposition
   and action, God could be excellent no other way at that time; for all
   the exertions of himself were towards himself. But he exerts himself
   towards himself, no other way, than in infinitely loving and delighting
   in himself; in the mutual love of the Father and the Son. This makes
   the Third, the Personal Holy Spirit, or the Holiness of God, which is
   his infinite Beauty; and this is God's Infinite Consent to Being in
   general. And his love to the creature is his excellence, or the
   communication of Himself, his complacency in them according as they
   partake of more or less of Excellence and beauty, that is, of holiness
   (which consists in love); that is, according as he communicates more or
   less of his Holy Spirit.

   10. As to that Excellence, that Created Spirits partake of; that it is
   all to be resolved into Love, none will doubt, that knows what is the
   Sum of the Ten Commandments; or believes what the Apostle says, That
   Love is the fulfilling of the Law; or what Christ says, That on these
   two, loving God and our neighbour, hang all the Law and the Prophets.
   This doctrine is often repeated in the New Testament. We are told that
   the End of the Commandment is Love; that to Love, is to fulfill the
   Royal Law; and that all the Law is fulfilled in this one word, Love.

   11. I know of no difficulties worth insisting on, except pertaining to
   the spiritual excellence of Justice; but enough has been said already
   to resolve them. Though Injustice is the greatest of all deformities,
   yet justice is no otherwise excellent, than as it is the exercise,
   fruit, and manifestation of the mind's love or consent to Being; nor
   Injustice deformed any otherwise, than as it is the highest degree of
   the contrary. Injustice is not to exert ourselves towards any Being as
   it deserves, or to do it contrary to what it deserves, in doing good or
   evil, or in acts of Consent or Dissent. There are two ways of deserving
   our Consent, and the acts of it: (By deserving any thing, we are to
   understand that the nature of being requires it:) By extensiveness and
   excellence; and by consent to that particular being. The reason of the
   deformity of not proportioning our consent, and the exercise of it, may
   be seen in paragraphs 3 and 5. As to the beauty of Vindictive Justice,
   see paragraph 6.

   12. Tis peculiar to God, that he has beauty within himself, consisting
   in Being's consenting with his own Being, or the love of himself, in
   his own Holy Spirit. Whereas the excellence of others is in loving
   others, in loving God, and in the communications of his Spirit.

   13. We shall be in danger, when we meditate on this love of God to
   himself, as being the thing wherein his infinite excellence and
   loveliness consists, of some alloy to the sweetness of our view, by its
   appearing with something of the aspect and cast of what we call
   self-love. But we are to consider that this love includes in it, or
   rather is the same as, a love to every thing, as they are all
   communications of himself. So that we are to conceive of Divine
   Excellence as the Infinite General Love, that which reaches all,
   proportionally, with perfect purity and sweetness; yea, it includes the
   true Love of all creatures, for that is his Spirit, or which is the
   same thing, his Love. And if we take notice, when we are in the best
   frames meditating on Divine Excellence, our idea of that tranquillity
   and peace, which seems to be overspread and cast abroad upon the whole
   Earth, and Universe, naturally dissolves itself into the idea of a
   General Love and Delight, every where diffused.

   14. Conscience is that Sense the Mind has of this Consent: Which Sense
   consist in the Consent of the Perceiving Being, to such a General
   Consent; (that is, of such perceiving Beings, as are capable of so
   general a perception, as to have any notion of Being in general;) and
   the Dissent of his mind to a Dissent from Being in general. We have
   said already, that it is naturally agreeable to Perceiving Being that
   Being should consent to Being, and the contrary disagreeable. If by any
   means, therefore, a particular and restrained love overcomes this
   General Consent;--the foundation of that Consent yet remaining in the
   nature, exerts itself again, so that there is the contradiction of one
   consent to another. And as it is naturally agreeable to every Being, to
   have being consent to him; the mind, after it has thus exerted an act
   of dissent to Being in general, has a sense that Being in general
   dissents from it, which is most disagreeable to it. And as he is
   conscious of a dissent from Universal Being, and of that Being's
   dissent from him, wherever he is, he sees what excites horror. And by
   inclining or doing that, which is against his natural inclination as a
   Perceiving Being, he must necessarily cause uneasiness, inasmuch as
   that natural inclination is contradicted. And this is the Disquiet of
   Conscience. And, though the Disposition be changed, the remembrance of
   his having so done in time past, and the idea being still tied to that
   of himself, he is uneasy. The notion of such a dissent any where, as we
   have shown, is odious; but the notion of its being in himself, renders
   it uneasy and disquieting. But when there is no sense of any such
   dissent from Being in general, there is no contradiction to the natural
   inclination of Perceiving Being. And when he reflects, he has a sense
   that Being in general doth not dissent from him; and then there is
   Peace of Conscience; though he has a remembrance of past dissensions
   with nature. Yet if by any means it be possible, when he has the idea
   of it, to conceive of it as not belonging to him, he has the same
   Peace. And if he has a sense not only of his not dissenting, but of his
   consenting to Being in general, or Nature, and acting accordingly; he
   has a sense that Nature, in general, consents to him: he has not only
   Peace, but Joy, of mind, wherever he is. These things are obviously
   invigorated by the knowledge of God and his Constitution about us, and
   by the light of the Gospel.

   [The preceding articles were written as comments on the various
   subjects treated of, while the author was studying the Essay on the
   Human Understanding. It is not improbable that some of the later
   numbers were written while the author was a tutor in College.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [103] The preceding articles were set down from time to time at the
   close of the work, in two series; the first ending with No. 26.

   [104] This article, and the numbers following, viz. 62, 63. &c. are
   inserted in the manuscript distinctly from the rest, and were written
   probably at a somewhat later period of life.
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX, NO. V.

   FAMILY AND DESCENDANTS OF PRESIDENT EDWARDS.

   First.--family.

   THE following is a copy of the Family Record, in his own hand, in the
   Family Bible.

   "Jonathan Edwards, son of Timothy and Esther Edwards of Windsor in
   Connecticut.

   I was born Oct. 5, 1703.

   I was ordained at Northampton, Feb. 15, 1727.

   I was married to Miss Sarah Pierrepont, July 28, 1727.

   My wife was born Jan. 9, 1710.

   My daughter Sarah was born on a sabbath day, between 2 and 3 o'clock in
   the afternoon, Aug. 25, 1728.

   My daughter Jerusha was born on a sabbath day, towards the conclusion
   of the afternoon exercise, April 26, 1730.

   My daughter Ester was born on a sabbath day, between 9 and 10 o'clock
   in the forenoon, Feb. 13, 1732.

   My daughter Mary was born April 7th 1734, being sabbath day, the sun
   being about an hour and a half high, in the morning.

   My daughter Lucy was born on Tuesday, the last day of Aug. 1736,
   between 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning.

   My son Timothy was born on Tuesday, July 25, 1738, between 6 and 7
   o'clock in the morning.

   My daughter Susannah was born on Friday, June 20, 1740 at about 3 in
   the morning.

   All the family above named had the measles, at the latter end of the
   year 1740.

   My daughter Eunice was born on Monday morning, May 9, 1743, about half
   an hour after midnight, and was baptized the sabbath following.

   My son Jonathan was born on a sabbath-day night, May 26, 1745, between
   9 and 10 o'clock, and was baptized the sabbath following.

   My daughter Jerusha died on a sabbath day, Feb. 14, 1747, about 5
   o'clock in the morning, aged 17.

   My daughter Elizabeth was born on Wednesday, May 6, 1747, between 10
   and 11 o'clock at night, and was baptized the sabbath following.

   My son Pierrepont was born on a sabbath-day night, April 8, 1750,
   between 8 and 9 o'clock; and was baptized the sabbath following.

   I was dismissed from my pastoral relation to the first church in
   Northampton, June 22d, 1750.

   My daughter Sarah was married to Mr. Elihu Parsons, June 11, 1750.

   My daughter Mary was married to Timothy Dwight, Esq. of Northampton,
   Nov. 8, 1750.

   My daughter Esther was married to the Rev. Aaron Burr of Newark, June
   29, 1752.

   I was properly initiated President of New Jersey college, by taking the
   previous oaths, Feb. 16, 1758."

   Rev. Jonathan Edwards, President of Nassau Hall, died of the small pox,
   March 22, 1758, and was buried March 24th.

   Esther, Burr, wife of Rev. Aaron Burr, died at Princeton, April 7,
   1758, of a short illness, aged 26.

   Sarah Edwards, wife of Jonathan Edwards, died Oct. 2, 1758, about 12
   o'clock, and was buried at Princeton the day following.

   Elizabeth Edwards, daughter of Jonathan and Sarah, died at Northampton,
   Jan. 1. 1762, aged 14.

   Lucy Woodbridge died at Stockbridge in Oct. 1786, aged 50.

   Rev. Jonathan Edwards, D.D. died at Schenectady, Aug. 1. 1801, aged 56.

   Susannah Porter died at Hadley, in the spring of 1802, aged 61.

   Sarah Parsons died at Goshen, Mass. May 15, 1805, aged 76.

   Mary Dwight died at Northampton, Feb. 1807, aged 72.

   Timothy Edwards died at Stockbridge in the autumn of 1813, aged 75.

   Eunice Hunt died at Newburn, N.C. in the autumn of 1822, aged 79.

   Pierrepont Edwards died at Bridgeport, April 14, 1826, aged 76.

   Second.(more remote descendants.

   I. Elibu Parsons, Esq. Sarah Edwards, married June 11, 1750. They lived
   at Stockbridge, and afterwards at Goshen.

   Children.

   1. Ebenezer. Died in infancy.

   2. Esther, born May 17, 1752, died at Stockbridge, Nov. 17, 1774.

   3. Elihu, born Dec. 9, 1753, married Rhoda Hinsdale of Lenox. He died
   at Goshen in Aug. 1804. They had 6 children.

   4. Eliphalet, born Jan. 1756; married Martha Young of Long Island. He
   died at Chenango, N.Y. in Jan. 1813. They had 5 children.

   5. Lydia, born Jan. 15. 1757; married Aaron Ingersoll of Lee. They had
   4 children.

   6. Lucretia, born Aug. 3, 1759; married Rev. Justin Parsons of
   Pittsfield, Vt. She died at Goshen in Dec. 1786. They had 1 child.

   7. Sarah, born Sept. 8, 1760; married David Ingersoll of Lee, Dec, 13,
   1781. They had 13 children.

   8. Lucy, born Oct. 14, 1762; married Joshua Ketchum. They had 3
   children.

   9. Jonathan. Died an infant.

   10. Jerusha. Died an infant.

   11. Jerusha, born May, 1766; married Ira Seymour of Victor, N.Y. They
   have had 5 children.

   II. Jerusha, died unmarried, at the age of 17.

   III. Rev. Aaron Burr, Esther Edwards, married June 29, 1752. They lived
   at Newark, and Princeton.

   Children.

   1. Sarah, born May 3, 1754; married Hon. Tapping Reeve of Litchfield,
   Conn. They had 1 child, Aaron Burr Reeve.

   2. Hon. Aaron Burr, Vice President of the United States, born Feb. 6,
   1756; married Mrs. Theodosia Prevost. They had one daughter.

   IV. Timothy Dwight, Esq. Mary Edwards, married Nov. 8, 1750. They lived
   at Northampton. He died at Natchez, in 1776; and she, in Feb. 1807, at
   Northampton.

   Children 13.

   1. Rev. Timothy Dwight, DD. LL. D., President of Yale college, born May
   14, 1752; married Mary, the daughter of Benjamin Woolsey, Esq. of
   Dorsous, L.I. They had 7 children. He died at New-Haven, Jan 11. 1817.

   2. Sereno Edwards Dwight, M.D., born 1753: married Miss Lyman. They had
   2 children. He was lost at sea, on the coast of Nova Scotia, in 1779.

   3. Jonathan Dwight, born 1755; married Miss Wright. They had 2
   children. he died in 180-.

   4. Erastus Dwight, born 1756; died, unmarried, in 1825.

   5. Maurice William Dwight, M.D., born in 1758; married Margaret Dewitt.
   They had 2 children.

   6. Sarah, born May 29, 1760; married Seth Storrs of Northampton. She
   died at Northampton, in 1805.

   7. Hon. Theodore Dwight, born in 1762; married Abbey Alsop. They have 3
   children.

   8. Mary, born in 1764; married Lewis R. Morris. They had 1 child.

   9. Delia, born in 1766; married Jonathan Edwards Porter, Esq. They had
   3 children.

   10. Elizabeth, born in 1771; married William W. Woolsey, Esq. They had
   8 children. She died at New-Haven in the autumn of 1812.

   12. Cecil Dwight, born June 10, 1774; married Mary Clap. They have had
   11 children.

   13. Henry Edwin Dwight, born in 1776; married Electa Keys. They had 6
   children.

   V. Jahleel Woodbridge, Esq., Lucy Edwards, married June 1764. They
   lived at Stockbridge.

   Children 7.

   1. Jonathan Woodbridge, Esq. born 1766; married Sarah Meach. They had 8
   children.

   2. Stephen, born 1778, and had several children.

   3. Joseph Woodbridge, Esq., born in 1770; married Louisa Hopkins. They
   had 4 children.

   4. Lucy, born in 1772; married Henry Brown. They had 9 or 10 children.

   5. John Woodbridge, Esq.

   6. Sarah, married a Mr. Leicester of Griswold, Conn. They had 5
   children.

   7. Rev Timothy Woodbridge, of Green River, N.Y.

   VI. Hon. Timothy Edwards, Rhoda Ogden, married Sept. 25, 1760. They
   lived at Stockbridge.

   Children 15. Two died young.

   1. Sarah. 2. Edward. 3. Jonathan. 4. Richard. 5. Phebe. 6. William. 7.
   Robert Ogden. 8. Timothy. 9. Mary Ogden. 10. Rhoda. 11. Mary. 12. Anna.
   13. Robert.

   VII. Eleazar Porter, Esq. Susannah Edwards, married Sept. 1761. They
   lived at Hadley.

   Children 5.

   1. Eleazar. 2. William. 3. Jonathan Edwards. 4. Moses. 5. Pierrepont.

   VIII. Thomas Pollock, Esq. Eunice Edwards, married Jan. 1764. They
   lived at Elizabethtown, N. J.

   Children 5.

   1. Elizabeth, married(Williams, Esq.

   2. Hester, died unmarried.

   3. Thomas Pollock, Esq.

   4. Frances, married John Deveraux, Esq. They have 3 children

   5. George Pollock, Esq.

   IX. Rev. Jonathan Edwards, D.D. President of Union College, Sarah
   Porter, married in 1770. They lived at New-Haven, and Schenectady.

   Children 4. One died young.

   1. Mary, married Mr. Hoit, of Schenectady.

   2. Jonathan Walter Edwards, Esq. Married Elizabeth Tryon.

   3. Jerusha, married Rev. Calvin Chapin, D.D. of Stepney.

   X. Elizabeth. Died unmarried, at the age of 14.

   XI. Hon. Pierrepont Edwards, Frances Ogden, married May, 1769. They
   lived at New-Haven.

   Children 10. Of whom 4 died in infancy.

   1. Susan, married Samuel W. Johnson, Esq. They have had 6 children.

   2. Hon. John Starkes Edwards, married Louisa Morris. They had 3
   children.

   3. Hon. Henry Waggerman Edwards, married Lydia Miller. They have had 8
   children.

   4. Hon. Ogden Edwards, married Harriet Penfield. They had 10 children.

   5. Alfred Edwards, married Deborah Glover.

   6. Henrietta Frances, married Eli Whitney, Esq. They had 4 children.
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX, NO. VI.

   CATALOGUE OF PRESIDENT EDWARDS'S WORKS, HERETOFORE PUBLISHED.

   1731. God glorified in Man's Dependence; A Sermon on 1 Cor. i. 29-31.
   Boston.

   1734. A Divine and Supernatural Light imparted to the Soul by the
   Spirit of God; A Sermon on Matt. xvi. 17. Boston

   1735. (Probably.) Curse ye Meroz; A Sermon on Judges v. 3. (This I have
   not found.)

   1736. Narrative of Surprising Conversions. London.

   1738. Five Discourses prefixed to the first American edition of the
   preceding. Boston.

   1741. Sinners in the hands of an angry God; A Sermon on Deut. xxxii.
   35. Boston.

   1741. Sorrows of the Bereaved spread before Jesus; A Sermon at the
   Funeral of the Rev. William Williams, on Matt. xiv. 12. Boston.

   1741. Distinguishing Marks of a Work of the True Spirit; A Sermon on 1
   John iv. 1.preached at New-Haven, Sept. 10. 1741. Boston.

   1742. Thoughts on the Revival of Religion in New England in 1740.
   Boston.

   1743. The Watchman's Duty and Account; A Sermon on Heb. xiii. 17. at
   the Ordination of the Rev. Jonathan Judd. Boston.

   1744. The True Excellency of a Gospel Minister; A Sermon on John v. 35.
   At the Ordination of the Rev. Robert Abererombie. Boston.

   1746. Treatise on Religious Affections. Boston.

   1747. True Saints, when absent from the Body, present with the Lord; A
   Sermon on .2 Cor. v. 8. At the Funeral of Rev. David Brainerd. Boston.

   1748. God's awful Judgments in breaking the Strong Rods of Community; A
   Sermon on the Death of Col. John Stoddard. Boston.

   1749. Life and Diary of the Rev. David Brainerd. Boston.

   1749. Christ the Example of Gospel Ministers; A Sermon on John xiii.
   15, 16. At the Ordination of the Rev. Job Strong. Boston.

   1749. Qualifications for Full Communion in the Visible Church. Boston.

   1750. Farewell Sermon to the People of Northampton. Boston.

   1752. True Grace distinguished from the Experience of Devils; A Sermon
   on James ii. 19. Before the Synod of Newark. New York.

   1754. On the Freedom of the Will. Boston.

   1758. On Original Sin. Boston.

   1765. Eighteen Sermons, annexed to the Life by Dr. Hopkins. Boston.

   1777. The History of Redemption. Edinburgh.

   1788. Nature of Virtue. Boston.

   1788. God's Last End in the Creation. In the same pamphlet as the
   preceding.

   1788. Practical Sermons. Edinburgh.

   1789. Twenty Sermons. Edinburgh.

   1793. Miscellaneous Observations. Edinburgh.

   1796. Miscellaneous Remarks. Edinburgh.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

    CAREFUL AND STRICT INQUIRY

        INTO THE

MODERN PREVAILING NOTIONS

        OF THAT

  FREEDOM OF WILL

   WHICH IS SUPPOSED TO BE ESSENTIAL TO MORAL AGENCY, VIRTUE. AND VICE,
   REWARD AND PUNISHMENT, PRAISE AND BLAME.

   Rom. ix. 16 it is not him that willeth.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PREFACE

   Many find much fault with calling professing Christians, that differ
   one from another in some matters of opinion, by distinct names;
   especially calling them by the names of particular men, who have
   distinguished themselves as maintainers and promoters of those
   opinions: as calling some professing Christians Arminians, from
   Arminius; others Arians, from Arius; others Socinians, from Socinus,
   and the like. They think it unjust in itself; as it seems to suppose
   and suggest, that the persons marked out by these names, received those
   doctrines which they entertain, out of regard to, and reliance on,
   those men after whom they are named; as though they made them their
   rule; in the same manner, as the followers of christ are called
   Christians, after his name, whom they regard and depend upon, as their
   great Head and Rule. Whereas, this is an unjust and groundless
   imputation on those that go under the forementioned denominations.
   Thus, say they, there is not the least ground to suppose, that the
   chief divines, who embrace the scheme of doctrine which is, by many,
   called Arminianismt believe it the more, because Arminius believed it:
   and that there is no reason to think any other, than that they
   sincerely and impartially study the Holy Scriptures, and inquire after
   the mind of Christ, with as much judgment and sincerity, as any of
   those that call them by these names; that they seek after truth, and
   are not careful whether they think exactly as Arminius did; yea, that,
   in some things, they actually differ from him. This practice is also
   esteemed actually injurious on this account, that it is supposed
   naturally to lead the multitude to imagine the difference between
   persons thus named, and others, to be greater than it is; so great, as
   if they were another species of beings. And they object against it as
   arising from an uncharitable, narrow, contracted spirit; which, they
   say, commonly inclines persons to confine all that is good to
   themselves, and their own party, and to make a wide distinction between
   themselves and others, and stigmatize those that differ from them with
   odious names. They say, moreover, that the keeping up such a
   distinction of names, has a direct tendency to uphold distance and
   disaffection, and keep alive mutual hatred among Christians, who ought
   all to be united in friendship and charity, though they cannot, in all
   things, think alike.

   I confess, these things are very plausible; and I will not deny, that
   there are some unhappy consequences of this distinction of names, and
   that men's infirmities and evil dispositions often make an ill
   improvement of it. But yet, I humbly conceive, these objections are
   carried far beyond reason. The generality of mankind are disposed
   enough, and a great deal too much, to uncharitableness, and to be
   censorious and bitter towards those that differ from them in religious
   opinions: which evil temper of mind will take occasion to exert itself
   from many things in themselves innocent, useful, and necessary. But yet
   there is no necessity to suppose, that our thus distinguishing persons
   of different opinions by different names, arises mainly from an
   uncharitable spirit. It may arise from the disposition there is in
   mankind (whom God has distinguished with an ability and inclination for
   speech) to improve the benefit of language, in the proper use and
   design of names, given to things of which they have often occasion to
   speak, which is to enable them to express their ideas with ease and
   expedition, without being encumbered with an obscure and difficult
   circumlocution. And our thus distinguishing persons of different
   opinions in religious matters may not imply any more, than that there
   is a difference; a difference of which we find we have often occasion
   to take notice: and it is always a defect in language, in such cases,
   to be obliged to make use of a description, instead of a name. Thus we
   have often occasion to speak of those who are the descendants of the
   ancient inhabitants of France, in distinction from the descendants of
   the inhabitants of Spain; and find the great convenience of those
   distinguishing words, French and Spaniard; by which the signification
   of our minds is quick and easy, and our speech is delivered from the
   burden of a continual reiteration of diffuse descriptions, with which
   it must otherwise be embarrassed.

   That there is occasion to speak often concerning the difference of
   those, who in their general scheme of divinity agree with these two
   noted men, Calvin and Arminius, is what the practice of the latter
   confesses; who are often, in their discourses and writings, taking
   notice of the supposed absurd and pernicious opinions of the former
   sort. And therefore the making use of different names in this case
   cannot reasonably be objected against, as a thing which must come from
   so bad a cause as they assign. It is easy to be accounted for, without
   supposing it to arise from any other source, than the exigence of the
   case, whereby mankind express those things, which they have frequent
   occasion to mention, by certain distinguishing names. It is an effect,
   similar to what we see in cases innumerable, where the cause is not at
   all blameworthy.

   Nevertheless, at first, I had thoughts of carefully avoiding the use of
   the appellation, Arminian, in this Treatise. But I soon found I should
   be put to great difficulty by it; and that my discourse would be too
   much encumbered with circumlocution, instead of a name, which would
   better express the thing intended. And therefore I must ask the excuse
   of such as are apt to be offended with things of this nature, that I
   have so freely used the term Arminian in the following Discourse. I
   profess it to be without any design to stigmatize persons of any sort
   with a name of reproach, or at all to make them appear more odious. If,
   when I had occasion to speak of those divines who are commonly called
   by this name, I had, instead of styling them Arminians, called them "
   these men" as Dr. Whitby does Calvinistic divines, it probably would
   not have been taken any better, or thought to show a better temper, or
   more good manners. I have done as I would be done by, in this matter.
   However the term Calvinistic is, in these days, among most, a term of
   greater reproach than the term Arminian; yet I should not take it at
   all amiss, to be called a Calvinist, for distinction's sake: though I
   utterly disclaim a dependence on Calvin, or believing the doctrines
   which I hold, because he believed and taught them; and cannot justly be
   charged with believing in every thing just as he taught.

   But, lest I should really be an occasion of injury to some persons, I
   would here give notice, that though I generally speak of that doctrine,
   concerning free-will and moral agency, which I oppose as an Arminian
   doctrine; yet I would not be understood as asserting, that every divine
   or author, whom I have occasion to mention as maintaining that
   doctrine, was properly an Arminian, or one of that sort which is
   commonly called by that name. Some of them went far beyond the
   Arminians; and I would by no means charge Arminians in general with all
   the corrupt doctrine which these maintained. Thus, for instance, it
   would be very injurious, if I should rank Arminian divines, in general,
   with such authors as Mr. Chubb. I doubt not, many of them have some of
   his doctrines in abhorrence; though he agrees, for the most part, with
   Arminians, in his notion of the Freedom of the Will. And, on the other
   hand, though I suppose this notion to be a leading article in the
   Arminian scheme, that which, if pursued in its consequences, will truly
   infer, or naturally lead to all the rest; yet I do not charge all that
   have held this doctrine, with being Arminians. For whatever may be the
   consequences of the doctrine really, yet some that hold this doctrine,
   may not own nor see these consequences; and it would be unjust, in many
   instances, to charge every author with believing and maintaining all
   the real consequences of his avowed doctrines. And I desire it may be
   particularly noted, that though I have occasion, in the following
   Discourse, often to mention the author of the book, entitled An Essay
   on the Freedom of the Will, in God and the Creature, as holding that
   notion of Freedom of Will, which I oppose; yet I do not mean to call
   him an Arminian: however, in that doctrine he agrees with Arminians,
   and departs from the current and general opinion of Calvinists. If the
   author of that Essay be the same as it is commonly ascribed to, he
   doubtless was not one that ought to bear that name. But however good a
   divine he was in many respects, yet that particular Arminian doctrine
   which he maintained, is never the better for being held by such an one:
   nor is there less need of opposing it on that account, but rather more;
   as it will be likely to have the more pernicious influence, for being
   taught by a divine of his name and character; supposing the doctrine to
   be wrong, and in itself to be of an ill tendency.

   I have nothing further to say by way of preface; but only to bespeak
   the reader's candour, and calm attention to what I have written. The
   subject is of such importance, as to demand attention, and the most
   thorough consideration. Of all kinds of knowledge that we can ever
   obtain, the knowledge of God, and the knowledge of ourselves, are the
   most important. As religion is the great business for which we are
   created, and on which our happiness depends; and as religion consists
   in an intercourse between ourselves and our Maker; and so has its
   foundation in God's nature and ours, and in the relation that God and
   we stand in to each other; therefore a true knowledge of both must be
   needful, in order to true religion. But the knowledge of ourselves
   consists chiefly in right apprehensions concerning those two chief
   faculties of our nature, the understanding and will. Both are very
   important: yet the science of the latter must be confessed to be of
   greatest moment; inasmuch as all virtue and religion have their seat
   more immediately in the will, consisting more especially in right acts
   and habits of this faculty. And the grand question about the Freedom of
   the Will, is the main point that belongs to the science of the Will.
   Therefore, I say, the importance of the subject greatly demands the
   attention of Christians, and especially of divines. But as to my manner
   of handling the subject, I would be far from presuming to say, that it
   is such as demands the attention of the reader to what I have written.
   I am ready to own, that in this matter I depend on the reader's
   courtesy. But only thus for I may have some colour for putting in a
   claim; that if the reader be disposed to pass his censure on what I
   have written, I may be fully and patiently heard, and well attended to,
   before I am condemned. However, this is what I would humbly ask of my
   readers; together with the prayers of all sincere lovers of truth, that
   I may have much of that Spirit which Christ promised his disciples,
   which guides into all truth; and that the blessed and powerful
   influences of this Spirit would make truth victorious in the world.

        A

  CAREFUL AND STRICT INQUIRY, &C.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART I.

   WHEREIN ARE EXPLAINED AND STATED VARIOUS TERMS AND THINGS BELONGING TO
   THE SUBJECT OF THE ENSUING DISCOURSE
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Concerning the Nature of the Will.

   It may possibly be thought, that there is no great need of going about
   to define or describe the Will; this word being generally as well
   understood as any other words we can use to explain it: and so perhaps
   it would be, had not philosophers, metaphysicians, and polemic divines,
   brought the matter into obscurity by the things they have said of it.
   But since it is so, I think it may be of some use, and will tend to
   greater clearness in the following discourse, to say a few things
   concerning it.

   And therefore I observe, that the Will (without any metaphysical
   refining) is, That by which the mind chooses any thing. The faculty of
   the Will, is that power, or principle of mind, by which it is capable
   of choosing: an act of the Will is the same as an act of choosing or
   choice.

   If any think it is a more perfect definition of the Will, to say, that
   it is that by which the soul either chooses or refuses; I am content
   with it: though I think it enough to say, It is that by which the soul
   chooses: for in every act of Will whatsoever, the mind chooses one
   thing rather than another; it chooses something rather than the
   contrary or rather than the want or non-existence of that thing. So in
   every act of refusal, the mind chooses the absence of the thing
   refused; the positive and the negative are set before the mind for its
   choice, and it chooses the negative; and the mind's making its choice
   in that case is properly the act of the Will: the Will's determining
   between the two, is a voluntary determination; but that is the same
   thing as making a choice. So that by whatever names we call the act of
   the Will, choosing, refusing, approving, disapproving, liking,
   disliking, embracing, rejecting, determining, directing, commanding,
   forbidding, inclining, or being averse, being pleased or displeased
   with; all may be reduced to this of choosing. For the soul to act
   voluntarily, is evermore to act electively.

   Mr. Locke [105] says, "The Will signifies nothing but a power or
   ability to prefer or choose." And, in the foregoing page, he says, "The
   word preferring seems best to express the act of volition;" but adds,
   that "it does it not precisely; for, though a man would prefer flying
   to walking, yet who can say he ever wills it?" But the instance he
   mentions, does not prove that there is any thing else in willing, but
   merely preferring: for it should be considered what is the immediate
   object of the Will, with respect to a man's walking, or any other
   external action; which is not being removed from one place to another;
   on the earth, or through the air; these are remoter objects of
   preference; but such or such an immediate exertion of himself. The
   thing next chosen, or preferred, when a man wills to walk is not his
   being removed to such a place where he would be, but such an exertion
   and motion of his legs and feet &c, in order to it. And his willing
   such an alteration in his body in the present moment, is nothing else
   but his choosing or preferring such an alteration in his body at such a
   moment, or his liking it better than the forbearance of it. And God has
   so made and established the human nature, the soul being united to a
   body in proper state that the soul preferring or choosing such an
   immediate exertion or alteration of the body, such an alteration
   instantaneously follows. There is nothing else in the actions of my
   mind, that I am conscious of while I walk, but only my preferring or
   choosing, through successive moments, that there should be such
   alterations of my external sensations and motions; together with a
   concurring habitual expectation that it will be so; having ever found
   by experience, that on such an immediate preference, such sensations
   and motions do actually, instantaneously, and constantly arise. But it
   is not so in the case of flying; though a man may be said remotely to
   choose or prefer flying; yet he does not prefer, or desire, under
   circumstances in view, any immediate exertion of the members of his
   body in order to it; because he has no expectation that he should
   obtain the desired end by any such exertion; and he does not prefer, or
   incline to, any bodily exertion, under this apprehended circumstance,
   of its being wholly in vain. So that if we carefully distinguish the
   proper objects of the several acts of the Will, it will not appear by
   this, and such like instances, that there is any difference between
   volition and preference; or that a man's choosing liking best, or being
   pleased with a thing, are not the same with his willing that thing.
   Thus an act of the Will is commonly expressed by its pleasing a man to
   do thus or thus; and a man doing as he wills, and doing as he pleases
   are in common speech the same thing.

   Mr. Locke [106] says, "The Will is perfectly distinguished from Desire;
   which in the very same action may have a quite contrary tendency from
   that which our Wills sets us upon. A man, says he, whom I cannot deny,
   may oblige me to use persuasions to another, which, at the same time I
   am speaking, I may wish not prevail on him. In this case, it is plain
   the Will and Desire run counter." I do not suppose, that Will and
   Desire are words of precisely the same signification: Will seems to be
   a word of more general signification, extending to things present and
   absent. Desire respects something absent. I may prefer my present
   situation and posture, suppose sitting still, or having my eyes open,
   and so may will it. But yet I cannot think they are so entirely
   distinct, that they can ever be properly said to run counter. A man
   never, in any instance, wills any thing contrary to his desires, or
   desires any thing contrary to his Will. The forementioned instance,
   which Mr. Locke produces, is no proof that he ever does. He may, on
   some consideration or other will to utter speeches which have a
   tendency to persuade another, and still may desire that they may not
   persuade him; but yet his Will and Desire do not run counter all: the
   thing which he wills, the very same he desires; and he does not will a
   thing, and desire the contrary, in any particular. In this instance, it
   is not carefully observed, what is the thing willed, and what is the
   thing desired: if it were, it would be found, that Will and Desire do
   not clash in the least. The thing willed on some consideration, is to
   utter such words; and certainly, the same consideration so influences
   him, that he does not desire the contrary; all things considered, he
   chooses to utter such words, and does not desire not to utter them. And
   so as to the thing which Mr. Locke speaks of as desired, viz. That the
   words, though they tend to persuade, should not be effectual to that
   end, his Will is not contrary to this; he does not will that they
   should be effectual, but rather wills that they should not, as he
   desires. In order to prove that the Will and Desire may run counter, it
   should be shown that they may be contrary one to the other in the same
   thing, or with respect to the very same object of Will or Desire: but
   here the objects are two; and in each, taken by themselves, the Will
   and Desire agree. And it is no wonder that they should not agree in
   different things, though but little distinguished in their nature. The
   Will may not agree with the Will, nor Desire agree with Desire, in
   different things. As in this very instance which Mr. Locke mentions, a
   person may, on some consideration, desire to use persuasions, and at
   the same time may desire they may not prevail; but yet nobody will say,
   that Desire runs counter to Desire; or that this proves that Desire is
   perfectly a distinct thing from Desire.--The like might be observed of
   the other instance Mr. Locke produces, of a man's desiring to be eased
   of pain, &c.

   But, not to dwell any longer on this, whether Desire and Will, and
   whether Preference and Volition be precisely the same things, I trust
   it will he allowed by all, that in every act of Will there is an act of
   choice; that in every volition there is a preference , or a prevailing
   inclination of the soul, whereby at that instant, it is out of a state
   of perfect indifference, with respect to the direct object of the
   volition. So that in every act, or going forth of the Will; there is
   some preponderation of the mind, one way rather than another; and the
   soul had rather have or do one thing, than another, or than not to have
   or do that thing; and that where there is absolutely no preferring or
   choosing, but a perfect, continuing equilibrium, there is no volition.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [105] Human Understanding. Edit. 7. vol. i. p. 197

   [106] Hum. Und. vol. i. p203, 204
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Concerning the Determination of the Will.

   By determining the Will, if the phrase be used with any meaning, must
   be intended, causing that the act of the Will or choice should be thus,
   and not otherwise: and the Will is said to be determined, when, in
   consequence of some action, or influence, its choice is directed to,
   and fixed upon a particular object. As when we speak of the
   determination of motion, we mean causing the motion of the body to be
   in such a direction, rather than another.

   The Determination of the Will, supposes an effect, which must have a
   cause. If the Will be determined, there is a Determiner. This must be
   supposed to be intended even by them that say, The Will determines
   itself. If it be so, the Will is both Determiner and determined; it is
   a cause that acts and produces effects upon itself, and is the object
   of its own influence and action.

   With respect to that grand inquiry, "What determines the Will?'' it
   would be very tedious and unnecessary, at present, to examine all the
   various opinions, which have been advanced concerning this matter; nor
   is it needful that I should enter into a particular discussion of all
   points debated in disputes on that other question, "Whether the Will
   always follows the last dictate of the understanding?" It is sufficient
   to my present purpose to say, It is that motive, which, as it stands in
   view of the mind, is the strongest, that determines the Will. But may
   be necessary that I should a little explain my meaning.

   By motive I mean the whole of that which moves, excites, or invites the
   mind to volition, whether that be one thing singly, or many things
   conjunctly. Many particular things may concur, and unite their
   strength, to induce the mind; and when it is so, all together are as
   one complex motive. And when I speak of the strongest motive, I have
   respect to the strength of the whole that operates to induce a
   particular act of volition, whether that be the strength of one thing
   alone, or of many together.

   Whatever is objectively [107] a motive, in this sense, must, be
   something that is extant in the view or apprehension of the
   understanding, or perceiving faculty. Nothing can induce or invite the
   mind to will or act any thing, any further than it is perceived, or is
   some way or other in the mind's view; for what is wholly unperceived
   and perfectly out of the mind's view, cannot affect the mind at all. It
   is most evident, that nothing is in the mind, or reaches it, or takes
   any hold of it, any otherwise than as it is perceived or thought of.

   And I think it must also be allowed by all, that every thing that is
   properly called a motive, excitement, or inducement to a perceiving,
   willing agent, has some sort and degree of tendency, or advantage to
   move or excite the Will, previous to the effect, or to the act of the
   Will excited. This previous tendency of the motive is what I call the
   strength of the motive. That motive which has a less degree of previous
   advantage, or tendency to move the Will, or which appears less
   inviting, as it stands in the view of the mind, is what I call a weaker
   motive. On the contrary, that which appears most inviting, and has, by
   what appears concerning it to the understanding or apprehension, the
   greatest degree of previous tendency to excite and induce the choice,
   is what I call the strongest motive. And in this sense, I suppose the
   Will is always determined by the strongest motive.

   Things that exist in the view of the mind have their strength,
   tendency, or advantage to move, or excite its Will, from many things
   appertaining to the nature and circumstances of the thing viewed, the
   nature and circumstances of the mind that views, and the degree and
   manner of its view; of which it would perhaps be hard to make a perfect
   enumeration. But so much I think may be determined in general, without
   room for controversy, that whatever is perceived or apprehended by an
   intelligent and voluntary agent, which has the nature and influence of
   a motive to volition or choice, is considered or viewed as good; nor
   has it any tendency to engage the election of the soul in any further
   degree than it appears such. For to say otherwise, would be to say,
   that things that appear, have a tendency, by the appearance they make,
   to engage the mind to elect them, some other way than by their
   appearing eligible to it; which is absurd. And therefore it must be
   true, in some sense, that the Will always is, as the greatest apparent
   good is. But only, for the right understanding of this, two things must
   be well and distinctly observed.

   1. It must be observed in what sense I use the term "good;" namely, as
   of the same import with "agreeable." To appear good to the mind, as I
   use the phrase, is the same as to appear agreeable, or seem pleasing to
   the mind. Certainly, nothing appears inviting and eligible to the mind,
   or tending to engage its inclination and choice, considered as evil or
   disagreeable; nor indeed, as indifferent, and neither agreeable nor
   disagreeable. But if it tends to draw the inclination, and move the
   Will, it must be under the notion of that which suits the mind. And
   therefore that must have the greatest tendency to attract and engage
   it, which as it stands in the mind's view, suits it best, and pleases
   it most; and in that sense, is the greatest apparent good: to say
   otherwise, is little, if any thing, short of a direct and plain
   contradiction.

   The word "good," in this sense, includes in its signification, the
   removal or avoiding of evil, or of that which is disagreeable and
   uneasy. It is agreeable and pleasing, to avoid what is disagreeable and
   displeasing, and to have uneasiness removed. So that here is included
   what Mr. Locke supposes determines the Will. For when he speaks of
   "uneasiness," as determining the Will, he must be understood as
   supposing that the end or aim which governs in the volition or act of
   preference, is the avoiding or the removal of that uneasiness; and that
   is the same thing as choosing and seeking what is more easy and
   agreeable.

   2. When I say, that the Will is as the greatest apparent good, or, (as
   I have explained it,) that volition has always for its object the thing
   which appears most agreeable; it must be carefully observed, to avoid
   confusion and needless objection, that I speak of the direct and
   immediate object of the act of volition; and not some object to which
   the act of Will has only an indirect and remote respect. Many acts of
   volition have some remote relation to an object, that is different from
   the thing most immediately willed and chosen. Thus, when a drunkard has
   his liquor before him, and he has to choose whether to drink it, or no;
   the immediate objects, about which his present volition is conversant,
   and between which his choice now decides, are his own acts, in drinking
   the liquor, or letting it alone; and this will certainly be done
   according to what, in the present view of his mind, taken in the whole
   of it, is most agreeable to him. If he chooses to drink it, and not to
   let it alone, then this action, as it stands in the view of his mind,
   with all that belongs to its appearance there, is more agreeable and
   pleasing than letting it alone.

   But the objects to which this act of volition may relate more remotely,
   and between which his choice may determine more indirectly, are the
   present pleasure the man expects by drinking, and the future misery
   which he judges will be the consequence of it: he may judge that this
   future misery, when it comes, will be more disagreeable and unpleasant,
   than refraining from drinking now would be. But these two things are
   not the proper objects that the act of volition spoken of is next
   conversant about. For the act of Will spoken of, is concerning present
   drinking, or forbearing to drink. If he wills to drink, then drinking
   is the proper object of the act of his Will; and drinking, on some
   account or other, now appears most agreeable to him, and suits him
   best. If he chooses to refrain, then refraining is immediate object of
   his Will, and is most pleasing to him. If in the choice he makes in the
   case, he prefers a present pleasure to a future advantage, which he
   judges will be greater when it comes; then a lesser present pleasure
   appears more agreeable to him than a greater advantage at a distance.
   If on the contrary a future advantage is preferred, then that appears
   most agreeable, and suits him best. And so still, the present volition
   is, as the greatest apparent good at present is.

   I have rather chosen to express myself thus, "that the Will always is
   as the greatest apparent good," or "as what appears most agreeable,"
   than to say "that the Will is determined by the greatest apparent
   good," or " by what seems most agreeable;" because an appearing most
   agreeable to the mind, and the mind's preferring, seem scarcely
   distinct. If strict propriety of speech be insisted on, it may more
   properly be said, that the voluntary action, which is the immediate
   consequence of the mind's choice, is determined by that which appears
   most agreeable, than the choice itself; but that volition itself is
   always determined by that in or about the mind's view of the object,
   which causes it to appear most agreeable. I say, "in or about the
   mind's view of' the object;" because what has influence to render an
   object in view agreeable, is not only what appears in the object
   viewed, but also the manner of the view and the state and circumstances
   of the mind that views. Particularly to enumerate all things pertaining
   to the mind's view of the objects of volition, which have influence in
   their appearing agreeable to the mind, would be a matter of no small
   difficulty, and might require a treatise by itself, and is not
   necessary to my present purpose. I shall therefore only mention some
   things in general.

   I. One thing that makes an object proposed to choice agreeable, is the
   apparent nature and circumstances of the object. And there are various
   things of this sort, that have influence in rendering the object more
   or less agreeable; as,

   1. That which appears in the object, rendering it beautiful and
   pleasant, or deformed and irksome to the mind; viewing it as it is in
   itself.

   2. The apparent degree of pleasure or trouble attending the object, or
   the consequence of it. Such concomitants and consequences being viewed
   as circumstances of the object, are to be considered as belonging to
   it; and as it were parts of it, as it stands in the mind's view a
   proposed object of choice.

   3. The apparent state of the pleasure or trouble that appears, with
   respect to distance of time; being either nearer or farther off. It is
   a thing in itself agreeable to the mind, to have pleasure speedily; and
   disagreeable, to have it delayed: so that if there be two equal degrees
   of pleasure set in the mind's view, and all other things are equal, but
   one is beheld as near, and the other afar off; the nearer will appear
   most agreeable, and so will be chosen. Because, though the
   agreeableness of the objects be exactly equal, as viewed in themselves,
   yet not as viewed in their circumstances; one of them having the
   additional agreeableness of the circumstance of nearness.

   II. Another thing that contributes to the agreeableness of an object of
   choice, as it stands in the mind's view, is the manner of view. If the
   object be something which appears connected with future pleasure, not
   only will the degree of apparent pleasure have influence, but also the
   manner of the view, especially in two respects.

   1. With respect to the degree of assent, with which the mind judges the
   pleasure to be future. Because it is more agreeable to have a certain
   happiness, than an uncertain one; and a pleasure viewed as more
   probable, all other things being equal, is more agreeable to the mind,
   than that which is viewed as less probable.

   2. With respect to the degree of the idea or apprehension of the future
   pleasure. With regard to things which are the subject of our thoughts,
   either past, present, or future, we have much more of an idea or
   apprehension of some things than others; that is, our idea is much more
   clear, lively, and strong. Thus the ideas we have of sensible things by
   immediate sensation, are usually much more lively than those we have by
   mere imagination, or by contemplation of them when absent. My idea of
   the sun when I look upon it is more vivid, than when I only think of
   it. Our idea of the sweet relish of a delicious fruit is usually
   stronger when we taste it, than when we only imagine it. And sometimes,
   the idea we have of things by contemplation, are much stronger and
   clearer, than at other times. Thus, a man at one time has a much
   stronger idea of the pleasure which is to be enjoyed in eating some
   sort of food that he loves, than at another. Now the strength of the
   idea or the sense that men have of future good or evil, is one thing
   that has great influence on their minds to excite volition. When two
   kinds of future pleasure are presented for choice, though both are
   supposed exactly equal by the judgment, and both equally certain, yet
   of one the mind has a far more lively sense, than of the other; this
   last has the greatest advantage by far to affect and attract the mind,
   and move the Will. It is now more agreeable to the mind, to take the
   pleasure of which it has a strong and lively sense, than that of which
   it has only a faint idea. The view of the former is attended with the
   strongest appetite, and the greatest uneasiness attends the want of it;
   and it is agreeable to the mind to have uneasiness removed, and its
   appetite gratified. And if several future enjoyments are presented
   together, as competitors for the choice of the mind, some of them
   judged to be greater, and others less; the mind also having a more
   lively idea of the good of some, and of others a less; and some are
   viewed as of greater certainty or probability than others; and those
   enjoyments that appear most agreeable in one of these respects, appear
   least so in others: in this case, all other things being equal, the
   agreeableness of a proposed object of choice will be in a degree some
   way compounded of the degree of good supposed by the judgment, the
   degree of apparent probability or certainty of that good, and the
   degree of the liveliness of the idea the mind has of that good; because
   all together concur to constitute the degree in which the object
   appears at present agreeable; and accordingly will volition be
   determined.

   I might further observe, that the state of the mind which views a
   proposed object of choice, is another thing that contributes to the
   agreeableness or disagreeableness of that object; the particular temper
   which the mind has by nature, or that has been introduced and
   established by education, example, custom, or some other means; or the
   frame or state that the mind is in on a particular occasion. That
   object which appears agreeable to one, does not so to another. And the
   same object does not always appear alike agreeable to the same person,
   at different times. It is most agreeable to some men, to follow their
   reason; and to others, to follow their appetites: to some men, it is
   more agreeable to deny a vicious inclination, than to gratify it;
   others it suits best to gratify the vilest appetites. It is more
   disagreeable to some men than others, to counteract a former
   resolution. In these respects, and many others which might be
   mentioned, different things will be most agreeable to different
   persons; and not only so, but to the same persons at different times.

   But possibly it is needless to mention the "state of the mind,'' as a
   ground of the agreeableness of objects distinct from the other two
   mentioned before; viz. The apparent nature and circumstances of the
   objects viewed, and the manner of the view. Perhaps, if we strictly
   consider the matter, the different temper and state of the mind makes
   no alteration as to the agreeableness of objects, any other way, than
   as it makes the objects themselves appear differently beautiful or
   deformed, having apparent pleasure or pain attending them; and, as it
   occasions the manner of the view to be different, causes the idea of
   beauty or deformity, pleasure or uneasiness, to be more or less lively.

   However, I think so much is certain, that volition, in no one instance
   that can be mentioned, is otherwise than the greatest apparent good is,
   in the manner which has been explained. The choice of the mind never
   departs from that which, at the time, and with respect to the direct
   and immediate objects of decision, appears most agreeable and pleasing,
   all things considered. If the immediate objects of the Will are a man's
   own actions, then those actions which appear most agreeable to him he
   wills. If it be now most agreeable to him, all things considered, to
   walk, then he now wills to walk. If it be now, upon the whole of what
   at present appears to him, most agreeable to speak, then he chooses to
   speak; if it suits him best to keep silence, then he chooses to keep
   silence. There is scarcely a plainer and more universal dictate of the
   sense and experience of mankind, than that, when men act voluntarily,
   and do what they please, then they do what suits them best, or what is
   most agreeable to them. To say, that they do what pleases them, but yet
   not what is agreeable to them, is the same thing as to say, they do
   what they please, but do not act their pleasure; and that is to say,
   that they do what they please and yet do not what they please.

   It appears from these things, that in some sense, the Will always
   follows the last dictate of the understanding. But then the
   understanding must be taken in a large sense, as including the whole
   faculty of perception or apprehension, and not merely what is called
   reason or judgment. If by the dictate of the understanding is meant
   what reason declares to be best, or most for the person's happiness,
   taking in the whole of its duration, it is not true, that the Will
   always follows the last dictate of the understanding. Such a dictate of
   reason is quite a different matter from things appearing now most
   agreeable, all things being put together which pertain to the mind's
   present perceptions in any respect: although that dictate of reason,
   when it takes place, has concern in the compound influence which moves
   the Will; and should be considered in estimating the degree of that
   appearance of good which the Will always follows; either as having its
   influence added to other things, or subducted from them. When such
   dictate of reason concurs with other things, then its weight is added
   to them, as put into the same scale; but when it is against them, it is
   as a weight in the opposite scale, resisting the influence of other
   things: yet its resistance is often overcome by their greater weight,
   and so the act of the Will is determined in opposition to it.

   These things may serve, I hope, in some measure, illustrate and confirm
   the position laid down in the beginning of section, viz. "That the Will
   is always determined by the strongest motive," or by that view of the
   mind which has the greatest degree of previous tendency to excite
   volition. But whether I have been so happy as rightly to explain the
   thing wherein consists the strength of motives, or not, yet my failing
   in this will not overthrow the position itself; which carries much of
   its own evidence with it, and is a point of chief importance to the
   purpose of the ensuing discourse: And the truth of it, I hope, will
   appear with great clearness, before I have finished what I have to say
   on the subject of human liberty.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [107] This appears to be the author's meaning, in order to preserve a
   consistency with his professed sentiment of divine influence. He
   believed that a real Christian's mind is born of the Spirit; and that
   such a state of mind induces one choice rather than another. But he
   could not maintain that divine influences, which is a subjective cause
   of one volition rather than another, must be "in the view or
   apprehension of the of the understanding." For "the wind bloweth where
   it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell
   whence it cometh, wither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the
   Spirit." Beside, the most proper acceptation of the term "motive" seems
   to plead in favor of the restriction suggested in the text by the word
   "objectively;" and the use of this distinction may appear more fully
   hereafter. W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Concerning the meaning of the terms, Necessity, Impossibility,
   Inability, &c. and of Contingence

   The words necessary, impossible, &c. are abundantly used in
   controversies about Free-Will and Moral Agency; and therefore the sense
   in which they are used should clearly understood.

   Here I might say, that a thing is then said to be necessary when it
   must be, and cannot be otherwise. But this would not properly be a
   definition of Necessity, any more than I explained the word must, by
   the phrase, there being a Necessity. The words must, can, and cannot,
   need explication as much as the words necessary, and impossible;
   excepting that the former are words that in earliest life we more
   commonly use.

   The word necessary, as used in common speech, is a relative term; and
   relates to some supposed opposition made to the existence of a thing,
   which opposition is overcome, or proves insufficient to hinder or alter
   it. That is necessary, in the original and proper sense of the word,
   which is, or will be, notwithstanding all supposable opposition. To
   say, that a thing is necessary, is the same thing as to say, that it is
   impossible that it should not be. But the word impossible is manifestly
   a relative term, and has reference to supposed power exerted to bring a
   thing to pass, which is insufficient for the effect; as the word unable
   is relative, and has relation to ability, or endeavor, which is
   insufficient. Also the word irresistible is relative, and has always
   reference to resistance which is made, or may be made, to some force or
   power tending to an effect, and is insufficient to withstand the power,
   or hinder the effect. The common notion of Necessity and Impossibility
   implies something that frustrates endeavor or desire.

   Here several things are to be noted.

   1. Things are said to be necessary in general, which are or will be
   notwithstanding any supposable opposition from whatever quarter. But
   things are said to be necessary to us, which are or will be
   notwithstanding all opposition supposable in the case from us. The same
   may be observed of the word impossible, and other such like terms.

   2. These terms necessary, impossible, irresistible, &c. more especially
   belong to controversies about liberty and moral agency, as used in the
   latter of the two senses now mentioned, viz. as necessary or impossible
   to us, and with relation to any supposable opposition or endeavor of
   ours.

   3. As the word Necessity, in its vulgar and common use, is relative,
   and has always reference to some supposable insufficient opposition; so
   when we speak of anything as necessary to us, it is with relation to
   some supposable opposition of our Wills, or some voluntary exertion or
   effort of ours to the contrary. For we do not properly make opposition
   to an event, any otherwise than as we voluntarily oppose it. Things are
   said to be what must be, or necessarily are, as to us, when they are,
   or will be, though we desire or endeavor the contrary, or try to
   prevent or remove their existence: but such opposition of ours always
   either consists in, or implies, opposition of our wills.

   It is manifest that all such like words and phrases, as vulgarly used,
   are understood in this manner. A thing is said to be necessary, when we
   cannot help it, let us do what we will. So any thing is said to be
   impossible to us, when we would do it, or would have it brought to
   pass, and endeavor it; or at least may be supposed to desire and seek
   it; but all our desires and endeavors are, or would be, vain. And that
   is said to be irresistible, which overcomes all our opposition,
   resistance, and endeavor to the contrary. And we are said to be unable
   to do a thing when our supposable desires and endeavors are
   insufficient.

   We are accustomed, in the common use of language, thus to apply and
   understand these phrases: we grow up with such a habit; which, by the
   daily use of these terms from our childhood, becomes fixed and settled;
   so that the idea of a relation to a supposed will, desire, and endeavor
   of ours, is strongly connected with these terms, whenever we hear the
   words used. Such ideas, and these words, are so associated, that they
   unavoidably go together; one suggests the other, and never can be
   easily separated as long as we live. And though we use the words, as
   terms of art, in another sense, yet, unless we are exceedingly
   circumspect, we shall insensibly slide into the vulgar use of them, and
   so apply the words in a very inconsistent manner, which will deceive
   and confound us in our reasonings and discourses, even when we pretend
   to use them as terms of art.

   4. It follows from what has been observed, that when these terms
   necessary, impossible, irresistible, unable, &c. are used in cases
   wherein no insufficient will is supposed, or can be supposed, but the
   very nature of the supposed case itself excludes any opposition, will,
   or endeavor; they are then not used in their proper signification. The
   reason is manifest; in such cases we cannot use the words with
   reference to a supposable opposition, will, or endeavor. And therefore
   if any man uses these terms in such cases, he either uses them
   nonsensically, or in some new sense, diverse from their original and
   proper meaning. As for instance; if any one should affirm after this
   manner, That it is necessary for a man, or what must be, that he should
   choose virtue rather than vice, during the time that he prefers virtue
   to vice; and that it is a thing impossible and irresistible, that it
   should be otherwise than that he should have this choice, so long as
   this choice continues; such a one would use the terms must,
   irresistible, &c. with either perfect insignificance, or in some new
   sense, diverse from their common use; which is with reference, as has
   been observed, to supposable opposition, unwillingness, and resistance;
   whereas, here, the very supposition excludes and denies any such thing:
   for the case supposed is that of being willing, and choosing.

   5. It appears from what has been said, that these terms necessary,
   impossible, &c. are often used by philosophers and metaphysicians in a
   sense quite diverse from their common and original signification; for
   they apply them to many cases in which no opposition is supposable.
   Thus they use them with respect to God's existence before the creation
   of the world, when there was no other being; with regard to many of the
   dispositions and acts of the divine Being, such as his loving himself,
   his loving righteousness, hating sin, &c. So they apply them to many
   cases of the inclinations and actions of created intelligent beings
   wherein all opposition of the Will is excluded in the very supposition
   of the case.

   Metaphysical or philosophical Necessity is nothing different from their
   certainty. I speak not now of the certainty of knowledge, but the
   certainty that is in things themselves, which is the foundation of the
   certainty of the knowledge, or that wherein lies the ground of the
   infallibility of the proposition which affirms them.

   What is sometimes given as the definition of philosophical Necessity,
   namely, "That by which a thing cannot but be," or "whereby it cannot be
   otherwise," fails of being a proper explanation of it, on two accounts:
   First, the words can, or cannot, need explanation as much as the word
   Necessity; and the former may as well be explained by the latter, as
   the latter by the former. Thus, if any one asked us what we mean, when
   we say, a thing cannot but be, we might explain ourselves by saying, it
   must necessarily be so; as well as explain Necessity, by saying, it is
   that by which a thing cannot but be. And Secondly, this definition is
   liable to the fore-mentioned great inconvenience; the words cannot, or
   unable, are properly relative, and have relation to power exerted, or
   that may be exerted, in order to the thing spoken of; to which as I
   have now observed, the word Necessity, as used by philosophers, has no
   reference.

   Philosophical Necessity is really nothing else than the full and fixed
   connexion between the things signified by the subject and predicate of
   a proposition, which affirms something to be true. When there is such a
   connexion, then the thing affirmed in the proposition is necessary, in
   a philosophical sense; whether any opposition or contrary effort be
   supposed, or no. When the subject and predicate of the proposition,
   which affirms the existence of any thing, either substance, quality,
   act, or circumstance, have a full and certain connexion, then the
   existence or being of that thing is said to be necessary in a
   metaphysical sense. And in this sense I use the word necessity, in the
   following discourse, when I endeavor to prove that necessity is not
   inconsistent with liberty.

   The subject and predicate of a proposition, which affirms existence of
   something, may have a full, fixed, and certain connexion several ways.

   (1.) They may have a full and perfect connexion in and of themselves;
   because it may imply a contradiction, or gross absurdity, to suppose
   them not connected. Thus many things are necessary in their own nature.
   So the eternal existence of being generally considered, is necessary in
   itself: because it would be in itself the greatest absurdity, to deny
   the existence of being in general, or to say there was absolute and
   universal nothing; and is as it were the sum of all contradictions; as
   might be shown if this were a proper place for it. So God's infinity
   and other attributes are necessary. So it is necessary in its own
   nature, that two and two should be four; and it is necessary that all
   right lines drawn from the center of a circle to the circumference
   should be equal. It is necessary, fit and suitable, that men should do
   to others, as they would that they should do to them. So innumerable
   metaphysical and mathematical truths are necessary in themselves: the
   subject and predicate of the proposition which affirm them, are
   perfectly connected of themselves.

   (2.) The connexion of the subject and predicate of a proposition, which
   affirms the existence of something, may be fixed and made certain,
   because the existence of that thing is already come to pass; and either
   now is, or has been; and so has, as it were, made sure of existence.
   And therefore, the proposition which affirms present and past existence
   of it, may by this means be made certain, and necessarily and
   unalterably true; the past event has fixed and decided the matter, as
   to its existence; and has made it impossible but that existence should
   be truly predicated of it. Thus the existence of whatever is already
   come to pass, is now become necessary; it is become impossible it
   should be otherwise than true, that such a thing has been.

   (3.) The subject and predicate of a proposition which affirms something
   to be, may have a real and certain connexion consequentially; and so
   the existence of the thing may be consequentially necessary; as it may
   be surely and firmly connected with something else, that is necessary
   in one of the former respects. As it is either fully and thoroughly
   connected with that which is absolutely necessary in its own nature, or
   with something which has already received and made sure of existence.
   This Necessity lies in, or may be explained by, the connexion of two or
   more propositions one with another.--Things which are perfectly
   connected with other things that are necessary, are necessary
   themselves, by a Necessity of consequence.

   And here it may be observed, that all things which are future, or which
   will hereafter begin to be, which can be said to be necessary, are
   necessary only in this last way. Their existence is not necessary in
   itself; for if so, they always would have existed. Nor is their
   existence become necessary by being already come to pass. Therefore,
   the only way that any thing that is to come to pass hereafter, is or
   can be necessary, is by a connexion with something that is necessary in
   its own nature, or something that already is, or has been; so that the
   one being supposed the other certainly follows.--And this also is the
   only way that all things past, excepting those which were from
   eternity, could be necessary before the come to pass; and therefore the
   only way in which any effect or event, or any thing whatsoever that
   ever has had or will have a beginning, has come into being necessarily,
   or will hereafter necessarily exist. And therefore this is the
   Necessity which especially belongs to controversies about the acts of
   the will.

   It may be of some use in these controversies, further to observe
   concerning metaphysical Necessity, that (agreeable to the distinction
   before observed of Necessity, as vulgarly understood) things that exist
   may be said to be necessary, either with a general or particular
   Necessity. The existence of a thing may be said to be necessary with a
   general Necessity, when, all things considered, there is a foundation
   for the certainty of their existence; or when in the most general and
   universal view of things, the subject and predicate of the proposition,
   which affirms its existence, would appear with an infallible connexion.

   An event, or the existence of a thing, may be said to be necessary with
   a particular Necessity, when nothing that can be taken into
   consideration, in or about a person, thing, or time, alters the case at
   all, as to the certainty of an event, or the existence of a thing; or
   can be of any account at all, in determining the infallibility of the
   connexion of the subject and predicate in the proposition which affirms
   the existence of the thing; so that it is all one, as to that person,
   or thing, at least, at that time, as if the existence were necessary
   with a Necessity that is most universal and absolute. Thus there are
   many things that happen to particular persons, in the existence of
   which no will of theirs has any concern, at least, at that time; which,
   whether they are necessary or not, with regard to things in general,
   yet are necessary to them, and with regard to any volition of theirs at
   that time; as they prevent all acts of the will about the affair.--I
   shall have occasion to apply this observation to particular instances
   in the following discourse.--Whether the same things that are necessary
   with a particular Necessity, be not also necessary with a general
   Necessity, may be a matter of future consideration. Let that be as it
   will, it alters not the case, as to the use of this distinction of the
   kinds of Necessity.

   These things may he sufficient for the explaining of the terms
   necessary and Necessity, as terms of art, and as often used by
   metaphysicians, and controversial writers in divinity, in a sense
   diverse from, and more extensive than, their original meaning, in
   common language, which was before explained.

   What has been said to show the meaning of the terms necessary and
   necessity, may be sufficient for the explaining of the opposite terms,
   impossible and impossibility. For there is no difference, but only the
   latter are negative, and the former positive. Impossibility is the same
   as negative Necessity, or a Necessity that a thing should not be. And
   it is used as a term of art in a like diversity from the original and
   vulgar meaning, with Necessity.

   The same may be observed concerning the words unable and Inability. It
   has been observed, that these terms, in their original and common use,
   have relation to will and endeavor, as supposable in the case, and as
   insufficient for the bringing to pass the thing willed and endeavored.
   But as these terms are often used by philosophers and divines,
   especially writers on controversies about Free Will, they are used in a
   quite different and far more extensive sense, and are applied to many
   cases wherein no will or endeavor for the bringing of the thing to pass
   is or can be supposed.

   As the words necessary, impossible, unable, &c. are used by polemic
   writers, in a sense diverse from their common signification, the like
   has happened to the term contingent. Any thing is said to be
   contingent, or to come to pass by chance or accident, in the original
   meaning of such words, when its connexion with its causes or
   antecedents, according to the established course of things, is not
   discerned; and so is what we have no means of foreseeing. And
   especially is any thing said to be contingent, or accidental, with
   regard to us, when it comes to pass without our foreknowledge, and
   besides our design and scope.

   But the word contingent is abundantly used in a very different sense;
   not for that whose connexion with the series of things we cannot
   discern, so as to foresee the event, but for something which has
   absolutely no previous ground or reason, with which its existence has
   any fixed and certain connexion.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Of the distinction of natural and moral Necessity, and Inability.

   That Necessity which has been explained, consisting in an infallible
   connexion of the things signified by the subject and predicate of a
   proposition, as intelligent beings are the subjects of it, is
   distinguished into moral and natural Necessity.

   I shall not now stand to inquire whether this distinction be a proper
   and perfect distinction; but shall only explain how these two sorts of
   Necessity are understood, as the terms are sometimes used, and as they
   are used in the following discourse.

   The phrase, moral Necessity, is used variously: sometimes it is used
   for a Necessity of moral obligation. So we say, a man is under
   Necessity, when he is under bonds of duty and conscience, from which he
   cannot be discharged. Again, the word Necessity is often used for great
   obligation in point of interest. Sometimes by moral Necessity is meant
   that apparent connexion of things, which is the ground of moral
   evidence; and so is distinguished from absolute Necessity, or that sure
   connexion of things, that is a foundation for infallible certainty. In
   this sense, moral Necessity signifies much the same as that high degree
   of probability, which is ordinarily sufficient to satisfy mankind, in
   their conduct and behavior in the world, as they would consult their
   own safety and interest, and treat others properly as members of
   society. And sometimes by moral Necessity is meant that Necessity of
   connexion and consequence, which arises from such moral causes, as the
   strength of inclination, or motives, and the connexion which there is
   in many cases between these and such certain volitions and actions. And
   it is in this sense, that I use the phrase, moral necessity, in the
   following discourse.

   By natural Necessity, as applied to men, I mean such Necessity as men
   are under through the force of natural causes; as distinguished from
   what are called moral causes, such as habits and dispositions of the
   heart, and moral motives and inducements. Thus men, placed in certain
   circumstances, are the subjects of particular sensations by Necessity:
   they feel pain when their bodies are wounded; they see the objects
   presented before them in a clear light, when their eyes are opened: so
   they assent to the truth of certain propositions, as soon as the terms
   are understood; as that two and two make four, that black is not white,
   that two parallel lines can never cross one another; so by a natural
   Necessity men's bodies move downwards, when there is nothing to support
   them.

   But here several things may be noted concerning these two kinds of
   Necessity.

   1. Moral Necessity may be as absolute as natural Necessity. That is,
   the effect may be as perfectly connected with its moral cause, as a
   natural, necessary effect is with its natural cause. Whether the Will
   in every case is necessarily determined by the strongest motive, or
   whether the Will ever makes any resistance to such a motive, or can
   ever oppose the strongest present inclination, or not; if that matter
   should be controverted, yet I suppose none will deny, but that, in some
   cases, a previous bias and inclination, or the motive presented, may be
   so powerful, that the act of the will may be certainly and indissolubly
   connected therewith. When motives or previous bias are very strong, all
   will allow that there is some difficulty in going against them. And if
   they were yet stronger, the difficulty would be still greater. And
   therefore, if more were still added to their strength, to a certain
   degree, it would make the difficulty so great, that it would be wholly
   impossible to surmount it; for this plain reason, because whatever
   power men may be supposed to have to surmount difficulties, yet that
   power is not infinite; and so goes not beyond certain limits. If a man
   can surmount ten degrees of difficulty of this kind with twenty degrees
   of strength, because the degrees of strength are beyond the degrees of
   difficulty; yet if the difficulty be increased to thirty, or an
   hundred, or a thousand degrees, and his strength not also increased,
   his strength will be wholly insufficient to surmount the difficulty. As
   therefore it must be allowed, that there may be such a thing as a sure
   and perfect connexion between moral causes and effects; so this only is
   what I call by the name of moral Necessity.

   2. When I use this distinction of moral and natural Necessity, I would
   not he understood to suppose, that if any thing come to pass by the
   former kind of Necessity, the nature of things is not concerned in it,
   as well as in the latter. I do not mean to determine, that when a moral
   habit or motive is so strong, that the act of the Will infallibly
   follows, this is not owing to the nature of things. But natural and
   moral are the terms by which thee two kinds of Necessity have usually
   been called; and they must be distinguished by some names, for there is
   a difference between them, that is very important in its consequences.
   This difference, however, does not lie so much in the nature of the
   connexion, as in the two terms connected. The cause with which the
   effect is connected, is of a particular kind; viz. that which is of a
   moral nature; either some previous habitual disposition, or some motive
   exhibited to the understanding. And the effect is also of a particular
   kind; being likewise of a moral nature; consisting in some inclination
   or volition of the soul, or voluntary action.

   I suppose, that Necessity which is called natural in distinction from
   moral Necessity, is so called, because mere nature, as the word is
   vulgarly used, is concerned, without any thing of choice. The word
   nature is often used in opposition to choice; not because nature has
   indeed never any hand in our choice; but, probably, because we first
   get our notion of nature from that obvious course of events, which we
   observe in many things where our choice has no concern; and especially
   in the material world; which, in very many parts of it, we easily
   perceive to be in a settled course; the stated order, and manner of
   succession, being very apparent. But where we do not readily discern
   the rule and connexion, (though there be a connexion, according to an
   established law, truly taking place,) we signify the manner of event by
   some other name. Even in many things which are seen in the material and
   inanimate world, which do not obviously come to pass according to any
   settled course, men do not call the manner of the event by the name of
   nature, but by such names as accident, chance, contingence, &c. So men
   make a distinction between nature and choice; as if they were
   completely and universally distinct. Whereas, I suppose none will deny
   but that choice, in many cases, arises from nature, as truly as other
   events. But the connexion between acts of choice, and their causes,
   according to established laws, is not so obvious. And we observe that
   choice is, as it were, a new principle of motion and action, different
   from that established order of things which is most obvious, and seen
   especially in corporeal things. The choice also often interposes,
   interrupts, and alters the chain of events in these external objects,
   and causes them to proceed otherwise than they would do, if let alone.
   Hence it is spoken of as if it were a principle of motion entirely
   distinct from nature, and properly set in opposition to it. Names being
   commonly given to things, according to what is most obvious, and is
   suggested by what appears to the senses without reflection and
   research.

   3. It must be observed, that in what has been explained, as signified
   by the name of moral Necessity, the word Necessity is not used
   according to the original design and meaning of the word: for, as was
   observed before, such terms, necessary, impossible, irresistible, &c.
   in common speech, and their most proper sense, are always relative;
   having reference to some supposable voluntary opposition or endeavour,
   that is insufficient. But no such opposition, or contrary will and
   endeavour, is supposable in the case of moral Necessity; which is a
   certainty of the inclination and will itself; which does not admit of
   the supposition of a will to oppose and resist it. For it is absurd, to
   suppose the same individual will to oppose itself, in its present act;
   or the present choice to be opposite to and resisting present choice:
   as absurd as it is to talk of two contrary motions, in the same moving
   body, at the same time.-- And therefore the very case supposed never
   admits of any trial, whether an opposing or resisting will can overcome
   this Necessity.

   What has been said of natural and moral Necessity, may serve to explain
   what is intended by natural and moral Inability. We are said to be
   naturally unable to do a thing, when we cannot do it if we will,
   because what is most commonly called nature does not allow of it, or
   because of some impeding defect or obstacle that is extrinsic to the
   Will; either in the faculty of understanding, constitution of body, or
   external objects. Moral Inability consists not in any of these things;
   but either in the want of inclination; or the strength of a contrary
   inclination; or the want of sufficient motives in view, to induce and
   excite the act of the Will, or the strength of apparent motives to the
   contrary. Or both these may be resolved into one; and it may be said in
   one word, that moral Inability consists in the opposition or want of
   inclination. For when a person is unable to will or choose such a
   thing, through a defect of motives, or prevalence of contrary motives,
   it is the same thing as his being unable through the want of an
   inclination, or the prevalence of a contrary inclination, in such
   circumstances, and under the influence of such views.

   To give some instances of this moral Inability.--A woman of great
   honour and chastity may have a moral Inability to prostitute herself to
   her slave. A child of great love and duty to his parents, may be thus
   unable to kill his father. A very lascivious man, in case of certain
   opportunities and temptations, and in the absence of such and such
   restraints, may be unable to forbear gratifying his lust. A drunkard,
   under such and such circumstances, may be unable to forbear taking
   strong drink. A very malicious man may be unable to exert benevolent
   acts to an enemy, or to desire his prosperity; yea, some may be so
   under the power of a vile disposition, that they may be unable to love
   those who are most worthy of their esteem and affection. A strong habit
   of virtue, and a great degree of holiness, may cause a moral Inability
   to love wickedness in general, and may render a man unable to take
   complacence in wicked persons or things; or to choose a wicked in
   preference to a virtuous life. And on the other hand, a great degree of
   habitual wickedness may lay a man under an Inability to love and choose
   holiness; and render him utterly unable to love an infinitely holy
   Being, or to choose and cleave to him as his chief good.

   Here it may be of use to observe this distinction of moral Inability,
   viz. of that which is general and habitual, and that which is
   particular and occasional. By a general and habitual moral Inability, I
   mean an Inability in the heart to all exercises or acts of will of that
   kind, through a fixed and habitual inclination, or an habitual and
   stated defect, or want of a certain kind of inclination. Thus a very
   ill-natured man may be unable to exert such acts of benevolence, as
   another, who is full of good nature, commonly exerts; and a man whose
   heart is habitually void of gratitude, may be unable to exert grateful
   acts, through that stated defect of a grateful inclination. By
   particular and occasional moral Inability, I mean an Inability of the
   will or heart to a particular act, through the strength or defect of
   present motives, or of inducements presented to the view of the
   understanding, on this occasion.--If it be so, that the Will is always
   determined by the strongest motive, then it must always have an
   Inability, in this latter sense, to act otherwise than it does; it not
   being possible, in any case, that the Will should, at present, go
   against the motive which has now, all things considered, the greatest
   advantage to induce it.--The former of these kinds of moral inability
   is most commonly called by the name of Inability; because the word, in
   its most proper and original signification, has respect to some stated
   defect. And this especially obtains the name of Inability also upon
   another account:--because, as before observed, the word Inability, in
   its original and most common use, is a relative term; and has respect
   to will and endeavor, as supposable in the case, and as insufficient to
   bring to pass the thing desired and endeavored. Now there may be more
   of an appearance and shadow of this, with respect to the acts which
   arise from a fixed and strong habit, than others that arise only from
   transient occasions and causes. Indeed will and endeavour against, or
   diverse from present acts of the Will are in no case supposable,
   whether those acts be occasional or habitual; for that would be to
   suppose the Will, at present, to be otherwise than, at present, it is.
   But yet their may be will and endeavour against future acts of the
   Will, or volitions that are likely to take place, as viewed at a
   distance. It is no contradiction, to suppose that the acts of the Will
   at one time, may be against the acts of the Will at another time; and
   there may be desires and endeavors to prevent or excite future acts of
   the Will; but such desires and endeavors are, in many cases, rendered
   insufficient and vain, through fixedness of habit: when the occasion
   returns, the strength of habit overcomes and baffles all such
   opposition. In this respect, a man may be in miserable slavery and
   bondage to a strong habit. But it may be comparatively easy to make an
   alteration, with respect to such future acts, as are only occasional
   and transient; because the occasion or transient cause, if foreseen,
   may often easily be prevented or avoided. On this account, the moral
   Inability that attends fixed habits, especially obtains the name of
   Inability. And then, as the will may remotely and indirectly resist
   itself, and do it in vain, in the case of strong habits; so reason may
   resist present acts of the Will, and its resistance be insufficient;
   and this is more commonly the case also, when the acts arise from
   strong habit.

   But it must be observed concerning moral Inability, in each kind of it,
   that the word Inability is used in a sense very diverse from its
   original import. The word signifies only a natural Inability, in the
   proper use of it; and is applied to such cases only wherein a present
   will or inclination to the thing, with respect to which a person is
   said to be unable, is supposable. It cannot be truly said, according to
   the ordinary use of language, that a malicious man, let him be never so
   malicious, cannot hold his hand from striking, or that he is not able
   to show his neighbor kindness; or that a drunkard, let his appetite be
   never so strong, cannot keep the cup from his mouth. In the strictest
   propriety of speech, a man has a thing in his power, if he has it in
   his choice, or at his election: and a man cannot be truly said to be
   unable to do a thing, when he can do it if he will. It is improperly
   said, that a person cannot perform those external actions, which are
   dependent on the act of the Will, and which would be easily performed,
   if the act of the Will were present. And if it be improperly said, that
   he cannot perform those external voluntary actions, which depend on the
   Will, it is in some respect more improperly said, that he is unable to
   exert the acts of the Will themselves; because it is more evidently
   false, with respect to these, that he cannot if he will: for to say so,
   is a downright contradiction; it is to say, he cannot will, if he does
   will. And in this case, not only is it true, that it is easy for a man
   to do the thing if he will, but the very willing is the doing; when
   once he has willed, the thing is performed; and nothing else remains to
   be done. Therefore, in these things, to ascribe a non-performance to
   the want of power or ability, is not just; because the thing wanting is
   not a being able, but a being willing. There are faculties of mind, and
   a capacity of nature, and every thing else, sufficient, but a
   disposition: nothing is wanting but a will.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Concerning the notion of Liberty, and of moral Agency.

   The plain and obvious meaning of the words Freedom and Liberty, in
   common speech, is The power, opportunity, or advantage, that any one
   has, to do as he pleases. Or in other words, his being free from
   hindrance or impediment in the way of doing, or conducting in any
   respect. as he wills. [108] --And the contrary to Liberty, whatever
   name we call that by, is a person's being hindered or unable to conduct
   as he will, or being necessitated to do otherwise.

   If this which I have mentioned be the meaning of the word Liberty, in
   the ordinary use of language; as I trust that none that has ever
   learned to talk, and is unprejudiced, will deny; then it will follow,
   that in propriety of speech, neither Liberty, nor its contrary, can
   properly be ascribed to any being or thing, but that which has such a
   faculty, power or property, as is called Will. For that which is
   possessed of no will, cannot have any power or opportunity of doing
   according to its will, nor be necessitated to act contrary to its will,
   nor be restrained from acting agreeably to it. And therefore to talk of
   Liberty, or the contrary, as belonging to the very Will itself, is not
   to speak good sense; if we judge of sense, and nonsense, by the
   original and proper signification of words.--For the Will itself is not
   an Agent that has a will: the power of choosing, itself, has not a
   power of choosing. That which has the power of volition is the man, or
   the soul, and not the power of volition itself. And he that has the
   Liberty of doing according to his will, is the Agent who is possessed
   of the Will; and not the Will which he is possessed of. We say with
   propriety, that a bird let loose has power and liberty to fly; but not
   that the bird's power of flying has a power arid Liberty of flying. To
   be free is the property of an Agent, who is possessed of powers and
   faculties, as much as to be cunning, valiant, bountiful, or zealous.
   But these qualities are the properties of persons; and not the
   properties of properties.

   There are two things contrary to what is called Liberty in common
   speech. One is constraint; otherwise called force, compulsion, and
   coaction; which is a person's being necessitated to do a thing contrary
   to his will. The other is restraint; which is, his being hindered, and
   not having power to do according to his will. But that which has no
   will, cannot be the subject of these things.--I need say the less on
   this head, Mr. Locke having set the same thing forth, with so great
   clearness, in his Essay on the Human Understanding.

   But one thing more I would observe concerning what is vulgarly called
   Liberty; namely, that power and opportunity for one to do and conduct
   as he will, or according to his choice, is all that is meant by it;
   without taking into the meaning of the word, any thing of the cause of
   that choice; or at all considering how the person came to have such a
   volition; whether it was caused by some external motive, or internal
   habitual bias; whether it was determined by some internal antecedent
   volition, or whether it happened without a cause; whether it was
   necessarily connected with something foregoing, or not connected. Let
   the person come by his choice any how, yet, if he is able, and there is
   nothing in the way to hinder his pursuing and executing his will, the
   man is perfectly free, according to, the primary and common notion of
   freedom.

   What has been said may be sufficient to show what is meant by Liberty,
   according to the common notions of mankind, and in the usual and
   primary acceptation of the word: but the word, as used by Arminians,
   Pelagians, and others, who oppose the Calvinists, has an entirely
   different signification.--These several things belong to their notion
   of Liberty. 1. That it consists in a self-determining power in the
   Will, or a certain sovereignty the Will has over itself, and its own
   acts, whereby it determines its own volitions; so as not to be
   dependent, in its determinations, on any cause without itself, nor
   determined by any thing prior to its own acts. 2. Indifference belongs
   to Liberty in their notion of it, or that the mind, previous to the act
   of volition, be in equilibrio. 3. Contingence is another thing that
   belongs and is essential to it; not in the common acceptation of the
   word, as that has been already explained, but as opposed to all
   necessity, or any fixed and certain connexion with some previous ground
   or reason of its existence. They suppose the essence of Liberty so much
   to consist in these things, that unless the will of man be free in this
   sense, he has no real freedom, how much soever, he may be at Liberty to
   act according to his will.

   A moral Agent is a being that is capable of those actions that have a
   moral quality, and which can properly be denominated good or evil in a
   moral sense, virtuous or vicious, commendable or faulty. To moral
   Agency belongs a moral faculty, or sense of moral good and evil, or of
   such a thing as desert or worthiness, of praise or blame, reward or
   punishments; and a capacity which an Agent has of being influenced in
   his actions by moral inducements or motives, exhibited to the view of
   understanding and reason, to engage to a conduct agreeable to the moral
   faculty.

   The sun is very excellent and beneficial in its action and influence on
   the earth, in warming and causing it to bring forth its fruit; but it
   is not a moral agent: its action, though good, is not virtuous or
   meritorious. Fire that breaks out in a city, and consumes great part of
   it, is very mischievous in its operation; but is not a moral Agent:
   what it does is not faulty or sinful, or deserving of any punishment.
   The brute creatures are not moral Agents: the actions of some of them
   are very profitable and pleasant; others are very hurtful: yet seeing
   they have no moral faculty, or sense of desert, and do not act from
   choice guided by understanding, or with a capacity of reasoning and
   reflecting, but only from instinct, and are not capable of being
   influenced by moral inducements, their actions are not properly sinful
   or virtuous, nor are they properly the subjects of any such moral
   treatment for what they do, as moral Agents are for their faults or
   good deeds.

   Here it may be noted, that there is a circumstantial difference between
   the moral Agency of a ruler and a subject. I call it circumstantial,
   because it lies only in the difference of moral inducements, by which
   they are capable of being influenced, arising from the difference of
   circumstances. A ruler, acting in that capacity only, is not capable of
   being influenced by a moral law, and its sanctions of threatenings and
   promises, rewards and punishments, as the subject is; though both may
   be influenced by a knowledge of moral good and evil. And therefore the
   moral Agency of the Supreme Being, who acts only in the capacity of a
   ruler towards his creatures, and never as a subject, differs in that
   respect from the moral Agency of created intelligent beings. God's
   actions, and particularly those which he exerts as a moral governor,
   have moral qualifications, and are morally good in the highest degree.
   They are most perfectly holy and righteous; and we must conceive of Him
   as influenced, in the highest degree, by that which, above all others,
   is properly a moral inducement; viz. the moral good which He sees in
   such and such things: and therefore He is, in the most proper sense, a
   moral Agent, the source of all moral ability and Agency, the fountain
   and rule of all virtue and moral good; though by reason of his being
   supreme over all, it is not possible He should be under the influence
   of law or command, promises or threatenings, rewards or punishments,
   counsels or warnings. The essential qualities of a moral Agent are in
   God, in the greatest possible perfection; such as understanding to
   perceive the difference between moral good and evil; a capacity of
   discerning that moral worthiness and demerit, by which some things are
   praiseworthy, others deserving of blame and punishment; and also a
   capacity of choice, and choice guided by understanding, and a power of
   acting according to his choice or pleasure, and being capable of doing
   those things which are in the highest sense praiseworthy. And herein
   does very much consist that image of God wherein he made man, (which we
   read of, Gen. i. 26, 27.; chap. ix.) by which God distinguished man
   from the beasts, viz. in those faculties and principles of nature,
   whereby He is capable of moral Agency. Herein very much consists the
   natural image of God; whereas the spiritual and moral image, wherein
   man was made at first, consisted in that moral excellency with which he
   was endowed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [108] I say not only doing, but conducting; because a voluntary
   forebearing to do, sitting still, keeping silence, &c. are instances of
   persons' conduct, about which Liberty is exercised; though they are not
   so properly called doing.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II.

   WHEREIN IT IS CONSIDERED WHETHER THERE IS OR CAN BE ANY SUCH SORT OF
   FREEDOM OF WILL, AS THAT WHEREIN ARMINIANS PLACE THE ESSENCE OF THE
   LIBERTY OF ALL MORAL AGENTS; AND WHETHER ANY SUCH THING EVER WAS OR CAN
   BE CONCEIVED OF.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Showing the manifest inconsistence of the Arminian notion of Liberty of
   Will, consisting in the Will's self-determining Power.

   Having taken notice of those things which may be necessary to be
   observed, concerning the meaning of the principal terms and phrases
   made use of in controversies concerning human liberty, and particularly
   observed what Liberty is according to the common language and general
   apprehension of mankind, and what it is as understood and maintained by
   Arminians; I proceed to consider the Arminian notion of the Freedom of
   the Will, and the supposed necessity of it in order to moral agency, or
   in order to any one's being capable of virtue or vice, and properly the
   subject of command or counsel, praise or blame, promises or
   threatenings, rewards or punishments; or whether that which has been
   described, as the thing meant by Liberty in common speech, be not
   sufficient, and the only Liberty, which makes or can make any one a
   moral agent, and so properly the subject of these things. In this Part,
   I shall consider whether any such thing be possible or conceivable, as
   that Freedom of Will which Arminians insist on; and shall inquire,
   whether any such sort of Liberty be necessary to moral agency, &c. in
   the next part.

   And first of all, I shall consider the notion of a self-determining
   Power in the Will: wherein, according to the Arminians, does most
   essentially consist the Will's freedom; and shall particularly inquire,
   whether it be not plainly absurd, and a manifest inconsistence, to
   suppose that the Will itself determines all the free acts of the Will.

   Here I shall not insist on the great impropriety of such ways of
   speaking as the Will determining itself; because actions are to be
   ascribed to agents, and not properly to the powers of agents; which
   improper way of speaking leads to many mistakes, and much confusion, as
   Mr. Locke observes. But I shall suppose that the Arminians, when they
   speak of the Will's determining itself, do by the Will mean the soul
   willing. I shall take it for granted, that when they speak of the Will,
   as the determiner, they mean the soul in the exercise of a power of
   willing, or acting voluntarily. I shall suppose this to be their
   meaning, because nothing else can be meant, without the grossest and
   plainest absurdity. In all cases when we speak of the powers or
   principles of acting, or doing such things, we mean that the agents
   which have these Powers of acting, do them, in the exercise of those
   Powers. So where we say, valor fights courageously, we mean, the man
   who is under the influence of valor fights courageously. When we say,
   love seeks the object loved, we mean, the person loving seeks that
   object. When we say, the understanding discerns, we mean the soul in
   the exercise of that faculty. So when it is said, the will decides or
   determines, this meaning must be, that the person, in the exercise of:
   Power of willing and choosing, or the soul, acting voluntarily,
   determines.

   Therefore, if the Will determines all its own free acts, the soul
   determines them in the exercise of a Power of willing and choosing; or,
   which is the same thing, it determines them of choice; it determines
   its own acts, by choosing its own acts. If the Will determines the
   Will, then choice orders and determines the choice; and acts of choice
   are subject to the decision, and follow the conduct of other acts of
   choice. And therefore if the Will determines all its own free acts,
   then every free act of choice is determined by a preceding act of
   choice, choosing that act. And if that preceding act of the will be
   also a free act, then by these principles, in this act too, the Will is
   self-determined: that is, this, in like manner, is an act that the soul
   voluntarily chooses; or, which is the same thing, it is an act
   determined still by a preceding act of the will, choosing that. Which
   brings us directly to a contradiction: for it supposes an act of the
   Will preceding the first act in the whole train, directing and
   determining the rest; or a free act of the Will, before the first free
   act of the Will. Or else we must come at last to an act of the Will,
   determining the consequent acts, wherein the Will is not
   self-determined, and so is not a free act, in this notion of freedom:
   but if the first act in the train, determining and fixing the rest, be
   not free, none of them all can be free; as is manifest at first view,
   but shall be demonstrated presently.

   If the Will, which we find governs the members of the body, and
   determines their motions, does also govern itself, and determines its
   own actions, it doubtless determines them the same way, even by
   antecedent volitions. The Will determines which way the hands and feet
   shall move, by an act of choice: and there is no other way of the
   Will's determining, directing, or commanding any thing at all.
   Whatsoever the Will commands, it commands by an act of the Will. And if
   it has itself under its command, and determines itself in its own
   actions, it doubtless does it the same way that it determines other
   things which are under its command. So that if the freedom of the Will
   consists in this, that it has itself and its own actions under its
   command and direction, and its own volitions are determined by itself,
   it will follow, that every free volition arises from another antecedent
   volition, directing and commanding that: and if that directing volition
   be also free, in that also the Will is determined; that is to say, that
   directing volition is determined by another going before that; and so
   on, till we come to the first volition in the whole series: and if that
   first volition be free, and the Will self-determined in it, then that
   is determined by another volition preceding that. Which is a
   contradiction; because by the supposition, it can have none before it,
   to direct or determine it, being the first in the train. But if that
   first volition is not determined by any preceding act of the Will, then
   that act is not determined by the Will, and so is not free in the
   Arminian notion of freedom, which consists in the Will's
   self-determination. And if that first act of the Will which determines
   and fixes the subsequent acts, be not free, none of the following acts
   which are determined by it can be free.--If we suppose there are five
   acts in the train, the fifth and last determined by the fourth, and the
   fourth by the third, the third by the second, and the second by the
   first; if the first is not determined by the Will, and so not free,
   then none of them are truly determined by the Will: that is, that each
   of them are as they are, and not otherwise, is not first owing to the
   Will, but to the determination of the first in the series, which is not
   dependent on the Will, and is that which the Will has no hand in
   determining. And this being that which decides what the rest shall be,
   and determines their existence; therefore the first determination of
   their existence is not from the Will. The case is just the same, if
   instead of a chain of five acts of the Will, we should suppose a
   succession of ten, or an hundred, or ten thousand. If the first act he
   not free, being determined by something out of the Will, and this
   determines the next to be agreeable to itself, and that the next, and
   so on; none of them are free, but all originally depend on, and are
   determined by, some cause out of the Will; and so all freedom in the
   case is excluded, and no act of the Will can be free, according to this
   notion of freedom. If we should suppose a long chain of ten thousand
   links, so connected, that if the first link moves, it will move the
   next, and that the next; and so the whole chain must be determined to
   motion, and in the direction of its motion, by the motion of the first
   link; and that is moved by something else; in this case, though all the
   links, but one, are moved by other parts of the same chain, yet it
   appears that the motion of no one, nor the direction of its motion, is
   from any self-moving or self-determining power in the chain, any more
   than if every link were immediately moved by something that did not
   belong to the chain.--If the Will be not free in the first act, which
   causes the next, then neither is it free in the next, which is caused
   by that first act; for though indeed the Will caused it, yet it did not
   cause it freely; because the preceding act, by which it was caused, was
   not free. And again, if the Will be not free in the second act, so
   neither can it be in the third, which is caused by that; because in
   like manner, that third was determined by an act of the Will that was
   not free. And so we may go on to the next act, and from that to the
   next; and how long soever the succession of acts is, it is all one: if
   the first on which the whole chain depends, and which determines all
   the rest, be not a free act, the Will is not free in causing or
   determining any one of those acts; because the act by which it
   determines them all is not a free act; and therefore the Will is no
   more free in determining them, than if it did not cause them at
   all.--Thus, this Arminian notion of Liberty of the Will, consisting in
   the will's Self-determination, is repugnant to itself, and shuts itself
   wholly out of the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Several supposed ways of evading the foregoing reasoning, considered.

   If to evade the force of what has been observed, it should be said,
   that when the Arminians speak of the Will determining its own acts,
   they do not mean that the Will determines them by any preceding act, or
   that one act of the Will determines another; but only that the faculty
   or power of Will, or the soul in the use of that power, determines its
   own volitions; and that it does it without any act going before the act
   determined; such an evasion would be full of the most gross
   absurdity.--I confess, it is an evasion of my own inventing; and I do
   not know but I should wrong the Arminians, in supposing that any of
   them would make use of it. But, it being as good a one as I can invent,
   I would observe upon it a few things.

   First, If the power of the will determines an act of volition, or the
   soul in the use or exercise of that power determines it, that is the
   same thing as for the soul to determine volition by an act of will, For
   an exercise of the power of will, and an act of that power, are the
   same thing. Therefore to say, that the power of will, or the soul in
   the use or exercise of that power, determines volition, without an act
   of will preceding the volition determined, is a contradiction.

   Secondly, If a power of will determines the act of the Will, then a
   power of choosing determines it. For, as was before observed, in every
   act of will, there is choice, and a power of willing is a power of
   choosing. But if a power of choosing determines the act of volition, it
   determines it by choosing it. For it is most absurd to say, that a
   power of choosing determines one thing rather than another, without
   choosing any thing. But if a power of choosing determines volition by
   choosing it, then here is the act of volition determined by an
   antecedent choice, choosing that volition.

   Thirdly, To say, that the faculty, or the soul, determines its own
   volition, but not by any act, is a contradiction. Because for the soul
   to direct, decide, or determine any thing, is to act; and this is
   supposed: for the soul is here spoken of as being a cause in this
   affair, doing something; or, which is the same thing, exerting itself
   in order to an effect, which effect is the determination of volition,
   or the particular kind and manner of an act of will. But certainly,
   this action is not the same with the effect, in order to the production
   of which it is exerted; but must be something prior to it.

   The advocates for this notion of the freedom of the Will, speak of a
   certain sovereignty in the Will, whereby it has power to determine its
   own volitions. And therefore the determination of volition must itself
   be an act of the Will; for otherwise it can be no exercise of that
   supposed power and sovereignty. Again, if the Will determines itself,
   then either the Will is active in determining its volitions, or it is
   not. If active, then the determination is an act of the Will; and so
   there is one act of the Will determining another. But if the Will is
   not active in the determination, then how does it exercise any liberty
   in it? These gentlemen suppose that the thing wherein the Will
   exercises liberty, is in its determining its own acts. But how can this
   be, if it be not active in determining? Certainly the Will, or the
   soul, cannot exercise any liberty in that wherein it doth not act, or
   wherein it doth not exercise itself. So that if either part of this
   dilemma be taken, this scheme of liberty, consisting in
   self-determining power, is overthrown. If there be an act of the Will
   in determining all its own free acts, then one free act of the Will is
   determined by another; and so we have the absurdity of every free act,
   even the very first, determined by a foregoing free act. But if there
   be no act or exercise of the Will in determining its own acts, then no
   liberty is exercised in determining them. From whence it follows, that
   no liberty consists in the Will's power to determine its own acts: or,
   which is the same thing, that there is no such thing as liberty
   consisting in a self-determining power of the Will.

   If it should be said, That although it be true, if the soul determines
   its own volitions, it must be active in so doing, and the determination
   itself must be an act; yet there is no need of supposing this act to be
   prior to the volition determined; but the Will or soul determines the
   act of the Will in willing; it determines its own volition, in the very
   act of volition; it directs and limits the act of the Will, causing it
   to be so and not otherwise, in exerting the act, without any preceding
   act to exert that. If any should say after this manner, they must mean
   one of these three things: either, (1.) That the determining act,
   though it be before the act determined in the order of nature, yet is
   not before it in order of time. Or, (2.) That the determining act is
   not before the act determined, either in the order of time or nature,
   nor is truly distinct from it; but that the soul's determining the act
   of volition is the same thing with its exerting the act of volition:
   the mind's exerting such a particular act, is its causing and
   determining the act. Or, (3.) That volition has no cause, and is no
   effect; but comes into existence, with such a particular determination,
   without any ground or reason of its existence and determination.--I
   shall consider these distinctly.

   (1.) If all that is meant, be, that the determining act is not before
   the act determined in order of time, it will not help the case at all,
   though it should be allowed. If it be before the determined act in the
   order of nature, being the cause or ground of its existence, this as
   much proves it to be distinct from, and independent on it, as if it
   were before in the order of time. As the cause of the particular motion
   of a natural body in a certain direction, may have no distance as to
   time, yet cannot be the same with the motion effected by it, but must
   be as distinct from it, as any other cause, that is before its effect
   in the order of time: as the architect is distinct from the house which
   he builds, or the father distinct from the son which he begets. And if
   the act of the Will determining be distinct from the act determined,
   and before it in the order of nature, then we can go back from one to
   another, till we come to the first in the series, which has no act of
   the Will before it in the order of nature, determining it; and
   consequently is an act not determined by the Will, and so not a free
   act, in this notion of freedom. And this being the act which determines
   all the rest, none of them are free acts. As when there is a chain of
   many links, the first of which only is taken hold of and drawn by hand;
   all the rest may follow and be moved at the same instant, without any
   distance of time; but yet the motion of one link is before that of
   another in the order of nature; the last is moved by the next, and that
   by the next, and so till we come to the first; which not being moved by
   any other, but by something distinct from the whole chain, this as much
   proves that no part is moved by any self-moving power in the chain, as
   if the motion of one link followed that of another in the order of
   time.

   (2.) If any should say, that the determining act is not before the
   determined act, either in the order of time, or of nature, nor is
   distinct from it; but that the exertion of the act is the determination
   of the act; that for the soul to exert a particular volition, is for it
   to cause and determine that act of volition: I would on this observe,
   that the thing in question seems to be forgotten, or kept out of sight,
   in a darkness and unintelligibleness of speech; unless such an objector
   would mean to contradict himself.--The very act of volition itself is
   doubtless a determination of mind; i.e. it is the mind's drawing up a
   conclusion, or coming to a choice between two or more things proposed
   to it. But determining among external objects of choice, is not the
   same with determining the act of choice itself, among various possible
   acts of choice.--The question is, What influences, directs, or
   determines the mind or Will to come to such a conclusion or choice as
   it does? Or what is the cause, ground, or reason, why it concludes
   thus, and not otherwise? Now it must be answered, according to the
   Arminian notion of freedom, that the Will influences, orders, and
   determines itself thus to act. And if it does, I say, it must be by
   some antecedent act. To say, it is caused, influenced, and determined
   by something, and yet not determined by any thing antecedent, either in
   order of time or nature, is a contradiction. For that is what is meant
   by a thing's being prior in the order of nature, that it is someway the
   cause or reason of the thing, with respect to which it is said to be
   prior.

   If the particular act or exertion of will, which comes into existence,
   be any thing properly determined at all, then it has some cause of
   existing, and of existing in such a particular determinate manner, and
   not another; some cause, whose influence decides the matter: which
   cause is distinct from the effect, and prior to it. But to say, that
   the Will or mind orders, influences, and determines itself to exert an
   act by the very exertion itself, is to make the exertion both cause and
   effect; or the exerting such an act, to be a cause of the exertion of
   such an act. For the question is, What is the cause and reason of the
   soul's exerting such an act? To which the answer is, The soul exerts
   such an act, and that is the cause of it. And so, by this, the exertion
   must be distinct from, and in the order of nature prior to, itself.

   (3.) If the meaning be, that the soul's exertion of such a particular
   act of will, is a thing that comes to pass of itself, without any
   cause; and that there is absolutely no reason of the soul being
   determined to exert such a volition, and make such a choice, rather
   than another; I say, if this be the meaning of Arminians, when they
   contend so earnestly for the Will determining its own acts, and for
   liberty of Will consisting in self-determining power; they do nothing
   but confound themselves and others with words without a meaning. In the
   question, What determines the Will? and in their answer, that the Will
   determines itself; and in all the dispute, it seems to be taken for
   granted, that something determines the Will; and the controversy on
   this head is not, whether its determination has any cause or foundation
   at all; but where the foundation of it is, whether in the will itself,
   or somewhere else. But if the thing intended be what is above
   mentioned, then nothing at all determines the Will; volition having
   absolutely no cause or foundation of its existence, either within or
   without.--There is a great noise made about self-determining power, as
   the source of all free acts of the Will: but when the matter comes to
   be explained, the meaning is, that no power at all is the source of
   these acts, neither self-determining power, nor any other, but they
   arise from nothing; no cause, no power, no influence, being at all
   concerned in the matter.

   However, this very thing, even that the free acts of the Will are
   events which come to pass without a cause, is certainly implied in the
   Arminian notion of liberty of Will; though it be very inconsistent with
   many other things in their scheme, and repugnant to some things implied
   in their notion of liberty. Their opinion implies, that the particular
   determination of volition is without any cause; because they hold the
   free acts of the Will to be contingent events; and contingence is
   essential to freedom in their notion of it. But certainly, those things
   which have a prior ground and reason of their particular existence, a
   cause which antecedently determines them to be, and determines them to
   be just as they are, do not happen contingently. If something
   foregoing, by a casual influence and connexion, determines and fixes
   precisely their coming to pass, and the manner of it, then it does not
   remain a contingent thing whether they shall come to pass or no.

   And because it is a question in many respects very important in this
   controversy, Whether the free acts of the Will are events which come to
   pass without a cause; I shall be particular in examining this point in
   the two following sections.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Whether any event whatsoever, and Volition in particular, can come to
   pass without a Cause of its existence.

   Before I enter on any argument on this subject, I would explain how I
   would be understood, when I use the word Cause in this discourse;
   since, for want of a better word, I shall have occasion to use it in a
   sense which is more extensive than that in which it is sometimes used.
   The word is often used in so restrained a sense as to signify only that
   which has a positive efficiency or influence to produce a thing, or
   bring it to pass. But there are many things which have no such positive
   productive influence; which yet are Causes in this respect, that they
   have truly the nature of a reason why some things are, rather than
   others; or why they are thus, rather than otherwise. Thus the absence
   of the sun in the night, is not the Cause of the fall of dew at that
   time, in the same manner as its beams are the cause of the ascent of
   vapors in the day-time; and its withdrawment in the winter, is not in
   the same manner the Cause of the freezing of the waters, as its
   approach in the spring is the cause of their thawing. But yet the
   withdrawment or absence of the sun is an antecedent, with which these
   effects in the night and winter are connected, and on which they
   depend; and is one thing that belongs to the ground and reason why they
   come to pass at that time, rather than at other times; though the
   absence of the sun is nothing positive, nor has any positive influence.

   It may be further observed, that when I speak of connexion of Causes
   and effects, I have respect to moral Causes, as well as those that are
   called natural in distinction from them. Moral Causes may be Causes in
   as proper a sense as any Causes whatsoever; may have as real an
   influence, and may as truly be the ground and reason of an Event's
   coming to pass.

   Therefore I sometimes use the word Cause, in this inquiry, to signify
   any antecedent, either natural or moral, positive or negative, on which
   an Event, either a thing, or the manner and circumstance of a thing, so
   depends, that it is the ground and reason, either in whole, or in part,
   why it is, rather than not; or why it is as it is, rather than
   otherwise; or, in other words, any antecedent with which a consequent
   Event is so connected, that it truly belongs to the reason why the
   proposition which affirms that Event is true; whether it has any
   positive influence, or not. And agreeably to this, I sometimes use the
   word effect for the consequence of another thing, which is perhaps
   rather an occasion than a Cause, most properly speaking.

   I am the more careful thus to explain my meaning, that I may cut off
   occasion, from any that might seek occasion to cavil and object against
   some things which I may say concerning the dependence of all things
   which come to pass, on some Cause, and their connexion with their
   Cause.

   Having thus explained what I mean by Cause, I assert, that nothing ever
   comes to pass without a Cause. What is self-existent must be from
   eternity, and must be unchangeable: but as to all things that begin to
   be, they are not self-existent, and therefore must have some foundation
   of their existence without themselves.--That whatsoever begins to be,
   which before was not, must have a Cause why it then begins to exist,
   seems to be the first dictate of the common and natural sense which God
   hath implanted in the minds of all mankind, and the main foundation of
   all our reasonings about the existence of things, past, present, or to
   come.

   And this dictate of common sense equally respects substances and modes,
   or things and the manner and circumstances of things. Thus, if we see a
   body which has hitherto been at rest, start out of a state of rest, and
   begin to move, we do as naturally and necessarily suppose there is some
   Cause or reason of this new mode of existence, as of the existence of a
   body itself which had hitherto not existed. And so if a body, which had
   hitherto moved in a certain direction, should suddenly change the
   direction of its motion; or if it should put off its old figure, and
   take a new one; or change its color: the beginning of these new modes
   is a new Event, and the human mind necessarily supposes that there is
   some Cause or reason of them.

   If this grand principle of common sense be taken away, all arguing from
   effects to causes ceaseth, and so all knowledge of any existence,
   besides what we have by the most direct and immediate intuition,
   particularly all our proof of the being of God, ceases: we argue His
   being from our own being, and the being of other things, which we are
   sensible once were not, but have begun to be; and from the being of the
   world, with all its constituent parts, and the manner of their
   existence; all which we see plainly are not necessary in their own
   nature, and so not self-existent, and therefore must have a Cause. But
   if things, not in themselves necessary, may begin to be without a
   Cause, all this arguing is vain.

   Indeed, I will not affirm, that there is in the nature of things no
   foundation for the knowledge of the Being of God, without any evidence
   of it from his works. I do suppose there is a great absurdity in
   denying Being in general, and imagining an eternal, absolute, universal
   nothing: and therefore that there would be, in the nature of things, a
   foundation of intuitive evidence, that there must be an eternal,
   infinite, most perfect Being; if we had strength and comprehension of
   mind sufficient, to have a clear idea of general and universal Being.
   But then we should not properly come to the knowledge of the Being of
   God by arguing; our evidence would be intuitive: we should see it, as
   we see other things that are necessary in themselves, the contraries of
   which are in their own nature absurd and contradictory; as we see that
   twice two is four; and as we see that a circle has no angles. If we had
   as clear an idea of universal, infinite entity, as we have of these
   other things, I suppose we should most intuitively see the absurdity of
   supposing such Being not to be; should immediately see there is no room
   for the question, whether it is possible that Being, in the most
   general, abstracted notion of it should not be. But we have not that
   strength and extent of mind, to know this certainly in this intuitive,
   independent manner: but the way that mankind come to the knowledge of
   the Being of God, is that which the apostle speaks of, Rom. i.20. The
   invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, are clearly
   seen; being understood by the things that are made; even his eternal
   power and Godhead. We first ascend, and prove a posteriori, or from
   effects, that there must be an eternal Cause; and then secondly, prove
   by argumentation, not intuition, that this Being must be necessarily
   existent; and then thirdly, from the proved necessity of his existence,
   we may descend, and prove many of his perfections a priori. [109]

   But if once this grand principle of common sense be given up, that what
   is not necessary in itself, must have a Cause; and we begin to
   maintain, that things which heretofore have not been, may come into
   existence, and begin to be of themselves, without any cause; all our
   means of ascending in our arguing from the creature to the Creator, and
   all our evidence of the Being of God, is cut off at one blow. In this
   case, we cannot prove that there is a God, either from the Being of the
   world, and the creatures in it, or from the manner of their Being,
   their order, beauty, and use. For if things may come into existence
   without any Cause at all, then they doubtless may without any Cause
   answerable to the effect. Our minds do alike naturally suppose and
   determine both these things; namely, that what begins to be has a
   Cause, and also that it has a Cause proportionable to the effect. The
   same principle which leads us to determine, that there cannot be any
   thing coming to pass without a Cause, leads us to determine that there
   cannot be more in the effect than in the Cause.

   Yea, if once it should be allowed, that things may come to pass without
   a Cause, we should not only have no proof of the Being of God, but we
   should be without evidence of the existence of any thing whatsoever,
   but our own immediately present ideas and consciousness. For we have no
   way to prove any thing else, but by arguing from effects to Causes:
   from the ideas now immediately in view, we argue other things not
   immediately in view; from sensations now excited in us, we infer the
   existence of things without us, as the Causes of these sensations; and
   from the existence of these things, we argue other things, on which
   they depend, as effects on Causes. We infer the past existence of
   ourselves, or any thing else, by memory; only as we argue, that the
   ideas, which are now in our minds, are the consequences of past ideas
   and sensations. We immediately perceive nothing else but the ideas
   which are this moment extant in our minds. We perceive or know other
   things only by means of these, as necessarily connected with others,
   and dependent on them. But if things may be without Causes, all this
   necessary connexion and dependence is dissolved, and so all means of
   our knowledge is gone. If there be no absurdity or difficulty in
   supposing one thing to start out of non-existence into being, of itself
   without a Cause; then there is no absurdity or difficulty in supposing
   the same of millions of millions. For nothing, or no difficulty,
   multiplied, still is nothing, or no difficulty: nothing multiplied by
   nothing, does not increase the sum.

   And indeed, according to the hypothesis I am opposing, of the acts of
   the Will coming to pass without a Cause, it is the cause in fact, that
   millions of millions of Events are continually coming into existence
   contingently, without any Cause or reason why they do so, all over the
   world, every day and hour, through all ages. So it is in a constant
   succession, in every moral agent. This contingency, this efficient
   nothing, this effectual No-Cause, is always ready at hand, to produce
   this sort of effects, as long as the agent exists, and as often as he
   has occasion.

   If it were so, that things only of one kind, viz. acts of the Will,
   seemed to come to pass of themselves; and it were an Event that was
   continual, and that happened in a course, wherever were found subjects
   capable of such Events; this very thing would demonstrate that there
   was some Cause of them, which made such a difference between this Event
   and others, and that they did not really happen contingently. For
   contingence is blind, and does not pick and choose a particular sort of
   Events. Nothing has no choice. This No-Cause, which causes no
   existence, cannot cause the existence which comes to pass, to be of one
   particular sort only, distinguished from all others. Thus, that only
   one sort of matter drops out of the heavens, even water, and that this
   comes so often, so constantly and plentifully, all over the world, in
   all ages, shows that there is some Cause or reason of the falling of
   water out of the heavens; and that something besides mere contingence
   has a hand in the matter.

   If we should suppose Non-entity to be about to bring forth; and things
   were coming into existence, without any Cause or antecedent, on which
   the existence, or kind, or manner of existence depends; or which could
   at all determine whether the things should be stones, or stars, or
   beasts, or angels, or human bodies, or souls, or only some new motion
   or figure in natural bodies, or some new sensations in animals, or new
   ideas in the human understanding, or new volitions in the Will; or any
   thing else of all the infinite number of possibles; then certainly it
   would not be expected, although many millions of millions of things
   were coming into existence in this manner, all over the face of the
   earth, that they should all be only of one particular kind, and that it
   should be thus in all ages, and that this sort of existences should
   never fail to come to pass where there is room for them, or a subject
   capable of them, and that constantly, whenever there is occasion.

   If any should imagine, there is something in the sort of Event that
   renders it possible for it to come into existence without a Cause, and
   should say, that the free acts of the Will are existences of an
   exceeding different nature from other things; by reason of which they
   may come into existence without any previous ground or reason of it,
   though other things cannot: if they make this objection in good
   earnest, it would be an evidence of their strangely forgetting
   themselves; for they would be giving an account of some ground of the
   existence of a thing, when at the same time they would maintain there
   is no ground of its existence. Therefore I would observe, that the
   particular nature of existence, be it never so diverse from others, can
   lay no foundation for that thing coming into existence without a Cause;
   because to suppose this, would be to suppose the particular nature of
   existence to be a thing prior to the existence, and so a thing which
   makes way for existence, without a cause or reason of existence. But
   that which in any respect makes way for a thing coming into being, or
   for any manner or circumstance of its first existence, must be prior to
   the existence. The distinguished nature of the effect, which is
   something belonging to the effect, cannot have influence backward, to
   act before it is. The peculiar nature of that thing called Volition,
   can do nothing, can have no influence, while it is not. And afterwards
   it is too late for its influence: for then the thing has made sure of
   existence already, without its help.

   So that it is indeed as repugnant to reason, to suppose that an act of
   the Will should come into existence without a Cause, as to suppose the
   human soul, or an angel, or the globe of the earth, or the whole
   universe, should come into existence without a Cause. And if once we
   allow, that such a sort of effect as a Volition may come to pass
   without a Cause, how do we know but that many other sorts of effects
   may do so too? It is not the particular kind of effect that makes the
   absurdity of supposing it has being without a Cause, but something
   which is common to all things that ever begin to be, viz. That they are
   not self- existent, or necessary in the nature of things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [109] To the inquirer after the truth it may here be recommended, as a
   matter of some consequence, to keep in mind the precise difference
   between an argument a priori and one a posteriori, a distinction of
   considerable use, as well as of long standing, among divines,
   metaphysicians, and logical writers. An argument from either of these,
   when legitimately applied, may amount to a demonstration, when used for
   instance, relatively to the being and perfections of God; but the one
   should be confined to the existence of Deity, while the other is
   applicable to his perfections. By the argument a posteriori we rise
   from the effect to the cause, from the stream to the fountain, from
   what is posterior to what is prior; in other words, from what is
   contingent to what is absolute, from number to unity; that is, from the
   manifestation of God to his existence. By the argument a priori we
   descend from the cause to the effect, from the fountain to the stream,
   from what is prior to what is posterior; that is, from the necessary
   existence of God we safely infer certain properties and perfections. To
   attempt a demonstration of the existence of a first cause, or the Being
   of God, a priori, would be most absurd; for it would be an attempt to
   prove a prior ground or cause of existence of a first cause; or, that
   there is some cause before the very first. The argument a priori,
   therefore, is not applicable to prove the divine existence. For this
   end, the argument a posteriori alone is legitimate; and its
   conclusiveness rests on this axiom, that "there can be no effect
   without a cause."-The absurdity of denying this axiom is abundantly
   demonstrated by our author.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Whether Volition can arise without a Cause, through the activity of the
   nature of the soul.

   The author of the Essay on the Freedom of the Will in God and the
   Creatures, in answer to that objection against his doctrine of a
   self-determining power in the Will, (p. 68--69.) That nothing is, or
   comes to pass, without a sufficient reason why it is, and why it is in
   this manner rather than another, allows that it is thus in corporeal
   things, which are, properly and philosophically speaking, passive
   being; but denies it is thus in spirits, which are beings of an active
   nature, who have the spring of action within themselves, and can
   determine themselves. By which it is plainly supposed, that such an
   event as an act of the Will, may come to pass in a spirit, without a
   sufficient reason why it comes to pass, or why it is after this manner,
   rather than another. But certainly this author, in this matter, must be
   very unwary and inadvertent. For,

   1. The objection or difficulty proposed by him seems to be forgotten in
   his answer or solution. The very difficulty, as he himself proposes it,
   is this: How an event can come to pass without a sufficient reason why
   it is, or why it is in this manner rather than another? Instead of
   solving this difficulty, with regard to Volition, as he proposes, he
   forgets himself, and answers another question quite diverse, viz. What
   is a sufficient reason why it is, and why it is in this manner rather
   than another? And he assigns the active being's own determination as
   the Cause, and a Cause sufficient for the effect; and leaves all the
   difficulty unresolved, even, How the soul's own determination, which he
   speaks of, came to exist, and to be what it was, without a Cause? The
   activity of the soul may enable it to be the Cause of effects; but it
   does not at all enable it to be the subject of effects which have no
   Cause; which is the thing this author supposes concerning acts of the
   Will. Activity of nature will no more enable a being to produce
   effects, and determine the manner of their existence, within itself,
   without a Cause, than out of itself, in some other being. But if an
   active being should, through its activity, produce and determine an
   effect in some external object, how absurd would it be to say, that the
   effect was produced without a Cause!

   2. The question is not so much, How a spirit endowed with activity
   comes to act, as why it exerts such an act, and not another; or why it
   acts with such a particular determination? If activity of nature be the
   Cause why a spirit (the soul of man, for instance) acts, and does not
   lie still; yet that alone is not the Cause why its action is thus and
   thus limited, directed, and determined. Active nature is a general
   thing; it is an ability or tendency of nature to action, generally
   taken; which may be a Cause why the soul acts as occasion or reason is
   given; but this alone cannot be a sufficient Cause why the soul exerts
   such a particular act, at such a time, rather than others. In order to
   this there must be something besides a general tendency to action;
   there must also be a particular tendency to that individual action.--If
   it should be asked, why the soul of man uses its activity, in such a
   manner as it does; and it should be answered, that the soul uses its
   activity thus, rather than otherwise, because it has activity; would
   such an answer satisfy a rational man? Would it not rather be looked
   upon as a very impertinent one?

   3. An active being can bring no effects to pass by his activity, but
   what are consequent upon his acting: he produces nothing by his
   activity, any other way than by the exercise of his activity, and so
   nothing but the fruits of its exercise: he brings nothing to pass by a
   dormant activity. But the exercise of his activity is action; and so
   his action, or exercise of his activity, must be prior to the effects
   of his activity. If an active being produces an effect in another
   being, about which his activity is conversant, the effect being the
   fruit of his activity, his activity must be first exercised or exerted,
   and the effect of it must follow. So it must be, with equal reason, if
   the active being is his own object, and his activity is conversant
   about himself, to produce and determine some effect in himself; still
   the exercise of his activity must go before the effect, which he brings
   to pass and determines by it. And therefore his activity cannot be the
   Cause of the determination of the first action, or exercise of activity
   itself, whence the effects of activity arise; for that would imply a
   contradiction; it would be to say, the first exercise of activity is
   before the first exercise of activity, and is the Cause of it.

   4. That the soul, though an active substance, cannot diversify its own
   acts, but by first acting; or be a determining Cause of different acts,
   or any different effects, sometimes of one kind, and sometimes of
   another, any other way than in consequence of its own diverse acts, is
   manifest by this; that if so, then the same Cause, the same causal
   influence, without variation in any respect, would produce different
   effects at different times. For the same substance of the soul before
   it acts, and the same active nature of the soul before it is exerted,
   i. e. before in the order of nature, would be the Cause of different
   effects, viz. different Volitions at different times. But the substance
   of the soul before it acts, and its active nature before it is exerted,
   are the same without variation. For it is some act that makes the first
   variation in the Cause, as to any causal exertion, force, or influence.
   But if it be so, that the soul has no different causality, or diverse
   causal influence, in producing these diverse effects; then it is
   evident, that the soul has no influence in the diversity of the effect;
   and that the difference of the effect cannot be owing to any thing in
   the soul; or which is the same thing, the soul does not determine the
   diversity of the effect; which is contrary to the supposition.--It is
   true, the substance of the soul before it acts, and before their is any
   difference in that respect, may be in a different state and
   circumstances: but those whom I oppose, will not allow the different
   circumstances of the soul to be the determining Causes of the acts of
   the Will; as being contrary to their notion of self-determination.

   5. Let us suppose, as these divines do, that there are no acts of the
   soul, strictly speaking, but free Volitions; then it will follow, that
   the soul is an active being in nothing further than it is a voluntary
   or elective being; and when ever it produces effects actively, it
   produces effects voluntarily and electively. But to produce effects
   thus, is the same thing as to produce effects in consequence of, and
   according to its own choice. And if so, then surely the soul does not
   by its activity produce all its own acts of will or choice themselves;
   for this, by the supposition, is to produce all its free acts of choice
   voluntarily an electively or in consequence of its own free acts of
   choice, which brings the matter directly to the forementioned
   contradiction, of a free act of choice before the first free act of
   choice.--According to these gentlemen's own notion of action, if there
   arises in the mind a Volition without a free act of the Will to produce
   it, the mind is not the voluntary Cause of that Volition; because it
   does not arise from, nor is regulated by, choice or design. And
   therefore it cannot be, that the mind should be the active, voluntary,
   determining Cause of the first and leading Volition that relates to the
   affair.--The mind being a designing Cause, only enables it to produce
   effects in consequence of its design; it will not enable it to be the
   designing Cause of all its own designs. The mind being an elective
   Cause, will enable it to produce effects only in consequence of its
   elections, and according to them; but cannot enable it to be the
   elective Cause of all its own elections; because that supposes an
   election before the first election. So the mind being an active Cause
   enables it to produce effects in consequence of its own acts, but
   cannot enable it to be the determining Cause of all its own acts; for
   that is, in the same manner, a contradiction; as it supposes a
   determining act conversant about the first act, and prior to it, having
   a causal influence on its existence, and manner of existence.

   I can conceive of nothing else that can be meant by the soul having
   power to cause and determine its own Volitions, as a being to whom God
   has given a power of action, but this; that God has given power to the
   soul, sometimes at least, to excite Volitions at its pleasure, or
   according as it chooses. And this certainly supposes, in all such
   cases, a choice preceding all Volitions which are thus caused, even the
   first of them. Which runs into the forementioned great absurdity.

   Therefore the activity of the nature of the soul affords no relief from
   the difficulties with which the notion of a self-determining power in
   the Will is attended, nor will it help, in the least, its absurdities
   and inconsistences.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Showing, that if the things asserted in these Evasions should be
   supposed to be true, they are altogether impertinent, and cannot help
   the cause of Arminian Liberty; and how, this being the state of the
   case, Arminian writers are obliged to talk inconsistently.

   What was last observed in the preceding section, may show--not only
   that the active nature of the soul cannot be a reason why an act of the
   Will is, or why it is in this manner rather than another, but
   also--that if it could be proved, that volitions are contingent events,
   their being and manner of being not fixed or determined by any cause,
   or any thing antecedent; it would not at all serve the purpose of
   Arminians, to establish their notion of freedom, as consisting in the
   Will's determination of itself, which supposes every free act of the
   Will to be determined by some act of the Will going before; inasmuch as
   for the Will to determine a thing, is the same as for the soul to
   determine a thing by willing; and there is no way that the Will can
   determine an act of the Will, than by willing that act of the Will, or,
   which is the same thing, choosing it. So that here must be two acts of
   the Will in the case, one going before another, one conversant about
   the other, and the latter the object of the former, and chosen by the
   former. If the Will does not cause and determine the act by choice, it
   does not cause or determine it at all; for that which is not determined
   by choice, is not determined voluntarily or willingly: and to say, that
   the Will determines something which the soul does not determine
   willingly, is as much as to say, that something is done by the Will,
   which the soul doth not with its Will.

   So that if Arminian liberty of Will, consisting in the Will determining
   its own acts, be maintained, the old absurdity and contradiction must
   be maintained, that every free act of Will is caused and determined by
   a foregoing free act of Will. Which doth not consist with the free acts
   arising without any cause, and being so contingent, as not to be fixed
   by any thing foregoing. So that this evasion must be given up, as not
   at all relieving this sort of liberty, but directly destroying it.

   And if it should be supposed, that the soul determines its own acts of
   W ill some other way, than by a foregoing act of Will; still it will
   help not their cause If it determines them by an act of the
   understanding, or some other power, then the Will does not determine
   itself; and so the self--determining power of the Will is given up. And
   what liberty is there exercised, according to their own opinion of
   liberty, by the soul being determined by something besides its own
   choice? The acts of the Will, it is true, may be directed, and
   effectually determined and fixed; but it is not done by the soul's own
   Will and pleasure: there is no exercise at all of choice or Will in
   producing the effect: and if Will and choice are not exercised in it,
   how is the liberty of the Will exercised in it?

   So that let Arminians turn which way they please with their notion of
   liberty, consisting in the Will determining its own acts, their notion
   destroys itself. If they hold every free act of Will to be determined
   by the soul's own free choice, or foregoing free act of Will;
   foregoing, either in the order of time, or nature; it implies that
   gross contradiction, that the first free act belonging to the affair,
   is determined by a free act which is before it. Or if they say, that
   the free acts of the Will are determined by some other act of the soul,
   and not an act of Will or choice; this also destroys their notion of
   liberty consisting in the acts of the Will being determined by the Will
   itself; or if they hold that the acts of the Will are determined by
   nothing at all that is prior to them, but that they are contingent in
   that sense, that they are determined and fixed by no cause at all; this
   also destroys their notion of liberty, consisting in the Will
   determining its own acts.

   This being the true state of the Arminian notion of liberty, the
   writers who defend it are forced into gross inconsistences, in what
   they say upon this subject. To instance in Dr. Whitby; he, in his
   discourse on the freedom of the Will, [110] opposes the opinion of the
   Calvinists, who place man's liberty only in a power of doing what he
   will, as that wherein they plainly agree with Mr. Hobbes. And yet he
   himself mentions the very same notion of liberty, as the dictate of the
   sense and common reason of mankind, and a rule laid down by the light
   of nature; viz. that liberty is a power of acting from ourselves, or
   doing what we will. [111] This is indeed, as he says, a thing agreeable
   to the sense and common reason of mankind; and therefore it is not so
   much to be wondered at, that he unawares acknowledges it against
   himself: for if liberty does not consist in this, what else can be
   devised that it should consist in? If it be said, as Dr. Whitby
   elsewhere insists, that it does not only consist in liberty of doing
   what we will, but also a liberty of willing without necessity; still
   the question returns, what does that liberty of willing without
   necessity consist in, but in a power of willing as we please, without
   being impeded by a contrary necessity? or in other words, a liberty for
   the soul in its willing to act according to its own choice? Yea, this
   very thing the same author seems to allow, and suppose again and again,
   in the use he makes of sayings of the fathers, whom he quotes as his
   vouchers. Thus he cites the words of Origen, which he produces as a
   testimony on his side; [112] "The soul acts by her own choice , and it
   is free for her to incline to whatever part she will." And those of
   Justin Martyr; [113] "The doctrine of the Christians is this, that
   nothing is done or suffered according to fate, but that every man doth
   good or evil according to his own free choice. And from Eusebius, these
   words; [114] "If fate be established, philosophy and piety are
   overthrown.--All these things depending upon the necessity introduced
   by the stars, aloud not upon meditation and exercise proceeding from
   our own free choice. And again, the words of Maccarius; [115] "God, to
   preserve the liberty of man's Will, suffered their bodies to die, that
   it might be in their choice. to turn to good or evil."--"They who are
   acted by the Holy Spirit, are not held under any necessity, but have
   liberty to turn themselves, and do what they will in this life."

   Thus, the Doctor in effect comes into that very notion of liberty,
   which the Calvinists have; which he at the same time condemns, as
   agreeing with the opinion of Mr. Hobbes, namely, The soul acting by its
   own choice, men doing good or evil according to their own free choice,
   their being in that exercise which proceeds from their own free choice,
   having it in their choice to turn to good or evil, and doing what they
   will." So that if men exercise this liberty in the acts of the Will
   themselves, it must be in exerting acts of Will according to their own
   free choice; or, exerting acts of Will that proceed from their choice.
   And if it be so, then let every one judge whether this does not suppose
   a free choice going before the free act of Will, or whether an act of
   choice does not go before that act of the Will which proceeds from it.
   And if it be thus with all free acts of the Will, then let every one
   judge, whether it will not follow that there is a free choice going
   before the first free act of the Will exerted in the case! And finally,
   let every one judge whether in the scheme of these writers there be any
   possibility of avoiding these absurdities.

   If liberty consists, as Dr. Whitby himself says, in a man's doing what
   he will; and a man exercises this liberty, not only in external
   actions, but in the acts of the Will themselves; then so far as liberty
   is exercised in the latter, it consists in willing what he wills: and
   if any say so, one of these two things must be meant, either, 1. That a
   man has power to will, as he does will; because what he wills, he
   wills; and therefore power to will what he has power to will. If this
   be their meaning, then all this mighty controversy about freedom of the
   Will and self-determining power, comes wholly to nothing; all that is
   contended for being no more than this, that the mind of man does what
   it does, and is the subject of what it is the subject, or that what is,
   is; wherein none has any controversy with them. Or, 2. The meaning must
   be, that a man has power to will as he chooses to will: that is, he has
   power by one act of choice to choose another; by an antecedent act of
   Will to choose a consequent act: and therein to execute his own choice.
   And if this be their meaning, it is nothing but shuffling with those
   they dispute with, and baffling their own reason. For still the
   question returns, wherein lies man's liberty in that antecedent act of
   Will which chose the consequent act. The answer according to the same
   principles must be, that his liberty in this also lies in his willing
   as he would, or as he chose, or agreeable to another act of choice
   preceding that. And so the question returns in infinitum, and the like
   answer must be made in infinitum: in order to support their opinion,
   their must be no beginning, but free acts of Will must have been chosen
   by foregoing free acts of Will in the soul of every man, without
   beginning.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [110] In his Book on the five Points, Second Edit. P. 350,351, 358.

   [111] Ibid. p. 325, 326.

   [112] Ibid. p. 342.

   [113] Ibid. p 360.

   [114] In his Book on the five Points, Second Edit. P. 363

   [115] Ibid. p. 369, 370.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Concerning the Will determining in things which are perfectly
   indifferent in the view of the mind .

   A great. argument for self-determining power, is the supposed
   experience we universally have of an ability to determine our Wills, in
   cases wherein no prevailing motive is presented: the Will, as is
   supposed, has its choice to make between two or more things, that are
   perfectly equal in the view of the mind; and the Will is apparently,
   altogether indifferent; and yet we find no difficulty in coming to a
   choice; the Will can instantly determine itself to one, by a sovereign
   power which it has over itself, without being moved by any
   preponderating inducement.

   Thus the fore-mentioned author of an Essay on the Freedom of the Will,
   &c. (p. 25, 26, 27.) supposes, "That there are many instances, wherein
   the Will is determined neither by present uneasiness, nor by the
   greatest apparent good, nor by the last dictate of the understanding,
   nor by any thing else, but merely by itself, as a sovereign
   self-determining power of the soul; and that the soul does not will
   this or that action, in some cases, by any other influence but because
   it will. Thus, says he, I can turn my face to the south, or the north;
   I can point with my finger upward, or downward.--And thus, in some
   cases, the Will determines itself in a very sovereign manner, because
   it will, without a reason borrowed from the understanding: and hereby
   it discovers its own perfect power of choice, rising from within
   itself, and free from all influence or restraint of any kind." And (p.
   66, 70, 73, 74.) this author very expressly supposes the Will in many
   cases to be determined by no motive at all, and acts altogether without
   motive, or ground of preference.--Here I would observe,

   1. The very supposition which is here made, directly contradicts and
   overthrows itself. For the thing supposed, wherein this grand argument
   consists, is, that among several things the Will actually chooses one
   before another, at the same time that it is perfectly indifferent;
   which is the very same thing as to say, the mind has a preference, at
   the same time that it has no preference. What is meant cannot be, that
   the mind is indifferent before it comes to have a choice, or until it
   has a preference; for certainly this author did not imagine he had a
   controversy with any person in supposing this. Besides, it appears in
   fact, that the thing which he supposes, is--not that the Will chooses
   one thing before another, concerning which it is indifferent before it
   chooses, but that the Will is indifferent when it chooses; and that it
   being otherwise than indifferent is not until afterwards, in
   consequence of its choice; that the chosen thing appearing preferable,
   and more agreeable than another, arises from its choice already made.
   His words are, (p. 30.) "Where the objects which are proposed appear
   equally fit or good, the Will is left without a guide or director; and
   therefore must take its own choice, by its own determination; it being
   properly a self-determining power. And in such cases the Will does as
   it were make a good to itself by its own choice, i.e. creates its own
   pleasure or delight in this self-chosen good. Even as a man by seizing
   upon a spot of unoccupied land, in an uninhabited country, makes it his
   own possession and property, and as such rejoices in it. Where things
   were indifferent before, the Will finds nothing to make them more
   agreeable, considered merely in themselves, but the pleasure it feels
   arising from its own choice, and its perseverance therein. We love many
   things which we have chosen, and purely because we chose them."

   This is as much as to say, that we first begin to prefer many things,
   purely because we have preferred and chosen them before.--These things
   must needs be spoken inconsiderately by this author. Choice or
   preference cannot be before itself in the same instance, either in the
   order of time or nature: It cannot be the foundation of itself, or the
   consequence of itself. The very act of choosing one thing rather than
   another, is preferring that thing, and that is setting a higher value
   on that thing. But that the mind sets a higher value on one thing than
   another, is not, in the first place, the fruit of its setting a higher
   value on that thing.

   This author says, (p. 36.) "The Will may be perfectly indifferent, and
   yet the Will may determine itself to choose one or the other." And
   again, in the same page, "I am entirely indifferent to either; and yet
   my Will may determine itself to choose." And again, "Which I shall
   choose must be determined by the mere act of my Will." If the choice is
   determined by a mere act of Will, then the choice is determined by a
   mere act of choice. And concerning this matter, viz. That the act of
   the Will itself is determined by act of choice, this writer is express.
   (p. 72.) Speaking of the case, where there is no superior fitness in
   objects presented, he has these words: "There it must act by its own
   choice., and determine itself as it pleases." Where it is supposed that
   the very determination, which is the ground and spring of the Will's
   act, is an act of choice and pleasure, wherein one act is more
   agreeable than another; and this preference and superior pleasure is
   the ground of all it does in the case. And if so, the mind is not
   indifferent when it determines itself, but had rather determine itself
   one way than another. And therefore the Will does not act at all in
   indifference; not so much as in the first step it takes. If it be
   possible for the understanding to act in indifference, yet surely the
   Will never does; because the Will beginning to act is the very same
   thing as it beginning to choose or prefer. And if in the very first act
   of the Will, the mind prefers something, then the idea of that thing
   preferred, does at that time preponderate, or prevail in the mind: or,
   which is the same thing, the idea of it has a prevailing influence on
   the Will. So that this wholly destroys the thing supposed, viz. That
   the mind can by a sovereign power choose one of two or more things,
   which in the view of the mind are, in every respect, perfectly equal,
   one of which does not at all preponderate, nor has any prevailing
   influence on the mind above another.

   So that this author, in his grand argument for the ability of the Will
   to choose one of two or more things, concerning which it is perfectly
   indifferent, does at the same time, in effect, deny the thing he
   supposes, even that the Will, in choosing, is subject to no prevailing
   influence of the view of the thing chosen. And indeed it is impossible
   to offer this argument without overthrowing it; the thing supposed in
   it being that which denies itself. To suppose the Will to act at all in
   a state of perfect indifference, is to assert that the mind chooses
   without choosing. To say that when it is indifferent, it can do as it
   pleases, is to say that it can follow its pleasure, when it has no
   pleasure to follow. And therefore if there be any difficulty in the
   instances of two cakes, or two eggs, &c. which are exactly alike, one
   as good as another; concerning which this author supposes the mind in
   fact has a choice, and so in effect supposes that it has a preference;
   it as much concerned himself to solve the difficulty, as it does those
   whom he opposes. For if these instances prove any thing to his purpose,
   they prove that a man chooses without choice. And yet this is not to
   his purpose; because if this is what he asserts, his own words are as
   much against him, and does as much contradict him, as the words of
   those he disputes against can do.

   2. There is no great difficulty in showing, in such instances as are
   alleged, not only that it must needs be so, that the mind must be
   influenced in its choice by something that has a preponderating
   influence upon it, but also how it is so. A little attention to our own
   experience, and a distinct consideration of the acts of our own minds,
   in such cases, will be sufficient to clear up the matter.

   Thus, supposing I have a chess-board before me; and because I am
   required by a superior, or desired by a friend, or on some other
   consideration, I am determined to touch some one of the spots or
   squares on the board with my finger. Not being limited or directed, in
   the first proposal, to any one in particular; and there being nothing
   in the squares, in themselves considered, that recommends any one of
   all the sixty-four, more than another; in this case, my mind determines
   to give itself up to what is vulgularly called accident, [116] by
   determining to touch that square which happens to be most in view,
   which my eye is especially upon at that moment, or which happens to be
   then most in my mind, or which I shall be directed to by some other
   such like accident. Here are several steps of the mind proceeding
   (though all may be done, as it were, in a moment). The first step is
   its general determination that it will touch one of the squares. The
   next step is another general determination to give itself up to
   accident, in some certain way; as to touch that which shall be most in
   the eye or mind at that time, or to some other such like accident. The
   third and last step is a particular determination to touch a certain
   individual spot, even that square, which, by that sort of accident the
   mind has pitched upon, has actually offered itself beyond others. Now
   it is apparent that in none of these several steps does the mind
   proceed in absolute indifference, but in each of them is influenced by
   a preponderating inducement. So it is in the first step, the mind's
   general determination to touch one of the sixty-four spots: the mind is
   not absolutely indifferent whether it does so or no; it is induced to
   it, for the sake of making some experiment, or by the desire of a
   friend, or some other motive that prevails. So it is in the second
   step, the mind determining to give itself up to accident, by touching
   that which shall be most in the eye, or the idea of which shall be most
   prevalent in the mind, &c. The mind is not absolutely indifferent
   whether it proceeds by this rule or no; but chooses it, because it
   appears at that time a convenient and requisite expedient in order to
   fulfil the general purpose. And so it is in the third and last step,
   which is determining to touch that individual spot which actually does
   prevail in the mind's view. The mind is not indifferent concerning
   this; but is influenced by a prevailing inducement and reason; which
   is, that this is a prosecution of the preceding determination, which
   appeared requisite, and was fixed before in the second step.

   Accident will ever serve a man, without hindering him a moment, in such
   a case. Among a number of objects in view, one will prevail in the eye,
   or in idea, beyond others. When we have our eyes open in the clear
   sunshine, many objects strike the eye at once, and innumerable images
   may be at once painted in it by the rays of light; but the attention of
   the mind is not equal to several of them at once; or if it be, it does
   not continue so for any time. And so it is with respect to the ideas of
   the mind in general: several ideas are not in equal strength in the
   mind's view and notice at once; or at least, does not remain so for any
   sensible continuance. There is nothing in the world more constantly
   varying, than the ideas of the mind; they do not remain precisely in
   the same state for the least perceivable space of time; as is evident
   by this:--That all time is perceived by the mind, only by the
   successive changes of its own ideas. Therefore while the perceptions of
   the mind remain precisely in the same state, there is no perceivable
   length of time, because no sensible succession at all.

   As the acts of the Will, in each step of the forementioned procedure,
   do not come to pass without a particular cause, but every act is owing
   to a prevailing inducement; so the accident, as I have called it, or
   that which happens in the unsearchable course of things, to which the
   mind yields itself, and by which it is guided, is not any thing that
   comes to pass without a cause. The mind in determining to be guided by
   it, is not determined by something that has no cause; any more than if
   it be determined to be guided by a lot, or the casting of a die. For
   though the die falling in such a manner be accidental to him that casts
   it, yet none will suppose that there is no cause why it falls as it
   does. The involuntary changes in the succession of our ideas, though
   the cause may not be observed, have as much a cause, as the changeable
   motions of the motes that float in the air, or the continual,
   infinitely various, successive changes of the unevennesses on the
   surface of the water.

   There are two things especially, which are probably the occasions of
   confusion in the minds of them who insist upon it, that the Will acts
   in a proper indifference, and without being moved by any inducement, in
   its determinations in such cases as have been mentioned. [117]

   1. They seem to mistake the point in question, or at least not to keep
   it distinctly in view. The question they dispute about, is, Whether the
   mind be indifferent about the objects presented, one of which is to be
   taken, touched, pointed to, &c. as two eggs, two cakes, which appear
   equally good. Whereas the question to be considered, is, Whether the
   person be indifferent with respect to his own actions; whether he does
   not, on some consideration or other, prefer one act with respect to
   these objects before another. The mind in its determination and choice,
   in these cases, is not most immediately and directly conversant about
   the objects presented; but the acts to be done concerning these
   objects. The objects may appear equal, and the mind may never properly
   make any choice between them; but the next act of the Will being about
   the external actions to be performed, taking, touching, &c. these may
   not appear equal, and one action may properly be chosen before another.
   In each step of the mind's progress, the determination is not about the
   objects, unless indirectly and improperly, but about the actions, which
   it chooses for other reasons than any preference of the objects, and
   for reasons not taken at all from the objects.

   There is no necessity of supposing, that the mind does ever at all
   properly choose one of the objects before another: either before it has
   taken, or afterwards. Indeed the man chooses to take or touch one
   rather than another; but not because it chooses the thing taken, or
   touched, but from foreign considerations. The case may be so, that of
   two things offered, a man may, for certain reasons, prefer taking that
   which he undervalues, and choose to neglect that which his mind
   prefers. In such a case, choosing the thing taken, and choosing to
   take, are diverse: and so they are in a case where the things presented
   are equal in the mind's esteem, and neither of them preferred. All that
   fact and experience makes evident, is, that the mind chooses one action
   rather than another. And therefore the arguments which they bring, in
   order to be to their purpose, should be to prove that the mind chooses
   the action in perfect indifference, with respect to that action; and
   not to prove that the mind chooses the action in perfect indifference,
   with respect to the object; which is very possible, and yet the Will
   not act at all without prevalent inducement, and proper preponderation.

   2. Another reason of confusion and difficulty in this matter, seems to
   be, not distinguishing between a general indifference, or an
   indifference with respect to what is to be done in a more distant and
   general view of it, and a particular indifference, or an indifference
   with respect to the next immediate act, viewed with its particular and
   present circumstances. A man may be perfectly indifferent with respect
   to his own actions, in the former respect; and yet not in the latter.
   Thus in the foregoing instance of touching one of the squares of a
   chess-board; when it is first proposed that I should touch one of them,
   I may be perfectly indifferent which I touch; because as yet I view the
   matter remotely and generally, being but in the first step of the
   mind's progress in the affair. But yet, when I am actually come to the
   last step, and the very next thing to be determined is which, is to be
   touched, having already determined that I will touch that which happens
   to be most in my eye or mind, and my mind being now fixed on a
   particular one, the act of touching that, considered thus immediately,
   and in these particular present circumstances, is not what my mind is
   absolutely indifferent about.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [116] I have elsewhere observed, what that is which is vulgarly called
   accident; that it is nothing akin to the Arminian metaphysical notion
   of contingence, or something not connected with any thing foregoing;
   but that it is something that comes to pass in the course of things,
   unforeseen by men, and not owing to their design.

   [117] The reader is particularly requested to give due attention to
   these two remarks, especially the former, as being of the utmost
   importance in the controversy. If he be pleased to examine, with this
   view, the most popular advocates for the liberty of indifference, he
   will find them continually confounding the objects of choice, and the
   acts of choice. When they have shown, with much plausibility, that
   there is no perceivable difference, or ground of choice, in the
   objects, they hastily infer the same indifferences as applicable to the
   acts of choice. --W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Concerning the Notion of Liberty of Will, consisting in Indifference.

   What has been said in the foregone section, has a tendency in some
   measure to evince the absurdity of the opinion of such as place Liberty
   in Indifference, or in that equilibrium whereby the will is without all
   antecedent bias; that the determination of the Will to either side may
   be entirely from itself, and that it may be owing only to its own
   power, and the sovereignty which it has over itself, that it goes this
   way rather than that. [118]

   But inasmuch as this has been of such long standing, and has been so
   generally received, and so much insisted on by Pelagians,
   Semi-Pelagians, Jesuits, Socinians, Arminians, and others, it may
   deserve a more full consideration. And therefore I shall now proceed to
   a more particular and thorough inquiry into this notion.

   Now lest some should suppose that I do not understand those that place
   Liberty in Indifference, or should charge me with misrepresenting their
   opinion, I would signify, that I am sensible, there are some, who, when
   they talk of Liberty of the Will as consisting in Indifference, express
   themselves as though they would not be understood to mean the
   Indifference of the inclination or tendency of the Will, but an
   Indifference of the soul's power, of willing; or that the Will, with
   respect to its power or ability to choose, is indifferent, can go
   either way indifferently, either to the right hand or left, either act
   or forbear to act, one as well as the other. This indeed seems to be a
   refining of some particular writers only, and newly invented, which
   will by no means consist with the manner of expression used by the
   defenders of Liberty of Indifference in general. I wish such refiners
   would thoroughly consider, whether they distinctly know their own
   meaning, when they make a distinction between an Indifference of the
   soul as to its power or ability of choosing, and the soul's
   Indifference as to the preference or choice itself; and whether they do
   not deceive themselves in imagining that they have any distinct meaning
   at all. The Indifference of the soul as to its ability or power to
   will, must be the same thing as the Indifference of the state of the
   power or faculty of the Will, or the Indifference of the state which
   the soul itself, which has that power or faculty, hitherto remains in,
   as to the exercise of that power, in the choice it shall by and by
   make.

   But not to insist any longer on the inexplicable abstruseness of this
   distinction; let what will be supposed concerning the meaning of them
   that use it, this much must at least be intended by Arminians when they
   talk of Indifference as essential to Liberty of Will, if they intend
   any thing, in any respect to their purpose, viz. That it is such an
   Indifference as leaves the Will not determined already; but free from
   actual possession, and vacant of predetermination, so far, that there
   may be room for the exercise of the self-determining power of the Will;
   and that the Will's freedom consists in, or depends upon, this vacancy
   and opportunity that is left for the Will itself to be the determiner
   of the act that is to be the free act.

   And here I would observe in the first place, that to make out this
   scheme of Liberty, the Indifference must be perfect and absolute; there
   must be a perfect freedom from all antecedent preponderation or
   inclination. Because if the Will be already inclined, before it exerts
   its own sovereign power on itself, then its inclination is not wholly
   owing to itself: if when two opposites are proposed to the soul for its
   choice, the proposal does not find the soul wholly in a state of
   Indifference, then it is not found in a state of Liberty for mere
   self-determination.--The least degree of an antecedent bias must be
   inconsistent with their notion of Liberty. For so long as prior
   inclination possesses the Will, and is not removed, the former binds
   the latter, so that it is utterly impossible that the Will should act
   otherwise than agreeably to it. Surely the Will cannot act or choose
   contrary to a remaining prevailing inclination of the Will. To suppose
   otherwise, would be the same thing as to suppose that the Will is
   inclined contrary to its present prevailing inclination, or contrary to
   what it is inclined to. That which the Will prefers, to that, all
   things considered, it preponderates and inclines. It is equally
   impossible for the Will to choose contrary to its own remaining and
   present preponderating inclination, as it is to prefer contrary to its
   own present preference, or choose contrary to its own present choice.
   The Will, therefore, so long as it is under the influence of an old
   preponderating inclination, is not at Liberty for a new free act; or
   any, that shall now be an act of self-determination. That which is a
   self-determined free act, must be one which the Will determines in the
   possession and use of a peculiar sort of Liberty; such as consists in a
   freedom from every thing, which, if it were there, would make it
   impossible that the Will, at that time, should be otherwise than that
   way to which it tends. [119]

   If any one should say, there is no need that the Indifference should be
   perfect; but although a former inclination still remains, yet, if it be
   not very strong, possibly the strength of the Will may oppose and
   overcome it:--This is grossly absurd; for the strength of the Will, let
   it be never so great, gives it no such sovereignty and command, as to
   cause itself to prefer and not to prefer at the same time, or to choose
   contrary to its own present choice.

   Therefore, if there be the least degree of antecedent preponderation of
   the Will, it must be perfectly abolished, before the Will can be at
   liberty to determine itself the contrary way. And if the Will
   determines itself the same way, it was not a free determination,
   because the Will is not wholly at liberty in so doing; its
   determination is not altogether from itself, but it was partly
   determined before, in its prior inclination: and all the freedom the
   Will exercises in the case, is in an increase of inclination, which it
   gives itself, added to what it had by a foregoing bias; so much is from
   itself, and so much is from perfect indifference. For though the Will
   had a previous tendency that way, yet as to that additional degree of
   inclination, it had no tendency. Therefore the previous tendency is of
   no consideration, with respect to the act wherein the Will is free. So
   that it comes to the same thing which was said at first, that as to the
   act of the Will, wherein the Will is free, there must be perfect
   Indifference, or equilibrium.

   To illustrate this: suppose a sovereign self-moving power in a natural
   body; but that the body is in motion already, by an antecedent bias;
   for instance, gravitation towards the centre of the earth; and has one
   degree of motion by virtue of that previous tendency; but by its
   self-moving power it adds one degree more to its motion, and moves so
   much move swiftly towards the centre of the earth than it would do by
   its gravity only: it is evident, all that is owing to a self-moving
   power in this case, is the additional degree of motion; and that the
   other degree which it had from gravity, is of no consideration in the
   case; the effect is just the same, as if the body had received from
   itself one degree of motion from a state of perfect rest. So, if we
   suppose a self-moving power given to the scale of a balance, which has
   a weight of one degree beyond the opposite scale; and if we ascribe to
   it an ability to add to itself another degree of force the same way, by
   its self-moving power; this is just the same thing as to ascribe to it
   a power to give itself one degree of preponderation from a perfect
   equilibrium; and so much power as the scale has to give itself an
   over-balance from a perfect equipoise, so much self-moving
   self-preponderating power it has, and no more. So that its free power
   this way is always to be measured from perfect equilibrium.

   I need say no more to prove, that if Indifference be essential to
   Liberty, it must be perfect Indifference; and that so far as the Will
   is destitute of this, so far is it destitute of that freedom by which
   it is in a capacity of being its own determiner, without being at all
   passive, or subject to the power and sway of something else, in its
   motions and determinations.

   Having observed these things, let us now try whether this notion of the
   Liberty of Will consisting in Indifference and equilibrium, and the
   Will's self-determination in such a state, be not absurd and
   inconsistent.

   And here I would lay down this as an axiom of undoubted truth; that
   every free act is done in a state of freedom, and not only after. such
   a state, If an act of the Will be an act wherein the soul is free, it
   must be exerted in a state of freedom, and in the time of freedom. It
   will not suffice, that the act immediately follows a state of Liberty;
   but Liberty must yet continue, and co-exist with the act; the soul
   remaining in possession of Liberty. Because that is the notion of a
   free act of the soul, even an act wherein the soul uses or exercises
   Liberty. But if the soul is not, in the very time of the act, in
   possession of Liberty, it cannot at that time be in the use of it.

   Now the question is, whether ever the soul of man puts forth an act of
   Will, while it yet remains in a state of Liberty, viz. as implying a
   state of Indifference; or whether the soul ever exerts an act of
   preference, while at that very time the Will is in a perfect
   equilibrium, not inclining on way more than another. The very putting
   of the question is sufficient to show the absurdity of the affirmative
   answer: for how ridiculous would it be for nay body to insist, that the
   soul chooses one thing before another, when at the very same instant it
   is perfectly indifferent with respect to each! This is the same thing
   as to say, the soul prefers one thing to another, at the very same time
   that it has no preference.--Choice and preference can no more be in a
   state of Indifference, than motion can be in a state of rest, or than
   the preponderation of the scale of a balance can be in a state of
   equilibrium. Motion may be the next moment after rest; but cannot
   co-exist with it, in any, even the least, part of it. So choice may be
   immediately after a state of Indifference, but cannot co-exist with it:
   even the very beginning of it is not in a state of Indifference. And
   therefore, if this be Liberty, no act of the Will, in any degree, is
   ever performed in a state of Liberty, or in the time of Liberty.
   Volition and Liberty are so far from agreeing together, and being
   essential on to another, that they are contrary one to another, and one
   excludes and destroys the other, as much as motion and rest, light and
   darkness, or life and death. So that the Will acts not at all, does not
   so much as begin to act, in the time of such Liberty: freedom has
   ceased to be,, at the first moment of action; and therefore Liberty
   cannot reach the action, to affect, or qualify it, or give it a
   denomination, any more than if it had ceased to be twenty years before
   the action began. The moment that Liberty ceases to be, it ceases to be
   a qualification of any thing. If light and darkness succeed one another
   instantaneously, light qualifies nothing after it is gone out, to make
   any thing lightsome or bright, at the first moment of perfect darkness,
   any more than months or years after. Life denominates nothing vital, at
   the first moment of perfect death. So freedom, if it consists in or
   implies Indifference, can denominate nothing free, at the first moment
   of preference or preponderation. Therefore it is manifest, that no
   Liberty which the soul is possessed of , or ever uses, in any of its
   acts of volition, consists in Indifference; and that the opinion of
   such as suppose, that Indifference belongs to the very essence of
   Liberty, is to the highest degree absurd and contradictory.

   If any one should imagine, that this manner of arguing is nothing but a
   trick and delusion; and to evade the reasoning, should say, that the
   thing wherein the Will exercises its Liberty, is not in the act of
   choice or preponderation itself, but in determining itself to a certain
   choice or preference; that the act of the Will wherein it is free, and
   uses its own sovereignty, consists in its causing or determining the
   change or transition from a state of indifference to a certain
   preference or determining to give a certain turn to the balance, which
   has hitherto been even; and that the Will exerts this act in a state of
   Liberty, or while the Will yet remains in equilibrium, and perfect
   master of itself.--I say, if any one chooses to express his notion of
   Liberty after this, or some such manner, let us see if he can succeed
   any better than before.

   What is asserted is, that the Will, while it yet remains in perfect
   equilibrium, without preference, determines to change itself from that
   state, and excite in itself a certain choice or preference. Now let us
   see whether this does not come to the same absurdity we had before. If
   it be so that the Will, while it yet remains perfectly indifferent,
   determines to put itself out of that state, and to give itself a
   certain preponderation; than I would inquire, whether the soul does not
   determine this of choice; or whether the Will coming to a determination
   to do so, be not the same thing as the soul coming to a choice to do
   so. If the soul does not determine this of choice, or in the exercise
   of choice, then it does not determine it voluntarily. And if the soul
   does not determine it voluntarily, or of its own Will, then in what
   sense does its Will determine it? And if the Will does not determine
   it, then how is the Liberty of the Will exercised in the determination?
   What sort of Liberty is exercised by the soul in those determinations,
   wherein there is no exercise of choice, which are not voluntary, and
   wherein the Will is not concerned? But if it be allowed, that this
   determination is an act of choice, and it be insisted on, that the
   soul, while it yet remains in a state of perfect Indifference, chooses
   to put itself out of that state, and to turn itself one way; then the
   soul is already come to a choice; and chooses that way. And so we have
   the very same absurdity which we had before. Here is the soul in a
   state of choice, and in a state of equilibrium, both at the same time:
   the soul already choosing one way, while it remains in a state of
   perfect Indifference, and has no choice of one way more than the
   other.--And indeed this manner of talking, though it may a little hide
   the absurdity, in the obscurity of expression, increases the
   inconsistence. To say, the free act of the Will, or the act which the
   Will exerts in a state of freedom and Indifference, does not imply
   preference in it, but is what the will does in order to cause or
   produce a preference, is as much as to say, the soul chooses (for to
   will and to choose are the same thing) without choice, and prefers
   without preference, in order to cause or produce the beginning of a
   preference, or the first choice. And that is, that the first choice is
   exerted without choice, in order to produce itself!

   If any, to evade these things, should own, that a state of Liberty and
   a state of Indifference are not the same, and that the former may be
   without the latter; but should say, that Indifference is still
   essential to freedom, as it is necessary to go immediately before it;
   it being essential to the freedom of an act of Will that it should
   directly and immediately arise out of a state of Indifference; still
   this will not help the cause of Arminian Liberty, or make it consistent
   with itself. For if the act springs immediately out of a state of
   Indifference, then it does not arise from antecedent choice or
   preference. But if the act arises directly out of a state of
   Indifference, without any intervening choice to determine it, then the
   act not being determined by choice, is not determined by the Will; the
   mind exercises no free choice in the affair, and free choice and free
   will have no hand in the determination of the act. Which is entirely
   inconsistent with their notion of the freedom of volition.

   If any should suppose, that these absurdities may be avoided, by
   saying, that the Liberty of the mind consists in a power to suspend the
   act of the Will, and so to keep it in a state of Indifference, until
   there has been opportunity for consideration; and so shall say, that
   however Indifference is not essential to Liberty in such a manner, that
   the mind must make its choice in a state of Indifference, which is an
   inconsistency, or that the act of Will must spring immediately out of
   Indifference; yet Indifference may be essential to the Liberty of acts
   of the Will in this respect; viz. That Liberty consists in a power of
   the mind to forbear or suspend the act of volition, and keep the mind
   in a state of Indifference for the present, until there has been
   opportunity for proper deliberation: I say, if any one imagines that
   this helps the matter, it is a great mistake: it reconciles no
   inconsistency, and relieves no difficulty.--For here the following
   things must be observed:

   1. That this suspending of volition, if there be properly any such
   thing, is itself an act of volition. If the mind determines to suspend
   its act, it determines it voluntarily; it chooses, on some
   consideration, to suspend it. And this choice or determination, is an
   act of the Will: And indeed it is supposed to be so in the very
   hypothesis; for it is supposed that the Liberty of the Will consists in
   its power to do this, and that its doing it is the very thing wherein
   the Will exercises its Liberty. But how can the Will exercise Liberty
   in it, if it be not an act of the Will? The Liberty of the Will is not
   exercised in any thing but what the Will does.

   2. This determining to suspend acting is not only an act of the Will,
   but it is supposed to be the only free act of the Will; because it is
   said, that this is the thing wherein the Liberty of the Will
   consists.--If so, then this is all the act of Will that we have to
   consider in this controversy. And now, the former question returns upon
   us; viz. Wherein consists the freedom of the will in those acts wherein
   it is free? And if this act of determining a suspension be the only act
   in which the Will is free, then wherein consists the Will's freedom
   with respect to this act of suspension? And how is Indifference
   essential to this act? The answer must be, according to what is
   supposed in the evasion under consideration, that the Liberty of the
   Will in this act of suspension, consists in a power to suspend even
   this act, until there has been opportunity for thorough deliberation.
   But this will be to plunge directly into the grossest nonsense: for it
   is the act of suspension itself that we are speaking of; and there is
   no room for a space of deliberation and suspension in order to
   determine whether we will suspend or no. For that supposes, that even
   suspension itself may be deferred: which is absurd; for the very
   deferring the determination of suspension, to consider whether we will
   suspend or no, will be actually suspending. For during the space of
   suspension, to consider whether to suspend, the act is, ipso facto,
   suspended. There is no medium between suspending to act, and
   immediately acting; and therefore no possibility of avoiding either the
   one or the other one moment.

   And besides, this is attended with ridiculous absurdity another way:
   for now, it seems, Liberty consists wholly in the mind having power to
   suspend its determination whether to suspend or no; that there may be
   time for consideration, whether it be best to suspend. And if Liberty
   consists in this only, then this is the Liberty under consideration. We
   have to inquire now, how Liberty, with respect to this act of
   suspending a determination of suspension, consists in Indifference, or
   how Indifference is essential to it. The answer, according to the
   hypothesis we are upon, must be, that it consists in a power of
   suspending even this last-mentioned act, to have time to consider
   whether to suspend that. And then the same difficulties and inquiries
   return over again with respect to that; and so on for ever. Which, if
   it would show any thing, would show only that there is no such thing as
   a free act. It drives the exercise of freedom back in infinitum; and
   that is to drive it out of the world.

   And besides all this, there is a delusion, and a latent gross
   contradiction in the affair another way; inasmuch as in explaining how,
   or in what respect, the Will is free, with regard to a particular act
   of volition, it is said, that its Liberty consists in a power to
   determine to suspend that act, which places Liberty not in that act of
   volition which the inquiry is about, but altogether in another
   antecedent act. Which contradicts the thing supposed in both the
   question and answer. The question is, wherein consists the mind's
   Liberty in any particular act of volition? And the answer, in
   pretending to show wherein lies the mind's Liberty in that act, in
   effect says, it does not lie in that act at all, but in another, viz. a
   volition to suspend that act. And therefore the answer is both
   contradictory, and altogether impertinent and beside the purpose. For
   it does not show wherein the Liberty of the Will consists in the act in
   question; instead of that, it supposes it does not consist in that act
   at all, but in another distinct from it, even a volition to suspend
   that act, and take time to consider of it. And no account is pretended
   to be given wherein the mind is free with respect to that act, wherein
   this answer supposes the Liberty of the mind indeed consists, viz. the
   act of suspension, or of determining the suspension.

   On the whole, it is exceeding manifest, that the Liberty of the mind
   does not consist in Indifference, and that Indifference is not
   essential or necessary to it, or at all belonging to it, as the
   Arminians suppose; that opinion being full of nothing but
   self-contradiction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [118] Dr. Whitby, and some other Arminians, make a distinction of
   different kinds of freedom; one of God, and perfect spirits above;
   another of persons in a state of trial. The former Dr. Whitby allows to
   consist with necessity; the latter he holds to be without necessity;
   and this latter he supposes to be requisite to our being the subject of
   praise or dispraise, rewards or punishments, precepts and prohibitions,
   promises and threats, exhortations and dehortations, and a covenant
   treaty. And to this freedom he supposes Indifference to be requisite.
   In his Discourse on the five points, )p. 299, 300.) he says; "It is a
   freedom, (speaking of a freedom not only from co-action, but from
   necessity) requisite, as we conceive, to render us capable of trial or
   probation, and to render our actions worthy of praise or dispraise, and
   our persons of rewards or punishments." Excellent to this purpose, are
   the words of Mr Thorndake: We say not, that Indifference is requisite
   to all freedom, but to the freedom of man alone in this state of
   treveil and preficience; the ground of which is God's tender of a
   treaty, and conditions of peace and reconcilement to fallen man,
   together with those precepts and prohibitions, those promises and
   threats, those exhortations and dehortations, it is enforced with."

   [119] There is a little intricacy in this mode of expression. It may be
   thus illustrated. Suppose it were asserted. "That it is impossible for
   the Will to be otherwise at any one given time, than that way to which
   it tends." Such a proposition one might think, none who understood the
   terms would controvert; for it would be to controvert this proposition,
   "The Will is as its tendency." And yet, the advocates for a
   self-determining power must assert a liberty which denies this plain
   proposition.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   Concerning the supposed Liberty of the will, as opposite to all
   Necessity

   It is chiefly insisted on by Arminians, in this controversy, as a thing
   most important and essential in human Liberty, that volitions, or the
   acts of the Will, are contingent events; understanding contingence as
   opposite, not only to constraint, but to all Necessity. Therefore I
   would particularly consider this matter.

   And, First, I would inquire, whether there is or can be any such thing,
   as a volition which is contingent in such a sense, as not only to come
   to pass without any Necessity of constraint or co-action, but also
   without a Necessity of consequence, or an infallible connexion with any
   thing foregoing.--Secondly, Whether, if it were so, this would at all
   help the cause of Liberty.

   I. I would consider whether volition is a thing that ever does or can
   come to pass, in this manner, contingently.

   And here it must be remembered, that it has been already shown, that
   nothing can ever come to pass without a cause, or a reason, why it
   exists in this manner rather than another; and the evidence of this has
   been particularly applied to the acts of the Will. Now if this be so,
   it will demonstrably follow, that the acts of the Will are never
   contingent, or without Necessity, in the sense spoken of; inasmuch as
   those things which have a cause, or a reason of their existence, must
   be connected with their cause. This appears by the following
   considerations.

   1. For an event to have a cause and ground of its existence, and yet
   not to be connected with its cause, is an inconsistence. For if the
   event be not connected with the cause, it is not dependent on the
   cause; its existence is as it were loose from its influence, and may
   attend it, or may not; it being a mere contingence, whether it follows
   or attends the influence of the cause, or not: And that is the same
   thing as not to he dependent on it. And to say, the event is not
   dependent on its cause, is absurd; it is the same thing as to say, it
   is not its cause, nor the event the effect of it; for dependence on the
   influence of a cause is the very notion of an effect. If there be no
   such relation between one thing and another, consisting in the
   connexion and dependence of one thing an the influence of another, then
   it is certain there is no such relation between them as is signified by
   the terms cause and effect. So far as an event is dependent on a cause,
   and connected with it, so much causality is there in the case, and no
   more. The cause does, or brings to pass, no more in any event, than is
   dependent on it. If we say, the connexion and dependence is not total,
   but partial, and that the effect, though it has some connexion and
   dependence, yet is not entirely dependent on it; that is the same thing
   as to say, that not all that is in the event is an effect of that
   cause, but that only part of it arises from thence, and part some other
   way.

   2. If there are some events which are not necessarily connected with
   their causes, then it will follow, that there are some things which
   come to pass without any cause, contrary to the supposition. For if
   there be any event which was not necessarily connected with the
   influence of the cause under such circumstances, then it was contingent
   whether it would attend or follow the influence of the cause, or no; it
   might have followed, and it might not, when the cause was the same, its
   influence the same, and under the same circumstances. And if so, why
   did it follow, rather than not follow? Of this there is no cause or
   reason. Therefore here is something without any cause or reason why it
   is, viz. the following of the effect on the influence of the cause,
   with which it was not necessarily connected. If there be no necessary
   connexion of the effect on any thing antecedent, then we may suppose
   that sometimes the event will follow the cause, and sometimes not, when
   the cause is the same, and in every respect in the same state and
   circumstances. And what can be the cause and reason of this strange
   phenomenon, even this diversity, that in one instance, the effect
   should follow, in another not? It is evident by the supposition, that
   this is wholly without any cause or ground. Here is something in the
   present manner of the existence of things, and state of the world, that
   is absolutely without a cause. Which is contrary to the supposition,
   and contrary to what has been before demonstrated.

   3. To suppose there are some events which have a cause and ground of
   their existence, that yet are not necessarily connected with their
   cause, is to suppose that they have a cause which is not their cause.
   Thus; if the effect be not necessarily connected with the cause, with
   its influence, and influential circumstances; then, as I observed
   before, it is a thing possible and supposable, that the cause may
   sometimes exert the same influence, under the same circumstances, and
   yet the effect not follow. And if this actually happens in any
   instance, this instance is a proof, in fact, that the influence of the
   cause is not sufficient to produce the effect. For if it had been
   sufficient, it would have done it. And yet, by the supposition, in
   another instance, the same cause, with perfectly the same influence,
   and when all circumstances which have any influence are the same, it
   was followed with the effect. By which it is manifest, that the effect
   in this last instance was not owing to the influence of the cause, but
   must come to pass some other way. For it was proved before, that the
   influence of the cause was not sufficient to produce the effect. And if
   it was not sufficient to produce it, then the production of it could
   not be owing to that influence, but must be owing to something else, or
   owing to nothing. And if the effect be not owing to the influence of
   the cause, then it is not the cause. Which brings us to the
   contradiction of a cause, and no cause, that which is the ground and
   reason of the existence of a thing, and at the same time is not the
   ground and reason of its existence.

   If the matter be not already so plain as to render any further
   reasoning upon it impertinent, I would say, that which seems to be the
   cause in the supposed case, can be no cause; its power and influence
   having, on a full trial, proved insufficient to produce such an effect:
   and if it be not sufficient to produce it, then it does not produce it.
   To say otherwise, is to say, there is power to do that which there is
   not power to do. If there be in a cause sufficient power exerted, and
   in circumstances sufficient to produce an effect, and so the effect be
   actually produced at one time; all these things concurring, will
   produce the effect at all times. And so we may turn it the other way;
   that which proves not sufficient at one time, cannot he sufficient at
   another, with precisely the same influential circumstances. And
   therefore if the effect follows, it is not owing to that cause; unless
   the different time be a circumstance which has influence: but that is
   contrary to the supposition; for it is supposed that all circumstances
   that have influence, are the same. And besides, this would be to
   suppose the time to be the cause; which is contrary to the supposition
   of the other thing being the cause. But if merely diversity of time has
   no influence, then it is evident that it is as much of an absurdity to
   say, the cause was sufficient to produce the effect at one time, and
   not at another; as to say, that it is sufficient to produce the effect
   at a certain time, and yet not sufficient to produce the same effect at
   the same time.

   On the whole, it is clearly manifest, that every effect has a necessary
   connexion with its cause, or with that which is the true ground and
   reason of its existence. And therefore, if there be no event without a
   cause, as was proved before, then no event whatsoever is contingent, in
   the manner that Arminians suppose the free acts of the Will to be
   contingent.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   Of the Connexion of the Acts of the Will with the Dictates of the
   Understanding.

   It is manifest, that no Acts of the Will are contingent, in such a
   sense as to be without all necessity, or so as not to be necessary with
   a necessity of consequence and Connexion; because every Act of the Will
   is some way connected with the Understanding, and is as the greatest
   apparent good is, in the manner which has already been explained;
   namely, that the soul always wills or chooses that which, in the
   present view of the mind, considered in the whole of that view, and all
   that belongs to it, appears most agreeable. Because, as was observed
   before, nothing is more evident than that, when men act voluntarily,
   and do what they please, then they do what appears most agreeable to
   them; and to say otherwise, would be as much as to affirm, that men do
   not choose what appears to suit them best, or what seems most pleasing
   to them; or that they do not choose what they prefer. Which brings the
   matter to a contradiction.

   And as it is very evident in itself, that the Acts of the Will have
   some Connexion with the Dictates or views of the Understanding, so this
   is allowed by some of the chief of the Arminian writers; particularly
   by Dr. Whitby and Dr. Samuel Clark. Dr. Turnbull, though a great enemy
   to the doctrine of necessity, allows the same thing. In his Christian
   Philosophy, (p. 196.) he with much approbation cites another
   philosopher, as of the same mind, in these words: "No man (says an
   excellent philosopher) sets himself about any thing, but upon some view
   or other, which serves him for a reason for what he does; and
   whatsoever faculties he employs, the Understanding, with such light as
   it has, well or ill formed, constantly leads; and by that light, true
   or false, all her operative powers are directed. The Will itself, how
   absolute and incontrollable soever it may be thought, never fails in
   its obedience to the Dictates of the Understanding. Temples have their
   sacred images; and we see what influence they have always had over a
   great part of mankind; but in truth, the ideas and images in men's
   minds are the invisible powers that constantly govern them; and to
   these they all pay universally a ready submission." But whether this be
   in a just consistence with themselves, and their own notions of
   liberty, I desire may now be impartially considered.

   Dr. Whitby plainly supposes, that the Acts and determinations of the
   Will always follow the Understanding's view of the greatest good to be
   obtained, or evil to be avoided; or, in other words, that the
   determinations of the Will constantly and infallibly follow these two
   things in the Understanding: 1. The degree of good to be obtained, and
   evil to be avoided, proposed to the Understanding, and apprehended,
   viewed, and taken notice of by it. 2. The degree of the Understanding's
   apprehension of that good or evil; which is increased by attention and
   consideration. That this is an opinion in which he is exceeding
   peremptory, (as he is in every opinion which he maintains in his
   controversy with the Calvinists,) with disdain of the contrary opinion,
   as absurd and self-contradictory, will appear by the following words,
   in his Discourse on the Five Points. [120]

   "Now, it is certain, that what naturally makes the Understanding to
   perceive, is evidence proposed, and apprehended, considered or adverted
   to: for nothing else can be requisite to make us come to the knowledge
   of the truth. Again, what makes the Will choose, is something approved
   by the Understanding; and consequently appearing to the soul as good.
   And whatsoever it refuseth, is something represented by the
   Understanding, and so appearing to the Will, as evil. Whence all that
   God requires of us is and can be only this; to refuse the evil, and
   choose the good. Wherefore, to say that evidence proposed, apprehended,
   and considered, is not sufficient to make the Understanding approve; or
   that the greatest good proposed, the greatest evil threatened, when
   equally believed and reflected on, is not sufficient to engage the Will
   to choose the good and refuse the evil, is in effect to say, that which
   alone doth move the Will to choose or to refuse, is not sufficient to
   engage it so to do; which being contradictory to itself, must of
   necessity be false. Be it then so, that we naturally have an aversion
   to the truths proposed to us in the gospel; that only can make us
   indisposed to attend to them, but cannot hinder our conviction, when we
   do apprehend them, and attend to them.--Be it, that there is in us also
   a renitency to the good we are to choose; that only can indispose us to
   believe it is, and to approve it as our chiefest good. Be it, that we
   are prone to the evil that we should decline; that only can render it
   the more difficult for us to believe it is the worst of evils. But yet,
   what we do really believe to be our chiefest good, will still be
   chosen; and what we apprehend to be the worst of evils, will, whilst we
   do continue under that conviction, be refused by us. It therefore can
   be only requisite, in order to these ends, that the Good Spirit should
   so illuminate our Understandings, that we attending to and considering
   what lies before us, should apprehend and be convinced of our duty; and
   that the blessings of the gospel should be so propounded to us, as that
   we may discern them to be our chiefest good; and the miseries it
   threateneth, so as we may be convinced that they are the worst of
   evils; that we may choose the one, and refuse the other."

   Here let it be observed, how plainly and peremptorily it is asserted,
   that the greatest good proposed, and the greatest evil threatened, when
   equally believed and reflected on, is sufficient to engage the Will to
   choose the good, and refuse the evil, and is that alone which doth move
   the Will to choose or to refuse; and that it is contradictory to
   itself, to suppose otherwise; and therefore must of necessity be false;
   and then what we do really believe to be our chiefest good will still
   be chosen, and what we apprehend to be the worst of evils, will, whilst
   we continue under that conviction, be refused by us. Nothing could have
   been said more to the purpose, fully to signify, that the
   determinations of the Will must evermore follow the illumination,
   conviction, and notice of the Understanding, with regard to the
   greatest good and evil proposed, reckoning both the degree of good and
   evil understood, and the degree of Understanding, notice, and
   conviction of that proposed good and evil; and that it is thus
   necessarily, and can be otherwise in no instance: because it is
   asserted, that it implies a contradiction, to suppose it ever to be
   otherwise.

   I am sensible, the Doctor's aim in these assertions is against the
   Calvinists; to show, in opposition to them, that there is no need of
   any physical operation of the Spirit of God on the Will, to change and
   determine that to a good choice, but that God's operation and
   assistance is only moral, suggesting ideas to the Understanding; which
   he supposes to be enough, if those ideas are attended to, infallibly to
   obtain the end. But whatever his design was, nothing can more directly
   and fully prove, that every determination of the Will, in choosing and
   refusing, is necessary; directly contrary to his own notion of the
   liberty of the Will. For if the determination of the Will, evermore, in
   this manner, follows the light, conviction, and view of the
   Understanding, concerning the greatest good and evil, and this be that
   alone which moves the Will, and it be a contradiction to suppose
   otherwise; then it is necessarily so, the Will necessarily follows this
   light or view of the Understanding, not only in some of its acts, but
   in every act of choosing and refusing. So that the Will does not
   determine itself in any one of its own acts; but every act of choice
   and refusal depends on, and is necessarily connected with, some
   antecedent cause; which cause is not the Will itself, nor any act of
   its own, nor any thing pertaining to that faculty, but something
   belonging to another faculty, whose acts go before the Will, in all its
   acts, and govern and determine them.

   Here, if it should be replied, that although it be true, that according
   to the Doctor, the final determination of the Will always depends upon,
   and is infallibly connected with, the Understanding's conviction, and
   notice of the greatest good; yet the Acts of the Will are not
   necessary; because that conviction of the Understanding is first
   dependent on a preceding Act of the Will, in determining to take notice
   of the evidence exhibited; by which means the mind obtains that degree
   of conviction, which is sufficient and effectual to determine the
   consequent and ultimate choice of the Will; and that the Will, with
   regard to that preceding act, whereby it determines whether to attend
   or no, is not necessary; and that in this, the liberty of the Will
   consists, that when God holds forth sufficient objective light, the
   Will is at liberty whether to command the attention of the mind to it
   or not.

   Nothing can be more weak and inconsiderate than such a reply as this.
   For that preceding Act of the Will, in determining to attend and
   consider, still is an Act of the Will; if the Liberty of the Will
   consists in it, as is supposed, as if it be an Act of the Will, it is
   an act of choice or refusal. And therefore, if what the Doctor asserts
   be true, it is determined by some antecedent light in the Understanding
   concerning the greatest apparent good or evil. For he asserts, it is
   that light which alone doth move the Will to choose or refuse. And
   therefore the Will must be moved by that, in choosing to attend to the
   objective light offered, in order to another consequent act of choice:
   so that this act is no less necessary than the other. And if we suppose
   another Act of the Will, still preceding both these mentioned, to
   determine both, still that also must be an Act of the Will, an act of
   choice; and so must, by the same principles, be infallibly determined
   by some certain degree of light in the Understanding concerning the
   greatest good. And let us suppose as many Acts of the Will, one
   preceding another, as we please, yet are they every one of them
   necessarily determined by a certain degree of light in the
   Understanding, concerning the greatest and most eligible good in that
   case; and so, not one of them free according to Dr. Whitby's notion of
   freedom. And if it be said, the reason why men do not attend to light
   held forth, is because of ill habits contracted by evil acts committed
   before, whereby their minds are indisposed to consider the truth held
   forth to them, the difficulty is not at all avoided: still the question
   returns, What determined the Will in those preceding evil acts? It
   must, by Dr. Whitby's principles, still be the view of the
   Understanding concerning the greatest good and evil. If this view of
   the Understanding be that alone which doth move the Will to choose or
   refuse, as the Doctor asserts, then every act of choice or refusal,
   from a man's first existence, is moved and determined by this view; and
   this view of the Understanding exciting and governing the act, must be
   before the act. And therefore the Will is necessarily determined, in
   every one of its acts, from a man's first existence, by a cause beside
   the Will, and a cause that does not proceed from or depend on any act
   of the Will at all. Which at once utterly abolishes the Doctor's whole
   scheme of Liberty of Will; and he, at one stroke, has cut the sinews of
   all his arguments from the goodness, righteousness, faithfulness, and
   sincerity of God, in his commands, promises, threatenings, calls,
   invitations, and expostulations; which he makes use of, under the heads
   of reprobation, election, universal redemption, sufficient and
   effectual grace, and the freedom of the Will of man; and has made vain
   all his exclamations against the doctrine of the Calvinists, as
   charging God with manifest unrighteousness, unfaithfulness, hypocrisy,
   fallaciousness, and cruelty.

   Dr. Samuel Clark, in his Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of
   God, [121] to evade the argument to prove the necessity of volition,
   from its necessary Connexion with the last Dictate of the
   Understanding, supposes the latter not to be diverse from the Act of
   the Will itself. But if it be so, it will not alter the case as to the
   necessity of the Act. If the Dictate of the Understanding be the very
   same with the determination of the Will, as Dr. Clark supposes, then
   this determination is no fruit or effect of choice; and if so, no
   liberty of choice has any hand in it: it is necessary; that is, choice
   cannot prevent it. If the last Dictate of the Understanding be the same
   with the determination of volition itself, then the existence of that
   determination must be necessary as to volition; in as much as volition
   can have no opportunity to determine whether it shall exist or no, it
   having existence already before volition has opportunity to determine
   any thing. It is itself the very rise and existence of volition. But a
   thing after it exists, has no opportunity to determine as to its own
   existence; it is too late for that.

   If liberty consists in that which Arminians suppose, viz. in the Will
   determining its own acts, having free opportunity and being without all
   necessity; this is the same as to say, that liberty consists in the
   soul having power and opportunity to have what determinations of the
   Will it pleases. And if the determinations of the Will, and the last
   Dictates of the Understanding, be the same thing, then liberty consists
   in the mind having power and opportunity to choose its own Dictates of
   Understanding. But this is absurd; for it is to make the determination
   of choice prior to the Dictate of Understanding, and the ground of it;
   which cannot consist with the Dictate of the Understanding being the
   determination of choice itself.

   Here is no alternative, but to recur to the old absurdity of one
   determination before another, and the cause of it; and another before,
   determining that; end so on in infinitum. If the last Dictate of the
   Understanding be the determination of the Will itself, and the soul be
   free with regard to that Dictate, in the Arminian notion of freedom;
   then the soul, before that dictate of its Understanding exists,
   voluntarily and according to its own choice determines, in every case,
   what that Dictate of the Understanding shall be; otherwise that
   Dictate, as to the Will, is necessary; and the acts determined by it
   must also be necessary. So that there is a determination of the mind
   prior to that Dictate of the Understanding, an act of choice going
   before it, choosing and determining what that Dictate of the
   Understanding shall be: and this preceding act of choice, being a free
   Act of Will, must also be the same with another last Dictate of the
   Understanding: And if the mind also be free in that Dictate of
   Understanding, that must be determined still by another; and so on for
   ever.

   Besides, if the Dictate of the Understanding, and determination of the
   Will be the same, this confounds the Understanding and Will, and makes
   them the same. Whether they be the same or no, I will not now dispute;
   but only would observe, that if it be so, and the Arminian notion of
   liberty consists in a self-determining power in the Understanding, free
   of all necessity; being independent, undetermined by any thing prior to
   its own acts and determinations; and the more the Understanding is thus
   independent, and sovereign over its own determinations, the more free:
   then the freedom of the soul, as a moral agent, must consist in the
   independence of the Understanding on any evidence or appearance of
   things, or any thing whatsoever that stands forth to the view of the
   mind, prior to the Understanding's determination. And what a liberty is
   this! consisting in an ability, freedom, and easiness of judging,
   either according to evidence, or against it; having a sovereign command
   over itself at all times, to judge, either agreeably or disagreeably to
   what is plainly exhibited to its own view. Certainly, it is no liberty
   that renders persons the proper subjects of persuasive reasoning,
   arguments, expostulations, and such like moral means and inducements.
   The use of which with mankind is a main argument of the Arminians, to
   defend their notion of liberty without all necessity. For according to
   this, the more free men are, the less they are under the government of
   such means, less subject to the power of evidence and reason, and more
   independent on their influence, in their determinations.

   And whether the Understanding and Will are the same or no, as Dr. Clark
   seems to suppose, yet in order to maintain the Arminian notion of
   liberty without necessity, the free Will is not determined by the
   Understanding, nor necessarily connected with the Understanding; and
   the further from such Connexion, the greater the freedom. And when the
   liberty is full and complete, the determinations of the Will have no
   Connexion at all with the Dictates of the Understanding. And if so, in
   vain are all the applications to the Understanding, in order to induce
   to any free virtuous act; and so in vain are all instructions,
   counsels, invitations, expostulations, and all arguments and
   persuasives whatsoever: for these are but applications to the
   Understanding, and a clear and lively exhibition of the objects of
   choice to the mind's view. But if, after all, the Will must be
   self-determined, and independent on the Understanding, to what purpose
   are things thus represented to the Understanding, in order to determine
   the choice?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [120] Second Edit. P. 211, 212, 213.

   [121] Edit. VI. p. 93.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. X.

   Volition necessarily connected with the influence of Motives: with
   particular observations on the great inconsistence of Mr. Chubb's
   assertions and reasonings about the Freedom of the Will.

   That every act of the Will has some cause, and consequently (by what
   has been already proved) has a necessary connexion with its cause, and
   so is necessary by a necessity of connexion and consequence, is evident
   by this, that every act of the Will whatsoever is excited by some
   motive: which is manifest, because, if the mind, in willing after the
   manner it does, is excited by no motive or inducement, then it has no
   end which it proposes to itself, or pursues in so doing; it aims at
   nothing, and seeks nothing. And if it seeks nothing, then it does not
   go after any thing, or exert any inclination or preference towards any
   thing, Which brings the matter to a contradiction; because for the mind
   to will something, and for it to go after something by an act of
   preference and inclination, are the same thing.

   But if every act of the Will is excited by a Motive, then that Motive
   is the cause of the act. If the acts of the Will are excited by
   Motives, then Motives are the causes of their being excited; or, which
   is the same thing, the cause of their existence. And if so, the
   existence of the acts of the Will is properly the effect of their
   Motives. Motives do nothing, as Motives or inducements, but by their
   influence; and so much as is done by their influence is the effect of
   them. For that is the notion of an effect, something that is brought to
   pass by the influence of something else.

   And if volitions are properly the effects of their Motives, then they
   are necessarily connected with their Motives. Every effect and event
   being as was proved before, necessarily connected with that which is
   the proper ground and reason of its existence. Thus it is manifest,
   that volition is necessary, and is not from any self-determining power
   in the Will: the volition, which is caused by previous Motive and
   inducement, is not caused by the Will exercising a sovereign power over
   itself, to determine, cause, and excite volitions in itself. This is
   not consistent with the Will acting in a state of indifference and
   equilibrium, to determine itself to a preference; for the way in which
   Motives operate, is by biassing the Will, and giving it a certain
   inclination or preponderation one way.

   Here it may he proper to observe, that Mr. Chubb in his Collection of
   Tracts on Various Subjects, has advanced a scheme of liberty, which is
   greatly divided against itself, and thoroughly subversive of itself:
   and that many ways.

   1. He is abundant in asserting, that the Will, in all its acts, is
   influenced by Motive and excitement; and that this is the previous
   ground and reason of all its acts, and that it is never otherwise in
   any instance. He says, (p. 262.) "No action can take place without some
   Motive to excite it." And, (p. 263,) "Volition cannot take place
   without some previous reason or motive to induce it." And, (p. 310.)
   Action would not take place without some reason or Motive to induce it;
   it being absurd to suppose, that the active faculty would be exerted
   without some previous reason to dispose the mind to action." (So also
   p. 257.) And he speaks of these things, as what we may be absolutely
   certain of, and which are the foundation, the only foundation we have
   of certainty respecting God's moral perfections. (p. 252 - 255, 261 -
   264.)

   And yet, at the same time, by his scheme, the influence of Motives upon
   us to excite to action, and to be actually a ground of volition, is
   consequent on the volition or choice of the mind. For he very greatly
   insists upon it, that in all free actions, before the mind is the
   subject of those volitions, which Motives excite, it chooses to be so.
   It chooses, whether it will comply with the Motive, which presents
   itself in view, or not; and when various Motives are presented, it
   chooses which it will yield to, and which it will reject. (p. 256.)
   "Every man has power to act, or to refrain from acting, agreeably with,
   or contrary to, any Motive that presents." (p. 257.) "Every man is at
   liberty to act, or refrain from acting, agreeably with, or contrary to,
   what each of these Motives, considered singly, would excite him
   to.--Man has power, and is as much at liberty, to reject the Motive
   that does prevail, as he has power, and is at liberty, to reject those
   Motives that do not." (And so p. 310, 311.) "In order to constitute a
   moral agent, it is necessary, that he should have power to act, or to
   refrain from acting, upon such moral Motives, as he pleases." And to
   the like purpose in many other places. According to these things, the
   Will acts first, and chooses or refuses to comply with the Motive that
   is presented, before it falls under its prevailing influence: and it is
   first determined by the mind's pleasure or choice, what Motives it will
   be induced by, before it is induced by them.

   Now, how can these things hang together? How can the mind first act,
   and by its act of volition and choice determine what Motives shall be
   the ground and reason of its volition and choice? For this supposes,
   the choice is already made, before the Motive has its effect; and that
   the volition is already exerted, before the Motive prevails, so as
   actually to be the ground of the volition; and make the prevailing of
   the Motive, the consequence of the volition, of which yet it is the
   ground. If the mind has already chosen to comply with a Motive, and to
   yield to its excitement, the excitement comes in too late, and is
   needless afterwards. If the mind has already chosen to yield to a
   Motive which invites to a thing, that implies, and in fact is, a
   choosing of the thing invited to; and the very act of choice is before
   the influence of the Motive which induces, and is the ground of the
   choice; the son is before-hand with the father that begets him: the
   choice is supposed to be the ground of that influence of the Motive,
   which very influence is supposed to be the ground of the choice. And so
   vice versa, the choice is supposed to be the consequence of the
   influence of the Motive, which influence of the Motive is the
   consequence of that very choice.

   And besides, if the Will acts first towards the Motive before it falls
   under its influence, and the prevailing of the Motive upon it to induce
   it to act and choose, be the fruit and consequence of its act and
   choice, then how is the Motive "a previous ground and reason of the act
   and choice, so that in the nature of the things, volition cannot take
   place without some previous reason and Motive to induce it;" and that
   this act is consequent upon, and follows the Motive? Which things Mr.
   Chubb often asserts, as of certain and undoubted truth. So that the
   very same Motive is both previous and consequent, both before and
   after, both the ground and fruit of the very same thing!

   II. Agreeable to the forementioned inconsistent notion of the Will
   first acting towards the Motive, choosing whether it will comply with
   it, in order to it becoming a ground of the Will's acting, before any
   act of volition can take place, Mr. Chubb frequently calls Motives and
   excitements to the action of the Will, " the passive ground or reason
   of that action." Which is a remarkable phrase; than which I presume
   there is none more unintelligible, and void of distinct and consistent
   meaning, in all the writings of Duns Scotus, or Thomas Aquinas. When he
   represents the Motive volition as passive, he must mean--passive in
   that affair, or passive with respect to that action, which he speaks
   of; otherwise it is nothing to the design of his argument: he must
   mean, (if that can be called a meaning,) that the Motive to volition is
   first acted upon or towards by the volition, choosing to yield to it,
   making it a ground of action, or determining to fetch its influence
   from thence; and so to make it a previous ground of its own excitation
   and existence. Which is the same absurdity, as if one should say, that
   the soul of man, previous to its existence, chose by what cause it
   would come into existence, and acted upon its cause, to fetch influence
   thence, to bring it into being; and so its cause was a passive ground
   of its existence!

   Mr. Chubb very plainly supposes Motive or excitement to be the ground
   of the being of volition. He speaks of it as the ground or reason of
   the exertion of an act of the Will, (p. 391, and 392.) and expressly
   says, that "volition cannot take place without some previous ground or
   Motive to induce it," (p. 363.) And he speaks of the act as "from the
   Motive, and from the influence of the Motive," (p. 352.) "and from the
   influence that the Motive has on the man, for the production of an
   action," (p. 317.) Certainly there is no need of multiplying words
   about this; it is easily judged, whether Motive can be the ground of
   volition taking place, so that the very production of it is from the
   influence of the Motive, and yet the Motive, before it becomes the
   ground of the volition, is passive, or acted upon the volition. But
   this I will say, that a man, who insists so much on clearness of
   meaning in others, and is so much in blaming their confusion and
   inconsistence, ought, if he was able, to have explained his meaning in
   this phrase of "passive ground of action," so as to show it not to be
   confused and inconsistent.

   If any should suppose, that Mr. Chubb, when he speaks of Motive as a
   "passive ground of action," does not mean passive with regard to that
   volition which it is the ground of, but some other antecedent volition,
   (though his purpose and argument, and whole discourse, will by no means
   allow of such a supposition,) yet it would not help the matter in the
   least. For, (1.) If we suppose an act, by which the soul chooses to
   yield to the invitation of a Motive to another volition; both these
   supposed volitions are in effect the very same. A volition to yield to
   the force of a Motive inviting to choose something, comes to just the
   same thing as choosing the thing which the Motive invites to, as I
   observed before. So that here can be no room to help the matter, by a
   distinction of two volitions. (2.) If the Motive be passive, not with
   respect to the same volition to which the Motive excites, but to one
   truly distinct and prior; yet, by Mr. Chubb, that prior volition cannot
   take place without a Motive or excitement, as a previous ground of its
   existence. For he insists, that "it is absurd to suppose any volition
   should take place without some previous Motive to induce it," So that
   at last it comes to just the same absurdity: for if every volition must
   have a previous Motive, then the very first in the whole series must be
   excited by a previous Motive; and yet the Motive to that first volition
   is passive; but cannot be passive with regard to another antecedent
   volition, because, by the supposition, it is the very first: therefore
   if it be passive with respect to any volition, it must be so with
   regard to that very volition of which it is the ground, and that is
   excited by it.

   III. Though Mr. Chubb asserts, as above, that every volition has some
   motive, and that "in the nature of the thing, no volition can take
   place without some Motive to induce it;" yet he asserts, that volition
   does not always follow the strongest Motive; or, in other words, is not
   governed by any superior strength of the Motive that is followed,
   beyond Motives to the contrary, previous to the volition itself. His
   own words (p. 258.) are as follow: "Though with regard to physical
   causes, that which is strongest always prevails, yet it is otherwise
   with regard to moral causes. Of these, sometimes the stronger,
   sometimes the weaker, prevails. And the ground of this difference is
   evident, namely, that what we call moral causes, strictly speaking, are
   no causes at all, but barely passive reasons of or excitements to the
   action, or to the refraining from acting: which excitements we have
   power, or are at liberty, to comply with or reject, as I have showed
   above." And so throughout the paragraph, he in a variety of phrases
   insists, that the Will is not always determined by the strongest
   Motive, unless by strongest we preposterously mean actually prevailing
   in the event; which is not in the Motive, but in the Will; but that the
   Will is not always determined by the Motive which is strongest, by any
   strength previous to the volition itself. And he elsewhere abundantly
   asserts, that the Will is determined by no superior strength or
   advantage, that Motives have, from any constitution or state of things,
   or any circumstances whatsoever, previous to the actual determination
   of the Will. And indeed his whole discourse on human liberty implies
   it, his whole scheme is founded upon it.

   But these things cannot stand together. There is a diversity of
   strength in Motives to choice, previous to the choice itself. Mr. Chubb
   himself supposes, that they do previously invite, induce, excite, and
   dispose the mind to action. This implies, that they have something in
   themselves that is inviting, some tendency to induce and dispose to
   volition previous to volition itself. And if they have in themselves
   this nature and tendency, doubtless they have it in certain limited
   degrees, which are capable of diversity; and some have it in greater
   degrees, others in less; and they that have most of this tendency,
   considered with all their nature and circumstances, previous to
   volition, are the strongest Motives, and those that have least, are the
   weakest Motives.

   Now if volition sometimes does not follow the Motive which is
   strongest, or has most previous tendency or advantage, all things
   considered, to induce or excite it, but follows the weakest, or that
   which, as it stands previously in the mind's view, has least tendency
   to induce it; herein the Will apparently acts wholly without Motive,
   without any previous reason to dispose the mind to it, contrary to what
   the same author supposes. The act, wherein the Will must proceed
   without a previous motive to induce it, is the act of preferring the
   weakest Motive. For how absurd is it to say, the mind sees previous
   reason in the Motive, to prefer that Motive before the other; and at
   the same time to suppose, that there is nothing in the Motive, in its
   nature, state, or any circumstance of it whatsoever, as it stands in
   the previous view of the mind, that gives it any preference: but on the
   contrary, the other Motive that stands in competition with it, in all
   these respects, has most belonging to it that is inviting and moving,
   and has most of a tendency to choice and preference. This is certainly
   as much as to say, there is previous ground and reason in the Motive
   for the act of preference, and yet no previous reason for it. By the
   supposition, as to all that is in the two rival Motives, which tends to
   preference, previous to the act of preference, it is not in that which
   is preferred, but wholly in the other: and yet Mr. Chubb supposes, that
   the act of preference is from previous ground and reason, in the Motive
   which is preferred. But are these things consistent? Can there be
   previous ground in a thing for an event that takes place, and yet no
   previous tendency in it to that event? If one thing follows another,
   without any previous tendency to its following, then I should think it
   very plain, that it follows it without any manner of previous reason
   why it should follow.

   Yea, in this case, Mr. Chubb supposes, that the event follows an
   antecedent, as the ground of its existence, which has not only no
   tendency to it, but a contrary tendency. The event is the preference,
   which the mind gives to that Motive, which is weaker, as it stands in
   the previous view of the mind; the immediate antecedent is the view the
   mind has of the two rival Motives conjunctly; in which previous view of
   the mind, all the preferableness, or previous tendency to preference,
   is supposed to be on the other side, or in the contrary Motive; and all
   the unworthiness of preference, and so previous tendency to comparative
   neglect, or undervaluing, is on that side which is preferred: and yet
   in this view of the mind is supposed to be the previous ground or
   reason of this act of preference, exciting it, and disposing the mind
   to it. Which I leave the reader to judge, whether it be absurd or not.
   If it be not, then it is not absurd to say, that the previous tendency
   of an antecedent to a consequent, is the ground and reason why that
   consequent does not follow; and the want of a previous tendency to an
   event, yea, a tendency to the contrary, is the true ground and reason
   why that event does follow.

   An act of choice or preference is a comparative act, wherein the mind
   acts with reference to two or more things that are compared, and stand
   in competition in the mind's view. If the mind, in this comparative
   act, prefers that which appears inferior in the comparison, then the
   mind herein acts absolutely without Motive, or inducement, or any
   temptation whatsoever. Then, if a hungry man has the offer of two sorts
   of food, to both which he finds an appetite, but has a stronger
   appetite to one than the other; and there be no circumstances or
   excitements whatsoever in the case to induce him to take either the one
   or the other, but merely his appetite: if in the choice he makes
   between them, he chooses that which he has least appetite to, and
   refuses that to which he has the strongest appetite, this is a choice
   made absolutely without previous Motive, Excitement, Reason, or
   Temptation, as much as if he were perfectly without all appetite to
   either; because his volition in this case is a comparative act,
   following a comparative view of the food, which he chooses, in which
   view his preference has absolutely no previous ground, yea, is against
   all previous ground and motive. And if there be any principle in man,
   from whence an act of choice may arise after this manner, from the same
   principle volition may arise wholly without Motive on either side. If
   the mind in its volition can go beyond Motive, then it can go without
   Motive: for when it is beyond the Motive, it is out of the reach of the
   Motive, out of the limits of its influence, and so without. Motive. If
   so, this demonstrates the independence of volition on Motive; and no
   reason can be given for what Mr. Chubb so often asserts, even that "in
   the nature of things volition cannot take place without a motive to
   induce it."

   If the Most High should endow a balance with agency or activity of
   nature, in such a manner, that when unequal weights are put into the
   scales, its agency could enable it to cause that scale to descend,
   which has the least weight, and so to raise the greater weight; this
   would clearly demonstrate, that the motion of the balance does not
   depend on weights in the scales; at least, as much as if the balance
   should move itself, when there is no weight in either scale. And the
   activity of the balance which is sufficient to move itself against the
   greater weight, must certainly be more than sufficient to move it when
   there is no weight at all.

   Mr. Chubb supposes, that the Will cannot stir at all without some
   Motive; and also supposes, that if there be a Motive to one thing, and
   none to the contrary, volition will infallibly follow that Motive. This
   is virtually to suppose an entire dependence of the Will on Motives; if
   it were not wholly dependent on them, it could surely help itself a
   little without them; or help itself a little against a Motive, without
   help from the strength and weight of a contrary Motive. And yet his
   supposing that the Will, when it has before it various opposite
   Motives, can use them as it pleases, and choose its own influence from
   them, and neglect the strongest, and follow the weakest, supposes it to
   be wholly independent on Motives.

   It further appears, on Mr. Chubb's hypothesis, that volition must be
   without any previous ground in any Motive, thus: if it be, as he
   supposes, that the Will is not determined by any previous superior
   strength of the Motive, but determines and chooses its own Motive,
   then, when the rival Motives are exactly equal, in all respects, it may
   follow either; and may, in such a case, sometimes follow one, sometimes
   the other. And if so, this diversity which appears between the acts of
   the Will, is plainly without previous ground in either of the Motives;
   for all that is previously in the Motives, is supposed precisely and
   perfectly the same, without any diversity whatsoever. Now perfect
   identity, as to all that is previous in the antecedent, cannot be the
   ground and reason of diversity in the consequent. Perfect identity in
   the ground, cannot be a reason why it is not followed with the same
   consequence. And therefore the source of this diversity of consequence
   must be sought for elsewhere.

   And lastly, it may be observed, that however much Mr. Chubb insists,
   that no volition can take place without some Motive to induce it, which
   previously disposes the mind to it; yet, as he also insists that the
   mind, without reference to any superior strength of Motives, picks and
   chooses for its Motive to follow; he himself herein plainly supposes,
   that, with regard to the mind's preference of one Motive before
   another--it is not the motive that disposes the Will, but--the Will
   disposes itself to follow the Motive.

   IV. Mr. Chubb supposes necessity to be utterly inconsistent with
   agency; and that to suppose a being to be an agent in that which is
   necessary, is a plain contradiction, p. 311. and throughout his
   discourses on the subject of Liberty, he supposes, that necessity
   cannot consist with agency or freedom; and that to suppose otherwise,
   is to make Liberty and Necessity, Action and Passion, the same thing.
   And so he seems to suppose, that there is no action, strictly speaking,
   but volition; and that as to the effects of volition in body or mind,
   in themselves considered, being necessary, they are said to be free,
   only as they are the effects of an act that is not necessary.

   And yet, according to him, volition itself is the effect of volition;
   yea, every act of free volition; and therefore every act of free
   volition must, by what has now been observed from him, be necessary.
   That every act of free volition is itself the effect of volition, is
   abundantly supposed by him. In p. 341, he says, "If a man is such a
   creature as I have proved him to be, that is, if he has in him a power
   of Liberty of doing either good or evil, and either of these is the
   subject of his own free choice, so that he might, if he had pleased,
   have chosen and done the contrary."--Here he supposes all that is good
   or evil in man is the effect of his choice; and so that his good or
   evil choice itself is the effect of his pleasure or choice, in these
   words, "he might if he had pleased, have chosen the contrary." So in p
   356, "Though it be highly reasonable, that a man should always choose
   the greater good,--yet he may, if he pleases, choose otherwise." Which
   is the same thing as if he had said, he may if he chooses choose
   otherwise. And then he goes on,--"that is, he may, if he pleases,
   choose what is good for himself," &c. And again in the same page, "The
   Will is not confined by the understanding, to any particular sort of
   good, whether greater or less; but it is at liberty to choose what kind
   of good it pleases."--If there be any meaning in the last words, it
   must be this, that the Will is at liberty to choose what kind of good
   it chooses to choose; supposing the act of choice itself determined by
   an antecedent choice. The Liberty Mr. Chubb speaks of, is not only a
   man's power to move his body, agreeable to an antecedent act of choice,
   but to use or exert the faculties of his soul. Thus, (p. 379.) speaking
   of the faculties of the mind, he says, "Man has power, and is at
   liberty to neglect these faculties, to use them aright, or to abuse
   them, as he pleases." And that he supposes an act of choice or exercise
   of pleasure, properly distinct from, and antecedent to, those acts thus
   chosen, directing, commanding, and producing the chosen acts, and even
   the acts of choice themselves, is very plain in p. 283. "He can command
   his actions; and herein consists his Liberty; he can give or deny
   himself that pleasure, as he pleases. And p. 377. If the actions of
   men--are not the produce of a free choice, or election, but spring from
   a necessity of nature,--he cannot in reason be the object of reward or
   punishment on their account. Whereas, if action in man, whether good or
   evil, is the produce of will or free choice; so that a man in either
   case, had it in his power, and was at liberty to have chosen the
   contrary, he is the proper object of reward or punishment, according as
   he chooses to behave himself." Here, in these last words, he speaks of
   Liberty of choosing according as he chooses. So that the behavior which
   he speaks of as subject to his choice, is his choosing itself, as well
   as his external conduct consequent upon it. And therefore it is
   evident, he means not only external actions, but the acts of choice
   themselves, when he speaks of all free actions, as the produce of free
   choice. And this is abundantly evident in what he says elsewhere, (p.
   372, 373.)

   Now these things imply a twofold great inconsistence.

   1. To suppose, as Mr. Chubb plainly does, that every free act of choice
   is commanded by, and is the produce of, free choice, is to suppose the
   first free act of choice belonging to the case, yea, the first free act
   of choice that ever man exerted, to be the produce of an antecedent act
   of choice. But I hope I need not labor at all to convince my readers,
   that it is an absurdity to say, the very first act is the produce of
   another act that went before it.

   2. If it were both possible and real, as Mr. Chubb insists, that every
   free act of choice were the produce or the effect of a free act of
   choice; yet even then, according to his principles, no one act of
   choice would be free, but every one necessary; because, every act of
   choice being the effect of a foregoing act, every act would be
   necessarily connected with that foregoing cause. For Mr. Chubb himself
   says, (p. 389.) "When the self-moving power is exerted, it becomes the
   necessary cause of its effects."--So that his notion of a free act,
   that is rewardable or punishable, is a heap of contradictions. It is a
   free act, and yet, by his own notion of freedom, is necessary; and
   therefore by him it is a contradiction, to suppose it to be free.
   According to him, every free act is the produce of a free act; so that
   there must be an infinite number of free acts in succession, without
   any beginning, in an agent that has a beginning. And therefore here is
   an infinite number of free acts, every one of them free; and yet not
   any one of them free, but every act in the whole infinite chain a
   necessary effect. All the acts are rewardable or punishable, and yet
   the agent cannot, in reason, be the object of reward or punishment, on
   account of any one of these actions. He is active in them all, and
   passive in none; yet active in none, but passive in all, &c.

   V. Mr. Chubb most strenuously denies, that Motives are causes of the
   acts of the Will; or that the moving principle in man is moved, or
   caused to be exerted by Motives. His words, (p. 388 and 389.) are, "If
   the moving principle in man is moved, or caused to be exerted, by
   something external to man, which all Motives are, then it would not be
   a self-moving principle, seeing it would be moved by a principle
   external to itself. And to say, that a self-moving principle is moved,
   or caused to be exerted, by a cause external to itself; is absurd and a
   contradiction," &c.--And in the next page, it is particularly and
   largely insisted, that Motives are causes in no case, that "they are
   merely passive in the production of action, and have no causality in
   the production of it,--no causality, to be the cause of the exertion of
   the Will.

   Now I desire it may be considered, how this can possibly consist with
   what he says in other places. Let it be noted here,

   1. Mr. Chubb abundantly speaks of Motives as excitements of the acts of
   the Will; and says, that Motives do excite volition, and induce it, and
   that they are necessary to this end; that in the reason and nature of
   things, volition cannot take place without Motives to excite it. But
   now, if Motives excite the Will, they move it; and yet he says, it is
   absurd to say, the Will is moved by Motives. And again, if language is
   of any significancy at all, if Motives excite volition, then they are
   the cause of its being excited; and to cause volition to be excited, is
   to cause it to be put forth or exerted. Yea, Mr. Chubb says himself,
   (p. 317.) Motive is necessary to the exertion of the active faculty. To
   excite, is positively to do something; and certainly that which does
   something, is the cause of the thing done by it. To create, is to cause
   to be created; to make, is to cause to be made; to kill, is to cause to
   be killed; to quicken, is to cause to be quickened; and to excite, is
   to cause to be excited. To excite, is to be a cause, in the most proper
   sense, not merely a negative occasion, but a ground of existence by
   positive influence. The notion of exciting, is exerting influence to
   cause the effect to arise or come forth into existence.

   2. Mr. Chubb himself (p. 3l7.) speaks of Motives as the ground and
   reason of action by influence, and by prevailing influence. Now, what
   can be meant by a cause, but something that is the ground and reason of
   a thing by its influence, an influence that is prevalent and effectual?

   3. This author not only speaks of Motives as the ground and reason of
   action, by prevailing influence; but expressly of their influence as
   prevailing for the production of an action, (p. 317.) which makes the
   inconsistency still more palpable and notorious. The production of an
   effect is certainly the causing of an effect; and productive influence
   is causal influence, if any thing is; and that which has this influence
   prevalently, so as thereby to become the ground of another thing, is a
   cause of that thing, if there be any such thing as a cause. This
   influence, Mr. Chubb says, Motives have to produce an action; and yet,
   he says, it is absurd and a contradiction, to say they are causes.

   4. In the same page, he once and again speaks of Motives as disposing
   the Agent to action, by their influence. His words are these: "As
   Motive, which takes place in the understanding, and is the product of
   intelligence, is necessary to action, that is, to the exertion of the
   active faculty, because that faculty would not be exerted without some
   previous reason to dispose the mind to action; so from hence it plainly
   appears, that when a man is said to be disposed to one action rather
   than another, this properly signifies the prevailing influence that one
   Motive has upon a man for the production of an action, or for the being
   at rest, before all other Motives, for the production of the contrary.
   For as motive is the ground and reason of any action, so the Motive
   that prevails, disposes the agent to the performance of that action."

   Now, if motives dispose the mind to action, then they cause the mind to
   be disposed; and to cause the mind to be disposed is to cause it to be
   willing; and to cause it to be willing is to cause it to will; and that
   is the same thing as to be the cause of an act of the Will. And yet
   this same Mr. Chubb holds it to be absurd, to suppose Motive to be a
   cause of the act of the Will.

   And if we compare these things together, we have here again a whole
   heap of inconsistences. Motives are the previous ground and reason of
   the acts of the Will; yea, the necessary ground and reason of their
   exertion, without which they will not be exerted, and cannot, in the
   nature of things, take place; and they do excite these acts of the
   Will, and do this by a prevailing influence; yea, an influence which
   prevails for the production of the act of the Will, and for the
   disposing of the mind to it; and yet it is absurd, to suppose Motive to
   be a cause of an act of the Will, or that a principle of Will is moved
   or caused to be exerted by it, or that it has any causality in the
   production of it, or any causality to be the cause of the exertion of
   the Will.

   A due consideration of these things which Mr. Chubb has advanced, the
   strange inconsistences which his notion of Liberty--consisting in the
   Will's power of self-determination void of all necessity, united with
   that dictate of common sense, that there can be no volition without a
   Motive--drove him into, may be sufficient to convince us, that it is
   utterly impossible ever to make that notion of Liberty consistent with
   the influence of Motives in volition. And as it is in a manner
   self-evident, that there can be no act of Will, or preference of the
   mind, without some Motive or inducement, something in the mind's view
   which it aims at, and goes after; so it is most manifest, that there is
   no such Liberty in the universe as Arminians insist on; nor any such
   thing possible, or conceivable.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XI.

   The evidence of God's certain Foreknowledge of the Volitions of moral
   Agents.

   That the acts of the Wills of moral Agents are not contingent events,
   in such a sense, as to be without all necessity, appears by God's
   certain Foreknowledge of such events.

   In handling this argument, I would in the first place prove, that God
   has a certain Foreknowledge of the voluntary acts of moral Agents; and
   secondly, show the consequence, or how it follows from hence, that the
   Volitions of moral Agents are not contingent, so as to be without
   necessity of connexion and consequence.

   First, I am to prove, that God has an absolute and certain
   Foreknowledge of the free actions of moral Agents.

   One would think it wholly needless to enter on such an argument with
   any that profess themselves Christians: but so it is; God's certain
   Foreknowledge of the free acts of moral Agents, is denied by some that
   pretend to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God; and especially
   of late. I therefore shall consider the evidence of such a prescience
   in the Most High, as fully as the designed limits of this essay will
   admit; -supposing myself herein to have to do with such as own the
   truth of the Bible.

   Arg. I. My first argument shall be taken from God's prediction of such
   events. Here I would, in the first place, lay down these two things as
   axioms.

   1. If God does not foreknow, He cannot foretell such events; that is,
   He cannot peremptorily and certainly foretell them. If God has no more
   than an uncertain guess concerning events of this kind, then he can
   declare no more than an uncertain guess. Positively to foretell, is to
   profess to foreknow, or declare positive Foreknowledge.

   2. If God does not certainly foreknow the future Volitions of moral
   Agents, then neither can he certainly foreknow those events which are
   dependent on these Volitions. The existence of the one depending on the
   existence of the other, the knowledge of the existence of the one
   depends on the knowledge of the existence of the other; and the one
   cannot be more certain than the other.

   Therefore, how many, how great, and how extensive soever the
   consequences of the Volitions of moral Agents may be; though they
   should extend to an alteration of the state of things through the
   universe, and should be continued in a series of successive events to
   all eternity, and should in the progress of things branch forth into an
   infinite number of series, each of them going on in an endless chain of
   events; God must be as ignorant of all these consequences, as he is of
   the Volition whence they first take their rise: and the whole state of
   things depending on them, how important, extensive, and vast soever,
   must be hid from him.

   These positions being such as, I suppose, none will deny, I now proceed
   to observe the following things.

   1. Men's moral conduct and qualities, their virtues and vices, their
   wickedness and good practice, things rewardable and punishable, have
   often been foretold by God.--Pharaoh's moral conduct, in refusing to
   obey God's command, in letting his people go, was foretold. God says to
   Moses, Exod. iii. 19. "I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let
   you go." Here God professes not only to guess at, but to know Pharaoh's
   future disobedience. In Exod. vii. 4. God says, "but Pharaoh shall not
   hearken unto you; that I may lay mine hand upon Egypt," &c. And chap.
   ix. 30. Moses says to Pharaoh, "as for thee, and thy servants, i know
   that ye will not fear the Lord." See also Exod. xi. 9.--The moral
   conduct of Josiah, by name, in his zealously exerting himself to oppose
   idolatry, in particular acts, was foretold above three hundred years
   before he was born, and the prophecy sealed by a miracle, and renewed
   and confirmed by the words of a second prophet, as what surely would
   not fail, (1 Kings xiii. 1-6, 32..) This prophecy was also in effect a
   prediction of the moral conduct of the people, in upholding their
   schismatical and idolatrous worship until that time, and the idolatry
   of those priests of the high places, which it is foretold Josiah should
   offer upon that altar of Bethel. Micaiah foretold the foolish and
   sinful conduct of Ahab, in refusing to hearken to the word of the Lord
   by him, and choosing rather to hearken to the false prophets, in going
   to Ramoth-Gilead to his ruin, (1 Kings xxi. 20-22.) The moral conduct
   of Hazael was foretold, in that cruelty he should be guilty of; on
   which Hazael says, "What, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this
   thing!" [122] The prophet speaks of the event as what he knew, and not
   what he conjectured, 2 Kings viii. 12. "I know the evil that thou wilt
   do unto the children of Israel: Thou wilt dash their children, and rip
   up their women with child." The moral conduct of Cyrus is foretold,
   long before he had a being, in his mercy to God's people, and regard to
   the true God, in turning the captivity of the Jews, and promoting the
   building of the temple, (Isa. xliv. 28; lxv. 13. compare 2 Chron.
   xxxvi. 22, 23.and Ezra i. 1-4.) How many instances of the moral conduct
   of the kings of the North and South, particular instances of the wicked
   behaviour of the kings of Syria and Egypt, are foretold in Daniel xi.!
   Their corruption, violence, robbery, treachery, and lies. And
   particularly, how much is foretold of the horrid wickedness of
   Antiochus Epiphanes, called there "a vile person," instead of
   Epiphones, or illustrious! In Daniel xi., and also in ver. 9, 14,
   23-27., are foretold his flattery, deceit, and lies, his having "his
   heart set to do mischief," and set "against the holy covenant," his
   "destroying and treading under foot the holy people," in a marvellous
   manner, his "having indignation against the holy covenant, setting his
   heart against it, and conspiring against it, "his" polluting the
   sanctuary of strength, treading it under foot, taking away the daily
   sacrifice, and placing the abomination that maketh desolate;" his great
   pride, " magnifying himself against God, and uttering marvellous
   blasphemies against Him," until God in indignation should destroy him.
   Withal, the moral conduct of the Jews, on occasion of his persecution,
   is predicted. It is foretold, that "he should corrupt many by
   flatteries," (Daniel xi. 32-34.) But that others should behave with a
   glorious constancy and fortitude, in opposition to him, (Daniel xi. 32.
   ) And that some good men should fall and repent, (Daniel xi. 35.)
   Christ foretold Peter's sin, in denying his Lord, with its
   circumstances, in a peremptory manner. And so, that great sin of Judas,
   in betraying his master, and its dreadful and eternal punishment in
   hell, was foretold in the like positive manner, Matt. xxvi. 21-25, and
   parallel places in the other Evangelists.

   2. Many events have been foretold by God, which are dependent on the
   moral conduct of particular persons, and were accomplished, either by
   their virtuous or vicious actions. Thus, the children of Israel's going
   down into Egypt to dwell there, was foretold to Abraham, (Gen. xv.)
   which was brought about by the wickedness of Joseph's brethren in
   selling him, and the wickedness of Joseph's mistress, and his own
   signal virtue in resisting her temptation. The accomplishment of the
   thing prefigured in Joseph's dream, depended on the same moral conduct.
   Jotham's parable and prophecy, (Judges ix. 15-20.) was accomplished by
   the wicked conduct of Abimelech, and the men of Shechem. The prophecies
   against the house of Eli, (1 Sam. ii.; iii.) were accomplished by the
   wickedness of Doeg the Edomite, in accusing the priests; and the great
   impiety, and extreme cruelty of Saul in destroying the priests at Nob.
   (1 Sam. xxii.) Nathan's prophecy against David, (2 Sam. xii. 11, 12.)
   was fulfilled by the horrible wickedness of Absalom, in rebelling
   against his father, seeking his life, and lying with his concubines in
   the sight of the sun. The prophecy against Solomon, (1 Kings xi.
   11-13.) was fulfilled by Jeroboam's rebellion and usurpation, which are
   spoken of as his wickedness, (2 Chron. xiii. 5, 6.compare 2 Chron.
   xiii. 18.) The prophecy against Jeroboam's family, ( 1 Kings xiv.) was
   fulfilled by the conspiracy, treason, and cruel murders of Bassha, (2
   Kings xv. 27.&c.) The predictions of the prophet Jehu against the house
   of Bassha, (1 Kings xvi.at the beginning,) were fulfilled by the
   treason and parricide of Zimri, (1 Kings xvi. 9-13, 20.)

   3. How often has God foretold the future moral conduct of nations and
   people, of numbers, bodies, and successions of men; with God's judicial
   proceedings, and many other events consequent and dependent on their
   virtues and vices; which could not be foreknown, if the Volitions of
   men, wherein they acted as moral Agents, had not been foreseen! The
   future cruelty of the Egyptians in oppressing Israel, and God's judging
   and punishing them for it, was foretold long before it came to pass,
   (Gen. xv. 13, 14.) The continuance of the iniquity of the Amorites, and
   the increase of it until it should be full, and they ripe for
   destruction, was foretold above four hundred years before, (Gen. xv.
   16. Acts vii. 6, 7.) The prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem,
   and the land of Judah, were absolute; (2 Kings xx. 17-19.; xxii.
   15-20.). It was foretold in Hezekiah's time, and was abundantly
   insisted on in the book of the prophet Isaiah, who wrote nothing after
   Hezekiah's days. It was foretold in Josiah's time, in the beginning of
   a great reformation, (2 Kings xxii.) And it is manifest by innumerable
   things in the predictions of the prophets, relating to this event, its
   time, its circumstances, its continuance, and end; the return from the
   captivity, the restoration of the temple, city, and land, &c. I say,
   these show plainly, that the prophecies of this great event were
   absolute. And yet this event was connected with, and dependent on, two
   things in men's moral conduct: first, the injurious rapine and violence
   of the king of Babylon and his people, as the efficient cause; which
   God often speaks of as what he highly resented, and would severely
   punish; and secondly, the final obstinacy of the Jews. That great event
   is often spoken of as suspended on this, (Jer. iv. 1; Jer. v. 1;Jer.
   vii. 1-7; Jer.xi. 1-6; Jer. xvii. 24-27; Jer. xxv. 1-7; Jer. xxvi. 1-8,
   13; Jer. xxxviii. 17, 18.) Therefore this destruction and captivity
   could not be foreknown, unless such a moral conduct of the Chaldeans
   and Jews had been foreknown. And then it was foretold, that the people
   should be finally obstinate, to the utter desolation of the city and
   land, (Isa. vi. 9-11. Jer. i. 18, 19. vii. 27-29. Ezek. iii. 7; xxiv.
   13, 14.)

   The final obstinacy of those Jews who were left in the land of Israel,
   in their idolatry and rejection of the true God, was foretold by him,
   and the prediction confirmed with an oath, (Jer. xliv. 26, 27.) And God
   tells the people, (Isa. xlviii. 3, 4-8.) that he had predicted those
   things which should be consequent on their treachery and obstinacy,
   because he knew they would be obstinate; and that he had declared these
   things beforehand, for their conviction of his being the only true God,
   &c.

   The destruction of Babylon, with many of the circumstances of it, was
   foretold, as the judgment of God for the exceeding pride and
   haughtiness of the heads of that monarchy, Nebuchadnezzar and his
   successors, and their wickedly destroying other nations, and
   particularly for their exalting themselves against the true God and his
   people, before any of these monarchs had a being; (Isa. xiii.; xiv.;
   xlvii.;compare Habak. ii. 5-20, and Jer. l.; li.) That Babylon's
   destruction was to be "a recompense, according to the works of their
   own hands," appears by Jer. xxv. 14.--The immorality of which the
   people of Babylon, and particularly her princes and great men, were
   guilty, that very night that the city was destroyed, their revelling
   and drunkenness at Belshazzar's idolatrous feast, was foretold, (Jer.
   li. 39, 57.)

   The return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity is often very
   particularly foretold, with many circumstances, and the promises of it
   are very peremptory: (Jer. xxxi. 35-40; xxxii. 6-15, 41-44; xxxiii.
   24-26.) And the very time of their return was prefixed; (Jer. xxv. 11,
   12; xxix. 10, 11. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 21. Ezek. iv. 6.and Dan. ix. 2.) And
   yet the prophecies represent their return as consequent on their
   repentance. And their repentance itself is very expressly and
   particularly foretold, (Jer. xxix. 12, 13, 14; xxxi. 8, 9, 18-31.;
   xxxiii. 8; l. 4, 5. Ezek. vi. 8, 9, 10; vii. 16.; xiv. 22, 23.; xx. 43,
   44.)

   It was foretold under the Old Testament, that the Messiah should suffer
   greatly through the malice and cruelty of men; as is largely and fully
   set forth, Psal. xxii.applied to Christ in the New Testament, (Matt.
   xxvii. 35, 43. Luke xxiii. 34. John xix. 24. Heb. ii. 12.) And likewise
   in Psal. lxix.which, it is also evident by the New Testament, is spoken
   of Christ; (John xv. 25; vii. 5.&c.; and John ii. 17. Rom. xv. 3. Matt.
   xxvii. 34, 48. Mark xv. 23. John xix. 29.) The same thing is also
   foretold, Isa. liii.; l. 6.and Mic. v. 1. This cruelty of men was their
   sin, and what they acted as moral Agents. It was foretold, that there
   should be an union of heathen and Jewish rulers against Christ, (Psal.
   ii. 1, 2.compared with Acts iv. 25-28.) It was foretold, that the Jews
   should generally reject and despise the Messiah, (Isa. xlix. 5, 6, 7;
   liii. 1-3. Psal. xxii. 6, 7; lxix. 4, 8, 19, 20.) And it was foretold,
   that the body of that nation should be rejected in the Messiah's days,
   from being God's people, for their obstinacy in sin; (Isa. xlix. 4-7;
   viii. 14, 15, 16.compared with Rom. x. 19.and Isa. 1xv.at the
   beginning, compared with Rom. x. 20, 21.) It was foretold, that Christ
   should be rejected by the chief priests and rulers among the Jews,
   (Psal. cxviii. 22.compared with Matt. xxi. 42.; Acts iv. 11.; 1 Pet.
   ii. 4, 7.)

   Christ himself foretold his being delivered into the hands of the
   elders, chief priests, and scribes, and his being cruelly treated by
   them, and condemned to death; and that he by them should be delivered
   to the Gentiles: and that he should be mocked and scourged, and
   crucified, (Matt. xvi. 21; xx. 17-19. Luke ix. 22. John viii. 28.) and
   that the people should be concerned in and consenting to his death,
   (Luke xx. 13-18.) especially the inhabitants of Jerusalem; (Luke xiii.
   33-35.) He foretold, that the disciples should all be offended because
   of him, that night in which he was betrayed, and should forsake him;
   (Matt. xxvi. 31. John xvi. 32.) He foretold, that he should be rejected
   of that generation, even the body of the people, and that they should
   continue obstinate to their ruin; (Matt. xii. 45; xxi. 33-42; xxii.
   1-7. Luke xiii. 16, 21, 24; xvii. 25.; xix. 14, 27, 41-44.; xx. 13-18;
   xxiii. 34-39.)

   As it was foretold in both the Old Testament and the New that the Jews
   should reject the Messiah, so it was foretold that the Gentiles should
   receive him, and so be admitted to the privileges of God's people; in
   places too many to be now particularly mentioned. It was foretold in
   the Old Testament, that the Jews should envy the Gentiles on this
   account; (Deut. xxxii. 21.compared with Rom. x. 19.) Christ himself
   often foretold, that the Gentiles would embrace the true religion, and
   become his followers and people; (Matt. viii. 10, 11, 12; xxi. 41-43.;
   xxii. 8-10. Luke xiii. 28; xiv. 16-24.; xx. 16. John x. 16.) He also
   foretold the Jews envy of the Gentiles on this occasion; (Matt. xx.
   12-16. Luke xv. 26-32.) He foretold, that they should continue in this
   opposition and envy, and should manifest it in the cruel persecutions
   of his followers, to their utter destruction; (Matt. xxi. 33-42; xxii.
   6.; xxiii. 34-39. Luke xi. 49-51.) The obstinacy of the Jews is also
   foretold, (Acts xxii. 18.) Christ often foretold the great persecutions
   his followers should meet with, both from Jews and Gentiles; (Matt. x.
   16-18, 21, 22, 34-36; xxiv. 9. Mark xiii. 9. Luke x. 3; xii. 11, 49-53;
   xxi. 12, 16, 17. John xv. 18-21; xvi. 1-4, 20-22, 23.) He foretold the
   martyrdom of particular persons; (Matt. xx. 23. John xiii. 36; xxi. 18,
   19, 22.) He foretold the great success of the gospel in the city of
   Samaria, as near approaching; which afterwards was fulfilled by the
   preaching of Philip, (John iv. 35-38 ) He foretold the rising of many
   deceivers after his departure, (Matt. xxiv. 4, 5, 11.) and the apostasy
   of many of his professed followers; (Matt. xxiv. 10; 12.)

   The persecutions, which the apostle Paul was to meet with in the world,
   were foretold; (Acts ix. 16; xx. 23; xxi. 11.) The apostle says, to the
   christian Ephesians, (Acts xx. 29, 30.) "I know, that after my
   departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
   flock; also of your ownselves shall men arise, speaking perverse
   things, to draw away disciples after them." The apostle says, he knew
   this: but he did not know it, if God did not know the future actions of
   moral Agents.

   4. Unless God foreknows the future acts of moral Agents, all the
   prophecies we have in Scripture concerning the great Antichristian
   apostasy; the rise, reign, wicked qualities, and deeds of "the man of
   sin," and his instruments and adherents; the extent and long
   continuance of his dominion, his influence on the minds of princes and
   others, to corrupt them, and draw them away to idolatry, and other foul
   vices; his great and cruel persecutions; the behaviour of the saints
   under these great temptations, &c. &.c. I say, unless the Volitions of
   moral Agents are foreseen, all these prophecies are uttered without
   knowing the things foretold.

   The predictions relating to this great apostasy are all of a moral
   nature, relating to men's virtues and vices, and their exercises,
   fruits, and consequences, and events depending on them; and are very
   particular; and most of them often repeated, with many precise
   characteristics, descriptions, and limitations of qualities, conduct,
   influence, effects, extent, duration, periods, circumstances, final
   issue, &c. which it would be tedious to mention particularly. And to
   suppose, that all these are predicted by God, without any certain
   knowledge of the future moral behaviour of free Agents, would be to the
   utmost degree absurd.

   5. Unless God foreknow the future acts of men's Wills, and their
   behaviour as moral Agents, all those great things which are foretold
   both in the Old Testament and the New, concerning the erection,
   establishment, and universal extent of the kingdom of the Messiah, were
   predicted and promised while God was in ignorance whether any of these
   things would come to pass or no, and did but guess at them. For that
   kingdom is not of this world, it does not consist in things external,
   but is within men, and consists in the dominion of virtue in their
   hearts, in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and in
   these things made manifest in practice, to the praise and glory of God.
   The Messiah came "to save men from their sins, and deliver them from
   their spiritual enemies; that they might serve him in righteousness and
   holiness before him: he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
   from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous
   of good works." And therefore his success consists in gaining men's
   hearts to virtue, in their being made God's willing people in the day
   of his power. His conquest of his enemies consists in his victory over
   men's corruptions and vices. And such a victory, and such a dominion is
   often expressly foretold: that his kingdom shall fill the earth; that
   all people, nations, and languages should serve and obey him; and so
   that all nations should go up to the mountain of the house of the Lord,
   that he might teach them his ways, and that they might walk in his
   paths; and that all men should be drawn to Christ, and the earth be
   full of the knowledge of the Lord (true virtue and religion) as the
   waters cover the seas; that God's laws should be put into men's inward
   parts, and written in their hearts; and that God's people should be all
   righteous, &c. &c.

   A very great part of the Old-Testament prophecies is taken up in such
   predictions as these.--And here I would observe, that the prophecies of
   the universal prevalence of the kingdom of the Messiah, and true
   religion of Jesus Christ, are delivered in the most peremptory manner,
   and confirmed by the oath of God, Isa. xlv. 22-25, "Look unto me, and
   be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none
   else. I have sworn by my Self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
   righteousness, and shall not return, that unto Me every knee shall bow,
   and every tongue shall swear. Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I
   righteousness and strength: even to Him shall men come," &c. But, here,
   this peremptory declaration and great oath of the Most High, are
   delivered with such mighty solemnity, respecting things which God did
   not know, if he did not certainly foresee the Volitions of moral
   Agents.

   And all the predictions of Christ and his apostles, to the like
   purpose, must be without knowledge: as those of our Saviour comparing
   the kingdom of God to a grain of mustard-seed, growing exceeding great,
   from a small beginning; and to leaven, hid in three measures of meal,
   until the whole was leavened, &c.--And the prophecies in the epistles
   concerning the restoration of the Jewish nation to the true church of
   God, and bringing in the fulness of the Gentiles; and the prophecies in
   all the Revelation concerning the glorious change in the moral state of
   the world of mankind, attending the destruction of Antichrist, "the
   kingdoms of the world becoming the kingdoms of our Lord and of his
   Christ;" and its being granted to the church to be "arrayed in that
   fine linen, white and clean, which is the righteousness of saints," &c.

   Corol. 1. Hence that great promise and oath of God to Abraham, Isaac,
   and Jacob, so much celebrated in Scripture, both in the Old Testament
   and the New, namely, "That in their seed all the nations and families
   of the earth should be blessed," must be made on uncertainties, if God
   does not certainly foreknow the Volitions of moral Agents. For the
   fulfilment of this promise consists in that success of Christ in the
   work of redemption, and that setting up of his spiritual kingdom over
   the nations of the world, which has been spoken of. Men are "blessed in
   Christ" no otherwise than as they are brought to acknowledge him, trust
   in him, love and serve him, as is represented and predicted in Psal
   1xxii. 11. "All kings shall fall down before Him; all nations shall
   serve him." With Psal 1xxii. 17. "Men shall be blessed in him; all
   nations shall call him blessed." This oath to Jacob and Abraham is
   fulfilled in subduing men's iniquities; as is implied in that of the
   prophet Micah vii. 19, 20.

   Corol. 2. Hence also it appears, that the first gospel promise that
   ever was made to mankind, that great prediction of the salvation of the
   Messiah, and his victory over Satan, made to our first parents, (Gen.
   iii. 15.) if there be no certain Prescience of the Volitions of moral
   Agents, must have no better foundation than conjecture. For Christ's
   victory over Satan consists in men's being saved from sin, and in the
   victory of virtue and holiness over that vice and wickedness which
   Satan by his temptations has introduced, and wherein his kingdom
   consists.

   6. If it be so, that God has not a Prescience of the future actions of
   moral Agents, it will follow, that the prophecies of Scripture in
   general are without Foreknowledge. For Scripture prophecies, almost all
   of them, if not universally, are either predictions of the actings and
   behaviour of moral Agents, or of events depending on them, or some way
   connected with them; judicial dispensations, judgments on men for their
   wickedness, or rewards of virtue and righteousness, remarkable
   manifestations of favour to the righteous, or manifestations of
   sovereign mercy to sinners, forgiving their iniquities, and magnifying
   the riches of divine grace; or dispensations of Providence, in some
   respect or other, relating to the conduct of the subjects of God's
   moral government, wisely adapted thereto; either providing for what
   should be in a future state of things, through the Volitions and
   voluntary actions of moral Agents, or consequent upon them, and
   regulated and ordered according to them. So that all events that are
   foretold, are either moral events, or others which are connected with
   and accommodated to them.

   That the predictions of Scripture in general must be without knowledge,
   if God does not foresee the Volitions of men, will further appear, if
   it be considered, that almost all events belonging to the future state
   of the world of mankind, the changes and revolutions which come to pass
   in empires, kingdoms, and nations, and all societies, depend, in ways
   innumerable, on the acts of men's Wills; yea, on an innumerable
   multitude of millions of Volitions. Such is the state and course of
   things in the world of mankind, that one single event, which appears in
   itself exceeding inconsiderable, may, in the progress and series of
   things, occasion a succession of the greatest and most important and
   extensive events; causing the state of mankind to be vastly different
   from what it would otherwise have been, for all succeeding generations.

   For instance, the coming into existence of those particular men, who
   have been the great conquerors of the world, which, under God, have had
   the main hand in all the consequent state of the world, in all
   after-ages; such as Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander, Pompey, Julius
   Caesar, &c. undoubtedly depended on many millions of acts of the Will,
   in their parents. And perhaps most of these Volitions depended on
   millions of Volitions in their contemporaries of the same generation;
   and most of these on millions of millions of Volitions in preceding
   generations.--As we go back, still the number of Volitions, which were
   some way the occasion of the event, multiply as the branches of a
   river, until they come at last, as it were, to an infinite number. This
   will not seem strange to any one who well considers the matter; if we
   recollect what philosophers tell us of the innumerable multitudes of
   those things which are the principia, or stamina vitae, concerned in
   generation; the animalcula in semine masculo, and the ova in the womb
   of the female; the impregnation or animating of one of these in
   distinction from all the rest, must depend on things infinitely minute
   relating to the time and circumstances of the act of the parents, the
   state of their bodies, &c. which must depend on innumerable foregoing
   circumstances and occurrences; which must depend, infinite ways, on
   foregoing acts of their Wills; which are occasioned by innumerable
   things that happen in the course of their lives, in which their own and
   their neighbor's behaviour must have a hand, an infinite number of
   ways. And as the Volitions of others must be so many ways concerned in
   the conception and birth of such men; so, no less, in their
   preservation, and circumstances of life, their particular
   determinations and actions, on which the great revolutions they were
   the occasions of, depended. As, for instance, when the conspirators in
   Persia, against the Magi, were consulting about a succession to the
   empire, it came into the mind of one of them, to propose, that he whose
   horse neighed first, when they came together the next morning, should
   be king. Now, such a thing coming into his mind, might depend on
   innumerable incidents, wherein the Volitions of mankind had been
   concerned. But, in consequence of this accident, Darius, the son of
   Hystaspes, was king. And if this had not been, probably his successor
   would not have been the same, and all the circumstances of the Persian
   empire might have been far otherwise: Then perhaps Alexander might
   never have conquered that empire; and then probably the circumstances
   of the world in all succeeding ages, might have been vastly otherwise.
   I might further instance in many other occurrences; such as those on
   which depended Alexander's preservation, in the many critical junctures
   of his life, wherein a small trifle would have turned the scale against
   him; and the preservation and success of the Roman people, in the
   infancy of their kingdom and commonwealth, and afterwards; upon which
   all the succeeding changes in their state, and the mighty revolutions
   that afterwards came to pass in the habitable world, depended. But
   these hints may be sufficient for every discerning considerate person,
   to convince him, that the whole state of the world of mankind, in all
   ages, and the very being of every person who has ever lived in it, in
   every age, since the times of the ancient prophets, has depended on
   more Volitions, or acts of the Wills of men, than there are sands on
   the sea-shore.

   And therefore, unless God does most exactly and perfectly foresee the
   fixture acts of men's Wills, all the predictions which he ever uttered
   concerning David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander;
   concerning the four monarchies, and the revolutions in them; and
   concerning all the wars, commotions, victories, prosperity, and
   calamities, of any kingdoms, nations, or communities in the world, have
   all been without knowledge.

   So that, according to this notion, God not foreseeing the Volitions and
   free actions of men, he could foresee nothing appertaining to the state
   of the world of mankind in future ages; not so much as the being of one
   person that should live in it: and could foreknow no events, but only
   such as he would bring to pass himself by the extraordinary
   interposition of his immediate power; or things which should come to
   pass in the natural material world, by the laws of motion, and course
   of nature, wherein that is independent on the actions or works of
   mankind: that is, as he might, like a very able mathematician and
   astronomer, with great exactness calculate the revolutions of the
   heavenly bodies, and the greater wheels of the machine of the external
   creation.

   And if we closely consider the matter, there will appear reason to
   convince us, that he could not, with any absolute certainty, foresee
   even these. As to the first, namely, things done by the immediate and
   extraordinary interposition of God's power, these cannot be foreseen,
   unless it can be foreseen when there shall be occasion for such
   extraordinary interposition. And that cannot be foreseen, unless the
   state of the moral world can be foreseen. For whenever God thus
   interposes, it is with regard to the state of the moral world,
   requiring such divine interposition. Thus God could not certainly
   foresee the universal deluge, the calling of Abraham, the destruction
   of Sodom and Gomorrah, the plagues on Egypt, and Israel's redemption
   out of it, the expelling of the seven nations of Canaan, and the
   bringing Israel into that land; for these all are represented as
   connected with things belonging to the state of the moral world. Nor
   can God foreknow the most proper and convenient time of the day of
   judgment and general conflagration; for that chiefly depends on the
   course and state of things in the moral World.

   Nor, Secondly, can we on this supposition reasonably think, that God
   can certainly foresee what things shall come to pass, in the course of
   things, in the natural and material world, even those which in an
   ordinary state of things might be calculated by a good astronomer. For
   the moral world is the end of the natural world; and the course of
   things in the former, is undoubtedly subordinate to God's designs with
   respect to the latter. Therefore he, has seen cause, from regard to the
   state of things in the moral world, extraordinarily to interpose, to
   interrupt, and lay an arrest on the course of things in the natural
   world; and unless he can foresee the Volitions of men, and so know
   something of the future state of the moral world, he cannot know but
   that he may still have as great occasion to interpose in this manner,
   as ever he had: nor can he foresee how, or when, he shall have occasion
   thus to interpose.

   Corol. 1. It appears from the things observed, that unless God foresees
   the Volitions of moral Agents, that cannot be true which is observed by
   the apostle James, (Acts xv. 18.) "Known unto God are all his works
   from the beginning of the world."

   Corol. 2. It appears, that unless God foreknows the Volitions of moral
   Agents, all the prophecies of Scripture have no better foundation than
   mere conjecture; and that, in most instances, a conjecture which must
   have the utmost uncertainty; depending on an innumerable multitude of
   Volitions, which are all, even to God, uncertain events: however, these
   prophecies are delivered as absolute predictions, and very many of them
   in the most positive manner, with asseverations; and some of them with
   the most solemn oaths.

   Corol. 3. It also follows, that if this notion of God's ignorance of
   future Volitions be true, in vain did Christ say, after uttering many
   great and important predictions, depending on men's moral actions,
   (Matt. xxiv. 35.) "Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my words shall
   not pass away."

   Corol. 4. From the same notion of God's ignorance, it would follow,
   that in vain has he himself often spoken of the predictions of his
   word, as evidences of Foreknowledge; of that which is his prerogative
   as GOD, and his peculiar glory, greatly distinguishing him from all
   other beings; (as in Isa. xli. 22-26; xliii. 9, 10; xliv. 8; xlv. 21;
   xlvi. 10; xlviii. 14.)

   Arg. II. If God does not foreknow the Volitions of moral Agents, then
   he did not foreknow the fall of man, nor of angels, and so could not
   foreknow the great things which are consequent on these events; such as
   his sending his Son into the world to die for sinners, and all things
   pertaining to the great work of redemption; all the things which were
   done for four thousand years before Christ came, to prepare the way for
   it; and the incarnation, life, death, resurrection, and ascension of
   Christ; setting Him at the head of the universe as King of heaven and
   earth, angels and men; and setting up his church and kingdom in this
   world, and appointing him the Judge of the world; and all that Satan
   should do in the world in opposition to the kingdom of Christ: and the
   great transactions of the day of judgment, &c. And if God was thus
   ignorant, the following scriptures, and others like them, must be
   without any meaning, or contrary to truth. (Eph. i. 4.) "According as
   he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world." (1 Pet.
   i. 20.)" Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
   world." (2 Tim. i. 9.) "Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy
   calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose,
   and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began."
   So (Eph. iii. 11.) speaking of the wisdom of God in the work of
   redemption, "according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in
   Christ Jesus." (Tit. i. 2.)"In hope of eternal life, which God that
   cannot lie, promised before the world began." (Rom. viii. 29.) "Whom he
   did foreknow, them he also did predestinate," &c. (1 Pet. i. 2.)"Elect,
   according to the foreknowledge of God the Father."

   If God did not foreknow the fall of man, nor the redemption by Jesus
   Christ, nor the Volitions of man since the fall; then he did not
   foreknow the saints in any sense; neither as particular persons, nor as
   societies or nations; either by election, or by mere foresight of their
   virtue or good works; or any foresight of any thing about them relating
   to their salvation; or any benefit they have by Christ, or any manner
   of concern of theirs with a Redeemer.

   ARG. III. On the supposition of God's ignorance of the future Volitions
   of free Agents, it will follow, that God must in many cases truly
   repent what he has done, so as properly to wish he had done otherwise:
   by reason that the event of things in those affairs which are most
   important, viz. the affairs of his moral kingdom, being uncertain and
   contingent, often happens quite otherwise than he was before aware of.
   And there would be reason to understand that, in the most literal
   sense, (Gen. vi. 6.) "It repented the Lord, that he had made man on the
   earth, and it grieved him at his heart," (and 1 Sam. xv. 11) contrary
   to Num. xxiii. 19."God is not the son of Man, that he should repent;"
   and 1 Sam. xv. 29."Also the Strength of Israel will not lie, nor
   repent; for he is not a man that he should repent." Yea, from this
   notion it would follow, that God is liable to repent and be grieved at
   his heart, in a literal sense, continually; and is always exposed to an
   infinite number of real disappointments in governing the world; and to
   manifold, constant, great perplexity and vexation: but this is not very
   consistent with his title of " God over all, blessed for evermore;"
   which represents him as possessed of perfect, constant, and
   uninterrupted tranquillity and felicity, as God over the universe, and
   in his management of the affairs of the world, as supreme and universal
   ruler. (See Rom. i. 25. ix. 5. 2 Cor. xi. 31. 1 Tim. vi. 15.)

   ARG. IV. It will also follow from this notion, that as God is liable to
   be continually repenting of what he has done; so he must be exposed to
   be constantly changing his mind and intentions, as to his future
   conduct; altering his measures, relinquishing his old designs, and
   forming new schemes and projects. For his purposes, even as to the main
   parts of his scheme, such as belong to the state of his moral kingdom,
   must be always liable to be broken, through want of foresight; and he
   must be continually putting his system to rights, as it gets out of
   order, through the contingence of the actions of moral Agents: he must.
   be a Being, who, instead of being absolutely immutable, must
   necessarily be the subject of infinitely the most numerous acts of
   repentance, and changes of intention, of any being whatsoever; for this
   plain reason, that his vastly extensive charge comprehends an
   infinitely greater number of those things which are to him contingent
   and uncertain. In such a situation, he must have little else to do, but
   to mend broken links as well as he can, and be rectifying his
   disjointed frame and disordered movements, in the best manner the case
   will allow, The Supreme Lord of all things must needs be under great
   and miserable disadvantages, in governing the world which he has made,
   and of which he has the care, through his being utterly unable to find
   out things of chief importance, which hereafter shall befall his
   system; for which, if he did but know, he might make seasonable
   provision. In many cases, there may be very great necessity that he
   should make provision, in the manner of his ordering and disposing
   things, for some great events which are to happen, of vast and
   extensive influence, and endless consequence to the universe; which he
   may see afterwards, when it is too late, and may wish in vain that he
   had known before, that he might have ordered his affairs accordingly.
   And it is in the power of man, on these principles, by his devices,
   purposes, and actions, thus to disappoint God, break his measures, make
   him continually change his mind, subject him to vexation, and bring him
   into confusion.

   But how do these things consist with reason, or with the word of God?
   Which represents, that all God's works, all that he has ever to do, the
   whole scheme and series of his operations, are from the beginning
   perfectly in his view; and declares, that whatever devices and designs
   are in the hearts of men, "the counsel of the Lord shall stand, and the
   thoughts of his heart to all generations," (Prov. xix. 21. Psal.
   xxxiii. 10, 11.) And "that which the Lord of hosts hath purposed, none
   shall disannul," Isa. xiv. 27.) And that he cannot be frustrated in one
   design or thought, (Job xlii. 2.) And "that which God doth, it shall be
   for ever, that nothing can be put to it, or taken from it," (Eccl. iii.
   14.) The stability and perpetuity of God's counsels are expressly
   spoken of as connected with his foreknowledge, (Isa. xlvi. 10.)
   "Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the
   things that are not yet done; saying, My counsel shall stand, and I
   will do my pleasure."--And how are these things consistent with what
   the Scripture says of God's immutability, which represents him as
   "without variableness, or shadow of turning;" and speaks of him, most
   particularly, as unchangeable with regard to his purposes, (Mal. iii.
   6.) "I am the Lord; I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
   consumed." (Exod. iii. 14.) "i am that i am." (Job xxiii. 13, 14.) He
   is in one mind; and who can turn him? And what his soul desireth, even
   that he doth: for he performeth the thing that is appointed for me."

   ARG. V. If this notion of God's ignorance of future Volitions of moral
   Agents be thoroughly considered in its consequences, it will appear to
   follow from it, that God, after he had made the world, was liable to be
   wholly frustrated of his end in the creation of it; and so has been, in
   like manner, liable to be frustrated of his end in all the great works
   he had wrought. It is manifest, the moral world is the end of the
   natural: the rest of the creation is but a house which God hath built,
   with furniture, for moral Agents: and the good or bad state of the
   moral world depends on the improvement they make of their natural
   Agency, and so depends on their Volitions. And therefore, if these
   cannot be foreseen by God, because they are contingent, and subject to
   no kind of necessity, then the affairs of the moral world are liable to
   go wrong, to any assignable degree; yea, liable to be utterly ruined.
   As on this scheme, it may well be supposed to be literally said, when
   mankind, by the abuse of their moral Agency, became very corrupt before
   the flood, " that the Lord repented that he had made man on the earth,
   and it grieved him at his heart;" so, when he made the universe, he did
   not know but that he might be so disappointed in it, that it might
   grieve him at his heart that he had made it. It actually proved, that
   all mankind became sinful, and a very great part of the angels
   apostatized: and how could God know before, that all of them would not?
   And how could God know but that all mankind, notwithstanding means used
   to reclaim them, being still left to the freedom of their own Will,
   would continue in their apostasy, and grow worse and worse, as they of
   the old world before the flood did?

   According to the scheme I am endeavouring to confute, the fall of
   neither men nor angels could be foreseen, and God must be greatly
   disappointed in these events; and so the grand contrivance for our
   redemption, and destroying the works of the devil, by the Messiah, and
   all the great things God has done in the prosecution of these designs,
   must be only the fruits of his own disappointment; contrivances to
   mend, as well as he could, his system, which originally was all very
   good, and perfectly beautiful; but was broken and confounded by the
   free Will of angels and men. And still he must be liable to be totally
   disappointed a second time: he could not know, that he should have his
   desired success, in the incarnation, life, death, resurrection, and
   exaltation of his only-begotten Son, and other great works accomplished
   to restore the state of things: he could not know, after all, whether
   there would actually be any tolerable measure of restoration; for this
   depended on the free Will of man. There has been a general great
   apostasy of almost all the Christian world, to that which was worse
   than heathenism; which continued for many ages. And how could God,
   without foreseeing men's Volitions, know whether ever Christendom would
   return from this apostasy? And which way would he foretell how soon it
   would begin? The apostle says, it began to work in his time; and how
   could it be known how far it would proceed in that age? Yea, how could
   it be known that the gospel which was not effectual for the reformation
   of the Jews, would ever be effectual for the turning of the heathen
   nations from their heathen apostasy, which they had been confirmed in
   for so many ages?

   It is represented often in Scripture, that God, who made the world for
   himself, and created it for his pleasure, would infallibly obtain his
   end in the creation, and in all his works; that as all things are of
   him, so they would all be to him; and that in the final issue of
   things, it would appear that he is "the first, and the last." (Rev.
   xxi. 6.) "And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the
   beginning and the end, the first and the last." But these things are
   not consistent with God's liability to be disappointed in all his
   works, nor indeed with his failing of his end in any thing that he has
   undertaken.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [122] 2 Kings viii. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XII.

   God's certain Foreknowledge of the future volitions of moral agents,
   inconsistent with such a Contingence of those volitions as is without
   all Necessity.

   Having proved, that God has a certain and infallible Prescience of the
   voluntary acts of moral agents, I come now, in the second place, to
   show the consequence; how it follows from hence, that these events are
   necessary, with a Necessity of connexion or consequence.

   The chief Arminian divines, so far as I have had opportunity to
   observe, deny this consequence; and affirm, that if such Foreknowledge
   be allowed, it is no evidence of any Necessity of the event foreknown.
   Now I desire, that this matter may be particularly and thoroughly
   inquired into. I cannot but think. that on particular and full
   consideration, it may be perfectly determined, whether it be indeed so
   or not.

   In order to a proper consideration of this matter, I would observe the
   following things.

   l. It is very evident, that, with regard to a thing whose existence is
   infallibly and indissolubly connected with something which already
   hath, or has had existence, the existence of that thing is necessary.
   Here may be noted the following particulars:

   1. I observed before, in explaining the nature of Necessity, that in
   things which are past, their past existence is now necessary: having
   already made sure of existence, it is too late for any possibility of
   alteration in that respect; it is now impossible that it should be
   otherwise than true, that the thing has existed.

   2. If there be any such thing as a divine Foreknowledge of the
   volitions of free agents, that Foreknowledge, by the supposition, is a
   thing which already has, and long ago had existence; and so, now its
   existence is necessary; it is now utterly impossible to be otherwise,
   than that this Foreknowledge should be or should have been.

   3. It is also very manifest, that those things which are indissolubly
   connected with other things that are necessary, are themselves
   necessary. As that proposition whose truth is necessarily connected
   with another proposition, which is necessarily true, is itself
   necessarily true. To say otherwise would be a contradiction: it would
   be in effect to say, that the connexion was indissoluble, and yet was
   not so, but might be broken. If that, the existence of which is
   indissolubly connected with something whose existence is now necessary,
   is itself not necessary, then it may possibly not exist,
   notwithstanding that indissoluble connexion of its existence.--Whether
   the absurdity be not glaring, let the reader judge.

   4. It is no less evident, that if there be a full, certain, and
   infallible Foreknowledge of the future existence of the volitions of
   moral agents, then there is a certain, infallible, and indissoluble
   connexion between those events and that Foreknowledge; and that
   therefore, by the preceding observations, those events are necessary
   events; being infallibly and indissolubly connected with that, whose
   existence already is, and so is now necessary, and cannot but have
   been.

   To say, the Foreknowledge is certain and infallible, and yet the
   connexion of the event with that Foreknowledge is dissoluble and
   fallible, is very absurd. To affirm it, would be the same thing as to
   affirm, that there is no necessary connexion between a proposition
   being infallibly known to be true, and its being true indeed. So that
   it is perfectly demonstrable, that if there be any infallible knowledge
   of future volitions, the event is necessary; or, in other words, that
   it is impossible but the event should come to pass. For if it be not
   impossible but that it may be otherwise, then it is not impossible but
   that the proposition which affirms its future coming to pass, may not
   now be true. There is this absurdity in it, that it is not impossible,
   but that there now should be no truth in that proposition, which is now
   infallibly known to be true.

   II. That no future event can be certainly foreknown, whose existence is
   contingent, and without all Necessity, may be proved thus; it is
   impossible for a thing to be certainly known to any intellect without
   evidence. To suppose otherwise, implies a contradiction: because for a
   thing to be certainly known to any understanding, is for it to be
   evident to that understanding: and for a thing to be evident to any
   understanding is the same thing, as for that understanding to see
   evidence of it: but no understanding, created or uncreated, can see
   evidence where there is none; for that is the same thing, as to see
   that to be which is not. And therefore, if there be any truth which is
   absolutely without evidence, that truth is absolutely unknowable,
   insomuch that it implies a contradiction to suppose that it is known.

   But if there be any future event, whose existence is contingent,
   without all Necessity, the future existence of the event is absolutely
   without evidence. If there be any evidence of it, it must be one of
   these two sorts, either self-evidence or proof; an evident thing must
   be either evident in itself; or evident in something else: that is,
   evident by connexion with something else. But a future thing, whose
   existence is without all Necessity, can have neither of these sorts of
   evidence. It cannot be self-evident: for if it be, it may be now known,
   by what is now to be seen in the thing itself; its present existence,
   or the Necessity of its nature: but both these are contrary to the
   supposition. It is supposed, both that the thing has no present
   existence to be seen; and also that it is not of such a nature as to be
   necessarily existent for the future: so that its future existence is
   not self-evident. And secondly, neither is there any proof, or evidence
   in any thing else, or evidence of connexion with something else that is
   evident; for this is also contrary to the supposition. It is supposed
   that there is now nothing existent, with which the future existence of
   the contingent event is connected. For such a connexion destroys its
   contingence, and supposes Necessity. Thus it is demonstrated, that
   there is in the nature of things absolutely no evidence at all of the
   future existence of that event, which is contingent, without all
   Necessity, (if any such event there be,) neither self-evidence nor
   proof. And therefore the thing in reality is not evident; and so cannot
   be seen to be evident, or, which is the same thing, cannot be known.

   Let us consider this in an example. Suppose that five thousand seven
   hundred and sixty years ago, there was no other being but the Divine
   Being; and then this world, or some particular body or spirit, all at
   once starts out of nothing into being, and takes on itself a particular
   nature and form; all in absolute Contingence, without any concern of
   God, or any other cause, in the matter; without any manner of ground or
   reason of its existence; or any dependence upon, or connexion at all
   with any thing foregoing: I say, that if this be supposed, there was no
   evidence of that event beforehand. There was no evidence of it to be
   seen in the thing itself; for the thing itself, as yet, was not. And
   there was no evidence of it to be seen in any thing else; for evidence
   in something else, is connexion with something else: but such connexion
   is contrary to the supposition. There was no evidence before, that this
   thing would happen; for by the supposition, there was no reason why it
   should happen, rather than something else, or rather than nothing. And
   if so, then all things before were exactly equal, and the same, with
   respect to that and other possible things; there was no preponderation,
   no superior weight or value; and therefore, nothing that could be of
   weight or value to determine any understanding. The thing was
   absolutely without evidence, and absolutely unknowable. An increase of
   understanding, or of the capacity of discerning, has no tendency, and
   makes no advance, towards discerning any signs or evidences of it, let
   it be increased never so much; yea, if it be increased infinitely. The
   increase of the strength of sight may have a tendency to enable to
   discern the evidence which is far off, and very much hid, and deeply
   involved in clouds and darkness; but it has no tendency to enable to
   discern evidence where there is none. If the sight be infinitely
   strong, and the capacity of discerning infinitely great, it will enable
   to see all that there is, and to see it perfectly, and with ease; yet
   it has no tendency at all to enable a being to discern that evidence
   which is not; but on the contrary, it has a tendency to enable to
   discern with great certainty that there is none.

   III. To suppose the future volitions of moral agents not to be
   necessary events; or, which is the same thing, events which it is not
   impossible but that they may not come to pass; and yet to suppose that
   God certainly foreknows them, and knows all things; is to suppose God's
   knowledge to be inconsistent with itself. For to say, that God
   certainly, and without all conjecture, knows that a thing will
   infallibly be, which at the same time he knows to be so contingent,
   that it may possibly not be, is to suppose his knowledge inconsistent
   with itself; or that one thing he knows, is utterly inconsistent with
   another thing he knows. It is the same as to say, he now knows a
   proposition to be of certain infallible truth, which he knows to be of
   contingent uncertain truth. If a future volition is so without all
   Necessity, that nothing hinders but it may not be, then the proposition
   which asserts its future existence, is so uncertain, that nothing
   hinders, but that the truth of it may entirely fail. And if God knows
   all things, he knows this proposition to be thus uncertain. And that is
   inconsistent with his knowing that it is infallibly true; and so
   inconsistent with his infallibly knowing that it is true. If the thing
   be indeed contingent, God views it so, and judges it to be contingent,
   if he views things as they are. If the event be not necessary, then it
   is possible it may never be: and if it be possible it may never be, God
   knows it may possibly never be; and that is to know that the
   proposition, which affirms its existence, may possibly not be true; and
   that is to know that the truth of it is uncertain; which surely is
   inconsistent with his knowing it as a certain truth. If volitions are
   in themselves contingent events, without all Necessity, then it is no
   argument of perfection of knowledge in any being to determine
   peremptorily that they will be; but on the contrary, an argument of
   ignorance and mistake; because it would argue, that he supposes that
   proposition to be certain, which in its own nature, and all things
   considered, is uncertain and contingent. To say, in such a case, that
   God may have ways of knowing contingent events which we cannot conceive
   of, is ridiculous; as much so, as to say, that God may know
   contradictions to be true, for ought we know; or that he may know a
   thing to be certain, and at the same time know it not to be certain,
   though we cannot conceive how; because he has ways of knowing which we
   cannot comprehend.

   Corol. 1. From what has been observed it is evident, that the absolute
   decrees of God are no more inconsistent with human liberty, on account
   of any Necessity of the event, which follows from such decrees, than
   the absolute Foreknowledge of God. Because the connexion between the
   event and certain Foreknowledge, is as infallible and indissoluble, as
   between the event and an absolute decree. That is, it is no more
   impossible, that the event and decree should not agree together, than
   that the event and absolute Knowledge should disagree. The connexion
   between the event and Foreknowledge is absolutely perfect, by the
   supposition: because it is supposed, that the certainty and
   infallibility of the Knowledge is absolutely perfect. And it being so,
   the certainty cannot be increased; and therefore the connexion, between
   the Knowledge and thing known, cannot be increased; so that if a decree
   be added to the Foreknowledge, it does not at all increase the
   connexion, or make it more infallible and indissoluble. If it were not
   so, the certainty of Knowledge might be increased by the addition of a
   decree; which is contrary to the supposition, which is, that the
   Knowledge is absolutely perfect, or perfect to the highest possible
   degree.

   There is as much impossibility but that the things which are infallibly
   foreknown, should be, or, which is the same thing, as great a Necessity
   of their future existence, as if the event were already written down,
   and was known and read by all mankind, through all preceding ages, and
   there was the most indissoluble and perfect connexion possible between
   the writing and the thing written. In such a case, it would be as
   impossible the event should fail of existence, as if it had existed
   already; and a decree cannot make an event surer or more necessary than
   this.

   And therefore, if there be any such Foreknowledge, as it has been
   proved there is, then Necessity of connexion and consequence is not at
   all inconsistent with any liberty which man, or any other creature,
   enjoys. And from hence it may be inferred, that absolute decrees, which
   do not at all increase the Necessity, are not inconsistent with the
   liberty which man enjoys, on any such account, as that they make the
   event decreed necessary, and render it utterly impossible but that it
   should come to pass. Therefore, if absolute decrees are inconsistent
   with man's liberty as a moral agent, or his liberty in a state of
   probation, or any liberty whatsoever that he enjoys, it is not on
   account of any Necessity which absolute decrees infer.

   Dr. Whitby supposes, there is a great difference between God's
   Foreknowledge, and his decrees, with regard to Necessity of future
   events. In his Discourse on the five Points, (p. 474, &c.) he says,
   "God's Prescience has no influence at all on our actions.--Should God,
   says he, by immediate revelation, give me the knowledge of the event of
   any man's state or actions, would my knowledge of them have any
   influence upon his actions? Surely none at all.--Our knowledge doth not
   affect the things we know, to make them more certain, or more fixture,
   than they could be without it. Now, Foreknowledge in God is Knowledge.
   As therefore Knowledge has no influence on things that are, so neither
   has Foreknowledge on things that shall be. And consequently, the
   Foreknowledge of any action that would be otherwise free, cannot alter
   or diminish that freedom. Whereas God's decree of election is powerful
   and active, and comprehends the preparation and exhibition of such
   means, as shall unfrustrably produce the end.--Hence God's Prescience
   renders no actions necessary." And to this purpose, (p. 473.) he cites
   Origen, where he says, "God's Prescience is not the cause of things
   future, but their being future is the cause of God's Prescience that
   they will be:" and Le Blanc, where he says, "This is the truest
   resolution of this difficulty, that Prescience is not the cause that
   things are future; but their being future is the cause they are
   foreseen." In like manner, Dr. Clark, in his Demonstration of the Being
   and Attributes of God, (p. 95 - 99.) And the Author of The Freedom of
   the Will, in God and Creature, speaking to the like purpose with Dr.
   Whitby, represents "Foreknowledge as having no more influence on things
   known, to make them necessary, than After-knowledge," or to that
   purpose.

   To all which I would say; that what is said about Knowledge, its not
   having influence on the thing known to make it necessary, is nothing to
   the purpose, nor does it in the least affect the foregoing reasoning.
   Whether Prescience be the thing that makes the event necessary or no,
   it alters not the case. Infallible Foreknowledge may prove the
   Necessity of the event foreknown, and yet not be the thing which causes
   the Necessity. [123] If the Foreknowledge be absolute, this proves the
   event known to be necessary, or proves that it is impossible but that
   the event should be, by some means or other, either by a decree, or
   some other way, if there be any other way: because, as was said before,
   it is absurd to say, that a proposition is known to be certainly and
   infallibly true, which yet may possibly prove not true.

   The whole of the seeming force of this evasion lies in this; that,
   inasmuch as certain Foreknowledge does not cause an event to be
   necessary, as a decree does; therefore it does not prove it to be
   necessary, as a decree does. But there is no force in this arguing: for
   it is built wholly on this supposition, that nothing can prove or be an
   evidence of a thing being necessary, but that which has a causal
   influence to make it so. But this can never be maintained. If certain
   Foreknowledge of the future existence of an event be not the thing
   which first makes it impossible that it should fail of existence; yet
   it may, and certainly does demonstrate, that it is impossible it should
   fail of it, however that impossibility comes. If Foreknowledge be not
   the cause, but the effect of this impossibility, it may prove that
   there is such an impossibility, as much as if it were the cause. It is
   as strong arguing from the effect to the cause, as from the cause to
   the effect. It is enough, that an existence, which is infallibly
   foreknown, cannot fail, whether that impossibility arises from the
   Foreknowledge, or is prior to it. It is as evident as any thing can be,
   that it is impossible a thing, which is infallibly known to be true,
   should prove not to be true; therefore there is a Necessity that it
   should be otherwise; whether the Knowledge be the cause of this
   Necessity, or the Necessity the cause of the Knowledge.

   All certain Knowledge, whether it be Foreknowledge or After-knowledge,
   or concomitant Knowledge, proves the thing known now to he necessary,
   by some means or other; or proves that it is impossible it should now
   be otherwise than true.--I freely allow, that Foreknowledge does not
   prove a thing to be necessary any more than After-knowledge: but then
   After-knowledge, which is certain and infallible, proves that it is now
   become impossible but that the proposition known should be true.
   Certain After-knowledge proves that it is now, by some means or other,
   become impossible but that the proposition, which predicates past
   existence on the event, should be true. And so does certain
   Foreknowledge prove, that now, in the time of the Knowledge, it is, by
   some means or other, become impossible but that the proposition, which
   predicates future existence on the event, should be true. The necessity
   of the truth of the propositions, consisting in the present
   impossibility of the non-existence of the event affirmed, in both
   cases, is the immediate ground of the certainty of the Knowledge; there
   can be no certainty of Knowledge without it.

   There must he a certainty in things themselves, before they are
   certainly known, or which is the same thing, known to be certain. For
   certainty of Knowledge is nothing else but knowing or discerning the
   certainty there is in the things themselves, which are known. Therefore
   there must be a certainty in things to be a ground of certainty of
   Knowledge, and to render things capable of being known to be certain.
   And there is nothing but the necessity of truth known, or its being
   impossible but that it should be true; or, in other words, the firm and
   infallible connexion between the subject and predicate of the
   proposition that contains that truth. All certainty of Knowledge
   consists in the view of the firmness of that connexion. So God's
   certain Foreknowledge of the future existence of any event, is his view
   of the firm and indissoluble connexion of the subject and predicate of
   the proposition that affirms its future existence. The subject is that
   possible event; the predicate is its future existence, but if future
   existence be firmly and indissolubly connected with that event, then
   the future existence of that event is necessary. If God certainly knows
   the future existence of an event which is wholly contingent, and may
   possibly never be, then, he sees a firm connexion between a subject and
   predicate that are not firmly connected; which is a contradiction.

   I allow what Dr. Whitby says to be true, that mere Knowledge does not
   affect the thing known, to make it more certain or more future. But
   yet, I say, it supposes and proves the thing to be already, both future
   and certain; i. e. necessarily future. Knowledge of futurity, supposes
   futurity; and a certain Knowledge of futurity, supposes certain
   futurity, antecedent to that certain Knowledge. But there is no other
   certain futurity of a thing, antecedent to certainty of Knowledge, than
   a prior impossibility but that the thing should prove true; or, which
   is the same thing, the Necessity of the event.

   I would observe one thing further; that if it be as those forementioned
   writers suppose, that God's Foreknowledge is not the cause, but the
   effect of the existence of the event foreknown; this is so far from
   showing that this Foreknowledge doth not infer the Necessity of the
   existence of that event, that it rather shows the contrary the more
   plainly. Because it shows the existence of the event to be so settled
   and firm, that it is as if it had already been; inasmuch as in effect
   it actually exists already; its future existence has already had actual
   influence and efficiency, and has produced an effect, viz. Prescience:
   the effect exists already; and as the effect supposes the cause, and
   depends entirely upon it, therefore it is as if the future event, which
   is the cause, had existed already. The effect is firm as possible, it
   having already the possession of existence, and has made sure of it.
   But the effect cannot be more firm and stable than its cause, ground,
   and reason. The building cannot be firmer than the foundation.

   To illustrate this matter; let us suppose the appearances and images of
   things in a glass, for instance, a reflecting telescope, to be the real
   effects of heavenly bodies (at a distance, and out of sight) which they
   resemble: if it be so, then, as these images in the telescope have had
   a past actual existence, and it is become utterly impossible now that
   it should be otherwise than that they have existed; so they being the
   true effects of the heavenly bodies they resemble, this proves the
   existence of those heavenly bodies to be as real, infallible, firm, and
   necessary, as the existence of these effects; the one being connected
   with, and wholly depending on the other.--Now let us suppose future
   existences, some way or other, to have influence back, to produce
   effects beforehand, and cause exact and perfect images of themselves in
   a glass, a thousand years before they exist, yea, in all preceding
   ages; but yet that these images are real effects of these future
   existences, perfectly dependent on, and connected with their cause.
   These effects and images having already had actual existence, render
   that matter of their existence perfectly firm and stable, and utterly
   impossible to be otherwise; and this proves, as in the other instance,
   that the existence of the things, which are their causes, is also
   equally sure, firm, and necessary; and that it is alike impossible but
   that they should be, as if they had been already, as their effects
   have. And if instead of images in a glass, we suppose the antecedent
   effects to be perfect ideas of them in the Divine Mind, which have
   existed there from all eternity, which are as properly effects, as
   truly and properly connected with their cause, the case is not altered.

   Another thing which has been said by some Arminians, to take off the
   force of what is urged from God's Prescience, against the continuance
   of the volitions of moral agents, is to this purpose; "That when we
   talk of Foreknowledge in God, there is no strict propriety in our so
   speaking; and that although it be true, that there is in God the most
   perfect Knowledge of all events from eternity to eternity, yet there is
   no such thing as before and after in God, but he sees all things by one
   perfect unchangeable view, without any succession."--To this I answer,

   1. It has been already shown, that all certain Knowledge proves the
   Necessity of the truth known; whether it be before, after, or at the
   same time.--Though it be true, that there is no succession in God's
   Knowledge, and the manner of his Knowledge is to us inconceivable, yet
   thus much we know concerning it, that there is no event, past, present,
   or to come, that God is ever uncertain of. He never is, never was, and
   never will be without infallible Knowledge of it; he always sees the
   existence of it to be certain and infallible. And as he always sees
   things just as they are in truth; hence there never is in reality any
   thing contingent in such a sense, as that possibly it may happen never
   to exist. If, strictly speaking, there is no Foreknowledge in God, it
   is because those things, which are future to us, are as present to God,
   as if they already had existence: and that is as much as to say, that
   future events are always in God's view as evident, clear, sure, and
   necessary, as if they already were. If there never is a time wherein
   the existence of the event is not present with God, then there never is
   a time wherein it is not as much impossible for it to fail of
   existence, as if its existence were present, and were already come to
   pass.

   God viewing things so perfectly and unchangeably, as that there is no
   succession in his ideas or judgment, does not hinder but that there is
   properly now, in the mind of God, a certain and perfect Knowledge of
   the moral actions of men, which to us are an hundred years hence: yea
   the objection supposes this; and therefore it certainly does not hinder
   but that, by the foregoing arguments, it is now impossible these moral
   actions should not come to pass.

   We know, that God foreknows the future voluntary actions of men, in
   such a sense, as that he is able particularly to foretell them, and
   cause them to be recorded, as he often has done; and therefore that
   necessary connexion which there is between God's Knowledge and the
   event known, as much proves the event to be necessary beforehand, as if
   the Divine Knowledge were in the same sense before the event, as the
   prediction or writing is. If the Knowledge be infallible, then the
   expression of it in the written prediction is infallible; that is,
   there is an infallible connexion between that written prediction and
   the event. And if so, then it is impossible it should ever be
   otherwise, than that the prediction and the event should agree: and
   this is the same thing as to say, it is impossible but that the event
   should come to pass: and this is the same as to say that its coming to
   pass is necessary.--So that it is manifest, that there being no proper
   succession in God's mind, makes no alteration as to the Necessity of
   the existence of the events known. Yea,

   2. This is so far from weakening the proof, given of the impossibility
   of future events known, not coming to pass, as that it establishes the
   foregoing arguments, and shows the clearness of the evidence. For,

   (1.) The very reason, why God's Knowledge is without succession, is,
   because it is absolutely perfect, to the highest possible degree of
   clearness and certainty. All things, whether past, present, or to come,
   being viewed with equal evidence and fulness; future things being seen
   with as much clearness, as if they were present; the view is always in
   absolute perfection; and absolute constant perfection admits of no
   alteration, and so no succession; the actual existence of the thing
   known, does not at all increase or add to the clearness or certainty of
   the thing known: God calls the things that are not, as though they
   were; they are all one to him as if they had already existed. But
   herein consists the strength of the demonstration before given; that it
   is as impossible they should fail of existence, as if they existed
   already. This objection, instead of weakening the argument, sets it in
   the strongest light; for it supposes it to be so indeed, that the
   existence of future events is in God's view so much as if it already
   had been, that when they come actually to exist, it makes not the least
   alteration or variation in his Knowledge of them.

   (2.) The objection is founded on the immutability of God's Knowledge:
   for it is the immutability of Knowledge that makes it to be without
   succession. But this most directly and plainly demonstrates the thing I
   insist on, viz. that it is utterly impossible the known events should
   fail of existence. For if that were possible, then a change in God's
   Knowledge and view of things, were possible. For if the known event
   should not come into being, as God expected, then he would see it, and
   so would change his mind, and see his former mistake; and thus there
   would be change and succession in his Knowledge. But as God is
   immutable, and it is infinitely impossible that his view should be
   changed; so it is, for the same reason, just so impossible that the
   foreknown event should not exist; and that is to be impossible in the
   highest degree; and therefore the contrary is necessary. Nothing is
   more impossible than that the immutable God should be changed, by the
   succession of time; who comprehends all things, from eternity to
   eternity, in one, most perfect, and unalterable view; so that his whole
   eternal duration is vitae interminabilis, tota, simul et perfecta
   possessio.

   On the whole, I need not fear to say, that there is no geometrical
   theorem or proposition whatsoever, more capable of strict
   demonstration, than that God's certain Prescience of the volitions of
   moral agents is inconsistent with such a Contingence of these events,
   as is without all Necessity; and so is inconsistent with the Arminian
   notion of liberty.

   Corol. 2. Hence the doctrine of the Calvinists, concerning the absolute
   decrees of God, does not all infer any more fatality in things, than
   will demonstrably follow from the doctrine of the most Arminian
   divines, who acknowledge God's omniscience, and universal Prescience.
   Therefore all objections they make against the doctrine of the
   Calvinists, as implying Hobbes's doctrine of Necessity, or the stoical
   doctrine of fate, lie no more against the doctrine of Calvinists, than
   their own doctrine: and therefore it doth not become those divines, to
   raise such an outcry against the Calvinists, on this account.

   Corol. 3. Hence all arguments of Arminians, who own God's omniscience,
   against the doctrine of the inability of unregenerate men to perform
   the conditions of salvation, and the commands of God requiring
   spiritual duties, and against the Calvinistic doctrine of efficacious
   grace; on this ground, that those doctrines, though they do not suppose
   men to be under any constraint or coaction, yet suppose them under
   Necessity, must fall to the ground. And their arguments against the
   Necessity of men's volitions, taken from the reasonableness of God's
   commands, promises, and threatenings, and the sincerity of his counsels
   and invitations; and all objections against any doctrines of the
   Calvinists as being inconsistent with human liberty, because they infer
   Necessity; I say, all these arguments and objections must be justly
   esteemed vain and frivolous, as coming from them; being leveled against
   their own doctrine, as well as against that of the Calvinists. [124]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [123] This distinction is of great importance in the present
   controversy; and the want of attending to the true ground on which it
   stands, has been, we presume, the principal cause of Dr. Whitby's
   objections, and those of most, if not all, other Arminian writers. They
   seem to consider, in this argument, no other necessity but the
   decretive, as maintained by their opponents; and therefore infer, that
   to allow any kind of necessity, is the same as to allow an infallible
   decree. From this view the transition is easy to another conclusion,
   viz. that if any thing is foreknown because it is decreed, every thing
   is foreknown on the same ground, of for the same reason.--And then,
   this proving too much --the decretive appointment of all the evil in
   the universe, which they are sure is incompatible with the divine
   character, and therefore impossible--they reject the whole doctrine of
   necessity as a ground of foreknowledge; and suppose that, though they
   cannot clearly disprove what is advanced against them, they infer that
   there is somehow a sophism in the reasoning of their opponents, or some
   false principle assumed were they but happy enough to detect it. But
   our author, in this reasoning, does not maintain, that the connexion by
   which every event is evidently certain, and therefore necessary, is so
   because decreed. The truth is, that some events are foreknown to be
   certain because foreordained; and others, because of the tendency there
   is in the nature of things themselves.--Should any, in the way of
   objection, assert, that the nature of things is itself derived from the
   divine will, or decree; we apprehend there is no evidence to support
   such an assertion. For instance, is it owing to a decree that the
   nature of any created being is dependent on the first cause? That a
   creature, however exalted, is not infinite? That any relation should
   subsist between the Creator and a creature? Or that, if equal
   quantities be taken from equal quantities, the remainders will be
   equal? Is there any room, in thought, for a supposition of nay decree
   in the case? Nay more, does it appear possible for a decree to have
   made such things otherwise? Let it be observed, however, that God is
   the almighty Sovereign over nature--not indeed so far as to alter the
   nature of things, which in reality is no object of power, any more than
   to make spirit to be the same thing as matter, and vice versa, or the
   working of contradictions is an object of power, but--by the position
   of antecedents, and establishing premises. To illustrate this, let it
   be supposed, if God create a world, that world must depend upon him, as
   a necessary consequence. To deny this, is to deny the nature and
   identity of things. For what is it to create, but for an independent
   cause to impart, ad extra, a dependent existence? So that to deny
   dependence, is to deny creation. But though the consequences be
   necessary, if the antecedent be established; yet the antecedent itself
   is not necessary, except from the decree; for there is not, in the
   nature of things, any antecedent necessity that a world be created.
   That is, to suppose its non-existence implies no contradiction, it
   being evidently the effect of sovereign pleasure. Hence to deny the
   consequence, on supposition of the antecedent, is to deny the nature of
   things, and to assert a contradiction, thought the antecedent itself be
   not necessary. And hence also in the instance now specified among
   others innumerable, the antecedent is an object of decree, but not the
   consequence. It is as absurd to say, that God decreed the dependence of
   the world upon himself, as it is to say, he decreed that two and two
   shall be equal to four, rather than to five. These remarks, duly
   considered in their just consequences, will abundantly show, that some
   things are necessary because decreed,--as the creation, the
   preservation, and the government of the world; the redemption, the
   purification, and the salvation of the church:--and that other
   things--as all imperfections, dependence, relations, and especially
   moral evils--come to be necessary, and so capable of being foreknown,
   only by connexion, of consequence. That is, if the antecedent, which is
   under the control of the Almighty Sovereign, be admitted, the
   consequence follows infallibly from the nature of things. But if
   another antecedent be established, another consequence will follow,
   with equal certainty, also from the nature of things. For instance: if
   holiness be given and continued to a redeemed creature, as an
   antecedent; excellence, honour, and happiness are the necessary
   consequences. But if sin operate without control, as the antecedent,
   dishonour and misery must be the necessary consequence from the same
   cause.--W.

   [124] In these two sections our author has abundantly demonstrated,
   that foreknowledge infers necessity; such a necessity as exists in the
   connexion of a consequent with its antecedent; and has represented, in
   various lights, how the most contradictory and absurd conclusions
   follow from the opposite hypothesis. But as his argument, strictly
   speaking, did not require a further explanation or distinction of the
   principles on which it rested, which yet are important, it may not be
   improper in this place briefly to inquire into the rationale of those
   principles; by which his reasoning may appear with additional evidence,
   and the radical principles themselves confirmed by their connexion with
   others. As these remarks are presented in the form of a series
   analytically disposed, we shall prefix to them the corresponding
   ordinal numbers. 1. Any kind of necessity is a sufficient ground of
   foreknowledge, in the view of omniscience; but as is the kind of
   necessity, or the nature of the connexion between cause and effect, so
   is the nature of the foreknowledge. But this difference in the nature
   of the connexion affects--not the certainty of the event, but the mode
   of causation; or from what cause the certainty arises. 2. All
   necessity, or certainty of connexion between antecedent and consequent,
   must arise form one of these two cources, viz. the nature of things,
   or, the decree of god. Chance is nothing; and nothing has no
   properties, consequently has no causal influence. 3. The necessity
   which arises from the nature of things, is either absolute or
   hypothetical. absolute necessity belongs only to the first cause, or
   God. He exists absolutely; and to suppose him not to exist, or not to
   have exited, is a contradiction. For the supposition itself is made by
   a confessedly contingent being; but a contingent being necessarily
   implies an absolute being, with as much certainty as an effect implies
   a cause; and consequently a first cause. 4. The first cause excepted,
   every other being, or mode of being, or nay event whatever, is only of
   hypothetical necessity. Any event is necessary, only on account of its
   relation to the first cause. This relation, or necessary connexion,
   between an event and the first cause, is either in the way of contrast,
   or in the way of dependence. 5. There are two things necessarily
   related to the first cause by way of contrast; passive power, which is
   a natural evil--if limited existence, dependence, and insufficiency, in
   their necessary tendency, may be so called--and sin, which is a moral
   evil; or something which, in point of obligation, ought not to be. 6.
   The other mode of necessary relation to the first cause, arising from
   the nature of things, is a that of dependence. Every contingent being
   and event must necessarily depend upon god, as an effect depends upon
   its cause. Nor is it conceivable without involving the grossest
   contradiction and absurdity, that any contingent being should continue
   to exist, any more that begin to exist, independent of the first cause.
   Sublata causa, tollitur effectus, is justly entitled to be called an
   axiom in metaphysical science. 7. It was before observed, that all
   necessity must arise either from the nature of things, or from the
   decree of God. What arises from the nature of things, as a consequence,
   has for its antecedent, either an efficient of a deficient cause. 8. A
   defect, no less that active efficiency, may be an antecedent, as
   founded in the nature of things, from whence a corresponding
   consequence must follow; but there is no defect in any antecedent but
   may be counteracted by a decree; so far counteracted, as that the
   defect shall not be an operative cause. 9. The purposes of God are a
   series of antecedents, from whence follow, by the very nature of
   things, corresponding good consequences, and good only; but the defect
   which is inseparable from created existence, considered in itself, is
   also a cause in the sense of an antecedent; otherwise a created
   existence would be as indefectible as the creating of first cause,
   which involves the most absurd consequences. 10. Defect is either
   natural or moral; and each arises from the nature of things, as
   contradistinguished to decree, but in a different manner. natural
   defect arises from the nature of things in the way of contrast to God's
   natural perfections; which contrast forms the primary difference
   between creator and creature. 11. This natural defect is different from
   defectibility; for defectibility expresses, in strictness, an effect
   not a cause; a liableness to defection. But the question returns, what
   renders a creature liable to defect? To say, Its liableness to defect,
   or its defectibility, assigns no true cause: for the question returns
   as before, what makes it liable, what makes it defectible? 12. Perhaps
   there is no term less exceptionable, in order to prevent
   circumlocution, that PASSIVE POWER, to express that natural defect,
   which exists in a created nature as a contrast to the natural (not the
   moral) perfections of God. 13. Passive power is as inapplicable to God,
   as it is applicable to a creature; for natural perfection is as
   applicable to him, as natural imperfection is to us.--Therefore to say,
   that a creature is not he subject of passive power, is the same as to
   say, that it is perfect and indefectible in its nature as God is: which
   is the grossest pantheism--the deification of every creature, of every
   atom that exists. 14. All antecedents originate in either passive power
   or the divine decrees. From the former proceed, according to the nature
   of things, all evil consequences; from the latter, all good. 15. moral
   defect, is a contrast to the moral perfections, excellence, or holiness
   of God; and arises, as a necessary consequence--not from the divine
   decree as its antecedent, but --from the hypothetical nature of things;
   that is, passive power, IF not aided by a decretive interposition, and
   IF also united to liberty of choice in an accountable being. 16. The
   removal of the antecedent is the prerogative of the supreme Lord of
   nature: but IF the antecedent be not removed, that is, altered from
   what it was as to its causal influence, the consequences can no more be
   prevented, than the nature of things can be changed. 17. That nature of
   things, or that necessity of consequence, whereby the effect is
   infallibly connected with its cause, is nothing else but the essence of
   truth, emanating from the first cause, the god of truth, or the true
   god. 18. We now observe, that an event may be necessarily connected
   with its cause by a divine decree. If the divine will contemplate an
   end, and decree accordingly, it necessarily implies that the means, or
   the antecedents to this consequence, are decreed. 19. Hence, an event
   may be necessary, either because virtually determined by the divine
   will, be a series of antecedents; or because the nature of things
   operates without being affected, as to their causal influence, by
   decretive antecedents. 20. To suppose any sort, of any degree of
   defect, to be decreed, is absurd in different ways. It is contrary to
   an established axiom, that from good nothing but good can proceed - and
   it is absurd to impute that to a divine decree, which antecedently
   arises from the nature of things. 21. In reality, divine decrees (as
   before hinted) are nothing else than a wonderful chain or series of
   positions, which are so many antecedents, counteracting defects arising
   from the hypothetical nature of things. Whence it necessarily follows,
   that if there were no passive powers there could be no divine decrees.
   For if good, and only good, arose from the nature of things; the
   decree, which has good only for its object, would be superfluous, and
   therefore unworthy of divine volition. 22. Hence also, whatever event
   is in itself good, is an object of divine decree in its antecedent; and
   the event itself is connected with the decretive position by the very
   essence of truth. But whatever is in itself evil arises from the
   hypothetical nature of things not counteracted by decretive positions.
   23. In God, his absolutely necessary, eternal, infinite, and
   unchangeable nature, is to be regarded as an antecedent; from which all
   possible happiness is the necessary consequence. Such an antecedent is
   no the result of mere, arbitrary, or decretive will, but of absolute
   necessity, but all antecedents in a creature, or every causal
   influence, of which good, or happiness, whether natural or moral, is
   the consequence, must be the positions of decretive will, as the only
   possible mode of securing a good result. 24. As is the antecedent, so
   is the consequent; for the connexion is formed by eternal truth. If
   therefore a good event --for instance, a virtuous of holy choice--be
   the consequent, the antecedent is a decretive position. 25. In
   reference to God, the proper and only ground of infallible certainty
   that his choice is good and praiseworthy, is the goodness of his
   nature. Were we to admit in thought the possibility of a defectible
   nature in him, in the same proportion must we admit a possible failure
   in the goodness of his choice. And in reference to a created being, the
   proper and only ground of certainty that his choice will be good, is
   the antecedent goodness of his nature or disposition. This alone is a
   sufficient causal influence; but the goodness of a creature's
   disposition can be secured, as a ground of certainty, only by decretive
   influence of a nature corresponding with the nature of the effect. 26.
   From these principles and considerations, which can here be but briefly
   stated, as necessarily connected with their legitimate consequences, we
   infer, that God foresees all good, in every created being, in every
   mode, in every event, by the evidence of a decretive necessity; a
   necessity resulting form actual influx, or perpetual energy, in the
   position of antecedents, and the essence of truth connecting the causal
   influence with the effect. 27. From the same principles we learn, that
   God foresees or foreknows all evil--however blended with the good, as
   the different colours in a pencil of light are blended--in every being,
   and in every event where found, by that necessity which is hypothetical
   only; a necessity resulting form the nature of things left to their own
   causal influence; which influence, in any circumstances, will manifest
   itself in the way of contrast, of dependence or both united. 28. Again:
   Volitions are acts of the mind, and each voluntary act is compounded of
   a natural and moral quality. The natural quality of a voluntary act
   proceeds form decretive necessity; for there is nothing in it but what
   is good, decreed, and effected by the first cause. The moral quality of
   a voluntary act is either good or evil. 29. A voluntary act morally
   good, is altogether of decretive necessity, both as to its physical and
   moral quality; and is therefore foreknown because of decretive
   appointment and energy. But a voluntary act morally bad, is partly of
   decretive, and partly of hypothetical necessity, or that of
   consequence. 30. The physical quality of a voluntary act morally bad,
   is of decretive necessity, and is foreknown because foreappointed; but
   the moral quality of the same act, or its badness, is foreknown only by
   relation, connexion, or consequence. Thus deformity is the absence of
   beauty, and may be known by the standard of beauty from which it
   deviates. Weakness is the absence of strength, and may be known by
   relation. A shadow is known by the interception of rays, and may be
   known in the same manner. Darkness is caused by the absence of light,
   and may be known by the light excluded. 31. How the bad quality of a
   moral act may be foreknown by the evidence of relation, will further
   appear from the consideration of the nature of moral evil itself. For
   what is moral, evil, or sin, but what ought not to be, in point of
   moral obligation? Now for at all knowing, or foreknowing, what ought
   not to be, which is incapable of being decreed, the proper medium or
   evidence is the knowledge of what ought to be. 32. If therefore what
   ought to be, is known to the omniscient by constituted relations, or
   voluntary appointment; what ought not to be may be known by evident
   consequences.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIII.

   Whether we suppose the volitions of moral Agents to be connected with
   any thing antecedent, or not, yet they must be necessary in such a
   sense as to overthrow Arminian Liberty.

   Every act of the Will has a cause, or it has not. If it has a cause,
   then, according to what has already been demonstrated, it is not
   contingent, but necessary; the effect being necessarily dependent and
   consequent on its cause, let that cause be what it will. If the cause
   is the Will itself, by antecedent acts choosing and determining; still
   the determined caused act must be a necessary effect. The act, that is
   the determined effect of the foregoing act which is its cause, cannot
   prevent the efficiency of its cause; but must be wholly subject to its
   determination and command, as much as the motions of the hands and
   feet. The consequent commanded acts of the Will are as passive and as
   necessary, with respect to the antecedent determining acts, as the
   parts of the body are to the volitions which determine and command
   them. And therefore, if all the free acts of the Will are all
   determined effects determined by the Will itself, that is by antecedent
   choice, then they are all necessary; they are all subject to, and
   decisively fixed by, the foregoing act, which is their cause: yea, even
   the determining act itself; for that must be determined and fixed by
   another act preceding, if it be a free and voluntary act; and so must
   be necessary. So that by this, all the free acts of the Will are
   necessary, and cannot be free unless they are necessary: because they
   cannot be free, according to the Arminian notion of freedom, unless
   they are determined by the Will; and this is to be determined by
   antecedent choice, which being their cause, proves them necessary. And
   yet they say, Necessity is utterly inconsistent with Liberty. So that,
   by their scheme, the acts of the Will cannot be free unless they are
   necessary, and yet cannot be free if they be necessary!

   But if the other part of the dilemma be taken, that the free acts of
   the Will have no cause, and are connected with nothing whatsoever that
   goes before and determines them, in order to maintain their proper and
   absolute Contingence, and this should be allowed to be possible; still
   it will not serve their turn. For if the volition come to pass by
   perfect Contingence, and without any cause at all, then it is certain,
   no act of the Will, no prior act of the soul, was the cause, no
   determination or choice of the soul had any hand in it. The Will, or
   the soul, was indeed the subject of what happened to it accidentally,
   but was not the cause. The Will is not active in causing or
   determining, but purely the passive subject; at least, according to
   their notion of action and passion. In this case, Contingence as much
   prevents the determination of the Will, as a proper cause; and as to
   the Will, it was necessary, and could be no otherwise. For to suppose
   that it could have been otherwise, if the Will or soul had pleased, is
   to suppose that the act is dependent on some prior act of choice or
   pleasure, contrary to what is now supposed; it is to suppose that it
   might have been otherwise, if its cause had ordered it otherwise. But
   this does not agree to it having no cause or orderer at all. That must
   be necessary as to the soul, which is dependent on no free act of the
   soul: but that which is without a cause, is dependent on no free act of
   the soul; because, by the supposition, it is dependent on nothing, and
   is connected with nothing. In such a case, the soul is necessarily
   subjected to what accident brings to pass, from time to time, as much
   as the earth that is inactive, is necessarily subjected to what falls
   upon it. But this does not consist with the Arminian notion of Liberty,
   which is the Will's power of determining itself in its own acts, and
   being wholly active in it, without passiveness, and without being
   subject to necessity.--Thus, Contingence belongs to the Arminian notion
   of Liberty, and yet is inconsistent with it.

   I would here observe, that the author of the Essay on the Freedom of
   the Will, in God and the Creature, (p. 76, 77.) says as follows. "The
   word Chance always means something done without design. Chance and
   design stand in direct opposition to each other: and Chance can never
   be properly applied to acts of the Will, which is the spring of all
   design, and which designs to choose whatsoever it doth choose, whether
   there be any superior fitness in the thing which it chooses, or no; and
   it designs to determine itself to one thing, where two things,
   perfectly equal, are proposed, merely because it will." But herein
   appears a very great inadvertence. For if the Will be the spring of all
   design, as he says, then certainly it is not always the effect of
   design; and the acts of the Will themselves must sometimes come to
   pass, when they do not spring from design; and consequently come to
   pass by Chance, according to his own definition of Chance. And if the
   Will designs to choose whatever it does choose, and designs to
   determine itself, as he says, then it designs to determine all its
   designs. Which carries us back from one design to a foregoing design
   determining that, and to another determining that; and so on in
   infinitum. The very first design must be the effect of foregoing
   design, or else it must be by Chance, in his notion of it.

   Here another alternative may be proposed, relating to the connexion of
   the acts of the Will with something foregoing that is their cause, not
   much unlike to the other; which is this: either human liberty may well
   stand with volitions being necessarily connected with the views of the
   understanding, and so is consistent with Necessity; or it is
   inconsistent with and contrary to such a connexion and Necessity. The
   former is directly subversive of the Arminian notion of Liberty,
   consisting in freedom from all Necessity. And if the latter be chosen,
   and it be said, that liberty is inconsistent with any such necessary
   connexion of volition with foregoing views of the understanding, it
   consisting in freedom from any such Necessity of the Will as that would
   imply; then the Liberty of the soul consists, partly at least, in
   freedom from restraint, limitation, and government, in its actings, by
   the understanding, and in Liberty and liableness to act contrary to the
   views and dictates of the understanding: and consequently the more the
   soul has of this disengagedness in its acting, the more Liberty. Now
   let it be considered to what this brings the noble principle of human
   Liberty, particularly when it is possessed and enjoyed in its
   perfection, viz. a full and perfect freedom and liableness to act
   altogether at random, without the least connexion with, or restraint or
   government by, any dictate of reason, or any thing whatsoever
   apprehended, considered, or viewed by the understanding; as being
   inconsistent with the full and perfect sovereignty of the Will over its
   own determinations.--The notion mankind have conceived of Liberty, is
   some dignity or privilege, something worth claiming. But what dignity
   or privilege is there, in being given up to such a wild Contingence as
   this, to be perfectly and constantly liable to act unreasonably, and as
   much without the guidance of understanding, as if we had none, or were
   as destitute of perception, as the smoke that is driven by the wind!
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III.

   WHEREIN IS INQUIRED, WHETHER ANY SUCH LIBERTY OF WILL AS ARMINIANS
   HOLD, BE NECESSARY TO MORAL AGENCY, VIRTUE AND VICE, PRAISE AND
   DISPRAISE, &C.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   God's moral Excellency necessary, yet virtuous and praiseworthy.

   Having considered the first thing proposed, relating to that freedom of
   Will which Arminians maintain; namely, Whether any such thing does,
   ever did, or ever can exist, I come now to the second thing proposed to
   be the subject of inquiry, viz. Whether any such kind of liberty be
   requisite to moral agency, virtue and vice, praise and blame, reward
   and punishment, &c.

   I shall begin with some consideration of the virtue and agency of the
   Supreme moral Agent, and Fountain of all Agency and Virtue.

   Dr. Whitby in his Discourse on the five Points, (p. 14.) says, "If all
   human actions are necessary, virtue and vice must be empty names; we
   being capable of nothing that is blameworthy, or deserveth praise; for
   who can blame a person for doing only what he could not help, or judge
   that he deserveth praise only for what he could not avoid?" To the like
   purpose he speaks in places innumerable; especially in his Discourse on
   the Freedom of the Will; constantly maintaining, that a freedom not
   only from co-action, but necessity, is absolutely requisite, in order
   to actions being either worthy of blame, or deserving of praise. And to
   this agrees, as is well known, the current doctrine of Arminian
   writers, who, in general, hold, that there is no virtue or vice, reward
   or punishment, nothing to be commended or blamed, without this freedom.
   And yet Dr. Whitby (p. 300.) allows, that God is without this freedom;
   and, Arminians, so far as I have had opportunity to observe, generally
   acknowledge, that God is necessarily holy, and his will necessarily
   determined to that which is good.

   So that, putting these things together, the infinitely holy God--who
   always used to be esteemed by God's people not only virtuous, but a
   Being in whom is all possible virtue, in the most absolute purity and
   perfection, brightness and amiableness; the most perfect pattern of
   virtue, and from whom all the virtue of others is but as beams from the
   sun; and who has been supposed to be, (being thus every where
   represented in Scripture,) on the account of his virtue and holiness,
   infinitely more worthy to be esteemed, loved, honoured, admired,
   commended, extolled, and praised, than any creature--this Being,
   according to this notion of Dr. Whitby, and other Arminians, has no
   virtue at all; virtue, when ascribed to him, is but on empty name; and
   he is deserving of no commendation or praise; because he is under
   necessity, he cannot avoid being holy and good as he is; therefore no
   thanks to him for it. It seems, the holiness, justice, faithfulness,
   &c. of the Most High, must not be accounted to be of the nature of that
   which is virtuous and praiseworthy. They will not deny, that these
   things in God are good; but then we must understand them, that they are
   no more virtuous, or of the nature of any thing commendable, than the
   good that is in any other being that is not a moral agent; as the
   brightness of the sun, and the fertility of the earth, are good, but
   not virtuous, because these properties are necessary to these bodies,
   and not the fruit of self-determining power.

   There needs no other confutation of this notion, to Christians
   acquainted with the Bible, but only stating and particularly
   representing it. To bring texts of Scripture, wherein God is
   represented, as in every respect, in the highest manner virtuous, and
   supremely praiseworthy, would be endless, and is altogether needless to
   such as have been brought up in the light of the gospel.

   It were to be wished, that Dr. Whitby and other divines of the same
   sort, had explained themselves, when they have asserted, that that
   which is necessary, is not deserving of praise; at the same time that
   they have owned God's perfection to he necessary, and so in effect
   representing God as not deserving praise. Certainly, if their words
   have any meaning at all, by praise, they must mean the exercise or
   testimony of esteem, respect, or honourable regard. And will they then
   say, that men are worthy of that esteem, respect, and honour for their
   virtue, small and imperfect as it is, which yet God is not worthy of,
   for his infinite righteousness, holiness, and goodness? If so, it must
   be, because of some sort of peculiar Excellency in the virtuous man,
   which is his prerogative, wherein he really has the preference; some
   dignity, that is entirely distinguished from any Excellency or
   amiableness in God; not in dependence, but in pre-eminence; which
   therefore he does not receive from God, nor is God the fountain or
   pattern of it; nor can God, in that respect, stand in competition with
   him, as the object of honour and regard; but man may claim a peculiar
   esteem, commendation, and glory, to which God can have no pretension.
   Yea, God has no right, by virtue of his necessary holiness, to
   intermeddle with that grateful respect and praise, due to the virtuous
   man, who chooses virtue, in the exercise of a freedom ad utrumque; any
   more than a precious stone, which. cannot avoid being hard and
   beautiful.

   And if it be so, let it be explained what that peculiar respect is,
   that is due to the virtuous man, which differs in nature and kind, in
   some way of pre-eminence, from all that is due to God. What is the name
   or description of that peculiar affection? Is it esteem, love,
   admiration, honour, praise, or gratitude? The Scripture every where
   represents God as the highest object of all these: there we read of the
   soul magnifying the Lord, of "loving him with all the heart, with all
   the soul, with all the mind, and with all the strength;" admiring him,
   and his righteous acts, or greatly regarding them, as marvelous and
   wonderful; honouring, glorifying, exalting, extolling, blessing,
   thanking, and praising him; giving unto him all the glory of the good
   which is done or received, rather than unto men; "that no flesh should
   glory in his presence;" but that he should be regarded as the Being to
   whom all glory is due. What then is that respect? What passion,
   affection, or exercise is it, that Arminians call praise, diverse from
   all these things, which men are worthy of for their virtue, and which
   God is not worthy of, in any degree?

   If that necessity which attends God's moral perfections and actions, be
   as inconsistent with being worthy of praise, as a necessity of
   co-action; as is plainly implied in, or inferred from, Dr. Whitby's
   discourse; then why should we thank God for his goodness, any more than
   if he were forced to be good, or any more than we should thank one of
   our fellow-creatures who did us good, not freely, and of good will, or
   from any kindness of heart, but from mere compulsion, or extrinsical
   necessity? Arminians suppose, that God is necessarily a good and
   gracious Being; for this they make the ground of some of their main
   arguments against many doctrines maintained by Calvinists; they say,
   these are certainly false, and it is impossible they should be true,
   because they are not consistent with the goodness of God. This
   supposes, that it is impossible but that God should be good: for if it
   be possible that he should be otherwise, then that impossibility of the
   truth of these doctrines ceases according to their own argument.

   That virtue in God is not, in the most proper sense, rewardable, is not
   for want of merit in his moral perfections and actions, sufficient to
   deserve rewards from his creatures; but because he is infinitely above
   all capacity of receiving any reward. He is already infinitely and
   unchangeably happy, and we cannot be profitable unto him. But still he
   is worthy of our supreme benevolence for his virtue: and would be
   worthy of our beneficence, which is the fruit and expression of
   benevolence, if our goodness could extend to him. If God deserves to be
   thanked and praised for his goodness, he would, for the same reason,
   deserve that we should also requite his kindness, if that were
   possible. "What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits?" is
   the natural language of thankfulness: and so far as in us lies, it is
   our duty to render again according to benefits received. And that we
   might have opportunity for so natural an expression of our gratitude to
   God, as beneficence, notwithstanding his being infinitely above our
   reach, he has appointed others to be his receivers, and to stand in his
   stead, as the objects of our beneficence; such are especially our
   indigent brethren.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   The Acts of the Will of the human soul of Jesus Christ, necessarily
   holy, yet truly virtuous, praise-worthy, rewardable, &c.

   I have already considered how Dr. Whitby insists upon it, that a
   freedom, not only from coaction, but necessity, is requisite either to
   virtue or vice, praise or dispraise, reward or punishment. He also
   insists on the same freedom as absolutely requisite to a person being
   the subject of a law, of precepts, or prohibitions; in the book before
   mentioned, (p. 301, 314, 328, 339, 340, 341, 342, 347, 361, 373, 410.)
   And of promises and threatenings, (p. 298, 301, 305, 311, 339, 340,
   363.) And as requisite to a state of trial, p. 297, &c.

   Now, therefore, with an eye to thee things, I would inquire into the
   moral conduct and practices of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
   exhibited in his human nature, in his state of humiliation. And first,
   I would show, that His holy behaviour was necessary; or that it was
   impossible it should be otherwise, than that he should behave himself
   holily, and that he should he perfectly holy in each individual act of
   his life. And secondly, that his holy behaviour was properly of the
   nature of virtue, and was worthy of praise; and that he was the subject
   of law, precept, or commands, promises and rewards; and that he was in
   a state of trial.

   I. It was impossible, that the Acts of the Will of Christ's human soul
   should, in any instance, degree, or circumstance, be otherwise than
   holy, and agreeable to God's nature and Will. The following things make
   this evident.

   1. God had promised so effectually to preserve and up hold him by his
   Spirit, under all his temptations, that he could not fail of the end
   for which he came into the world; but he would have failed, had he
   fallen into sin. We have such a promise, (Isa. xliii. 1-4.) "Behold my
   Servant, whom I uphold; mine Elect, in whom my soul delighteth: I have
   put my Spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles:
   he shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
   street.--He shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail,
   nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth; and the
   isles shall wait his law." This promise of God's Spirit put upon him,
   and his not crying and lifting up his voice, &c. relates to the time of
   Christ's appearance on earth; as is manifest from the nature of the
   promise, and also the application of it in the New Testament, (Matt.
   xii. 18.) And the words imply a promise of his being so upheld by God's
   Spirit, that he should be preserved from sin; particularly from pride
   and vain-glory; and from being overcome by any temptations he should be
   under to affect the glory of this world, the pomp of an earthly prince,
   or the applause and praise of men: and that he should be so upheld,
   that he should by no means fail of obtaining the end of his coming into
   the world, of bringing forth judgment unto victory, and establishing
   his kingdom of grace in the earth. And in the following verses, this
   promise is confirmed, with the greatest imaginable solemnity. Isaiah
   42:5 "Thus saith the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched
   them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of
   it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them
   that walk therein: I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
   will hold thine hand; and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant
   of the people, for a Light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to
   bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness
   out of the prison-house. I am Jehovah, that is my name," &c.

   Very parallel with these promises is another, (Isa. xlix. 7, 8, 9.)
   which also has an apparent respect to the time of Christ's humiliation
   on earth.--"Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy
   One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a
   servant of rulers; kings shall see and arise, princes also shall
   worship; because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of
   Israel, and he shall choose thee. Thus saith the Lord, in an acceptable
   time have I heard thee; in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I
   will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
   establish the earth," &.c.

   And in Isa. l. 5, 6.we have the Messiah expressing his assurance, that
   God would help him, by so opening his ear, or inclining his heart to
   God's commandments, that he should not be rebellious, but should
   persevere, and not apostatize, or turn his back: that through God's
   help, he should be immovable in obedience, under great trials of
   reproach and suffering; setting his face like a flint: so that he knew
   he should not be ashamed, or frustrated in his design; and finally
   should be approved and justified, as having done his work faithfully.
   Isa. l. 5. 6. "The Lord hath opened mine ear; so that I was not
   rebellious, neither turned away my back: I gave my back to the smiters,
   and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from
   shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I
   not be confounded: therefore have I set my face as a flint, and I know
   that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifieth me: who will
   contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? Let him
   come near to me. Behold the Lord God will help me: who is he that shall
   condemn me? Lo, they shall all wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat
   them up."

   2. The same thing is evident from all the promises which God made to
   the Messiah, of his future glory, kingdom, and success, in his office
   and character of a Mediator: which glory could not have been obtained,
   if his holiness had failed, and he had been guilty of sin. God's
   absolute promise makes the things promised necessary, and their failing
   to take place absolutely impossible: and, in like manner, it makes
   those things necessary, on which the thing promised depends, and
   without which it cannot take effect. Therefore it appears, that it was
   utterly impossible that Christ's holiness should fail, from such
   absolute promises as these, (Psal. cx. 4.) "The Lord hath sworn, and
   will not repent, thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
   Melchizedec." And from every other promise in that psalm, contained in
   each verse of it. (And Psal. ii. 6, 7.) "I will declare the decree: The
   Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee:
   Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance," &c.
   (Psal. xlv. 3, 4,&c.) "Gird thy sword on thy thigh, O most mighty, with
   thy glory and thy majesty; and in thy majesty ride prosperously." And
   so every thing that is said from thence to the end of the psalm. (See
   Isa. iii. 13-15; liii. 10-12.) And all those promises which God makes
   to the Messiah, of success, dominion, and glory in the character of a
   Redeemer, (Isa. chap. xlix.)

   3. It was often promised to the church of God of old, for their
   comfort, that God would give them a righteous, sinless Saviour. (Jer.
   xxiii. 5, 6.) "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will rise
   up unto David a righteous branch; and a king shall reign and prosper,
   and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days shall
   Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. And this is the name
   whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness." (So, Jer.
   xxxiii. 15.) "I will cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto
   David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land."
   (Isa. xi. 6, 7.) "For unto us a child is born;--upon the throne of
   David and of his kingdom, to order it and to establish it with judgment
   and justice, from henceforth, even for ever: the zeal of the Lord of
   hosts will do this." (Isa. xi. 1.&c.) "There shall come forth a rod out
   of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots; and the
   Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,--the spirit of knowledge, and
   the fear of the Lord:--with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and
   reprove with equity:--Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins,
   and faithfulness the girdle of his reins." (Isa. lii. 13.) "My servant
   shall deal prudently." (Isa. liii. 9.) "Because he had done no
   violence, neither was guile found in his mouth." If it be impossible,
   that these promises should fail, and it be easier for heaven and earth
   to pass away, than for one jot or title of them to pass away, then it
   was impossible that Christ should commit any sin.--Christ himself
   signified, that it was impossible but that the things which were spoken
   concerning him, should be fulfilled. (Luke xxiv. 44.) "That all things
   must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the
   prophets, and in the psalms concerning me." (Matt. xxvi. 53, 54.) "But
   how then shall the scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be?" (Mark
   xiv. 49.) "But the scriptures must be fulfilled." And so the apostle,
   (Acts I. 16, 17.) "This scripture must needs have been fulfilled."

   4. All the promises, which were made to the church of old, of the
   Messiah as a future Saviour, from that made to our first parents in
   paradise, to that which was delivered by the prophet Malachi show it to
   be impossible that Christ should not have persevered in perfect
   holiness. The ancient predictions given to God's church, of the Messiah
   as a Saviour, were of the nature of promises; as is evident by the
   predictions themselves, and the manner of delivering them. But they are
   expressly and very often called promises in the New Testament; (as in
   Luke i. 54, 55, 72, 73. Acts xiii. 32, 33. Rom. i. 1-3; xv. 8. Heb. vi.
   13., &c.) These promises were often made with great solemnity, and
   confirmed with an oath; as, (Gen. xxii. 16, 17.), "By myself have I
   sworn, saith the Lord, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
   multiplying I will multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as
   the sand which is upon the sea-shore:--And in thy seed shall all the
   nations of the earth be blessed." ( Compare Luke i. 72, 73.and Gal.
   iii. 8, 15, 16.) The apostle in Heb. vi. 17, 18.speaking of this
   promise to Abraham, says, "Wherein God willing more abundantly to show
   to the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
   by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible
   for God to lie, we might have strong consolation." In which words, the
   necessity of the accomplishment, or (which is the same thing) the
   impossibility of the contrary, is fully declared. So God confirmed the
   promise of the Messiah's great salvation, made to David, by an oath;
   (Psal. lxxxix. 3, 4.) "I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have
   sworn unto David my servant; thy seed will I establish for ever, and
   build up thy throne to all generations." There is nothing so abundantly
   set forth in Scripture, as sure and irrefragable, as this promise and
   oath to David. (See Psalm. lxxxix. 34-36. 2 Sam. xxiii. 5. Isa. lv. 4.
   Acts ii. 29, 30; xiii. 34.) The Scripture expressly speaks of it as
   utterly impossible that this promise and oath to David, concerning the
   everlasting dominion of the Messiah, should fail. (Jer. xxxiii. 15.,
   &c.) "In those days, and at that time, I will cause the Branch of
   righteousness to grow up unto David.--For thus saith the Lord, David
   shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel."
   (Jer. xxxiii. 20, 21.) "If you can break my covenant of the day, and my
   covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
   their season; then may also my covenant be broken with David my
   servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne." (So
   in Jer. xxxiii. 25, 26.) Thus abundant is the Scripture in representing
   how impossible it was, that the promises made of old concerning the
   great salvation and kingdom of the Messiah should fail: which implies,
   that it was impossible that this Messiah, the second Adam, the promised
   seed of Abraham, and of David, should fall from his integrity, as the
   first Adam did.

   5. All the promises that were made to the church of God under the Old
   Testament, of the great enlargement of the church, and advancement of
   her glory, in the days of the gospel, after the coming of the Messiah;
   the increase of her light, liberty, holiness, joy, triumph over her
   enemies, &c. of which so great a part of the Old Testament consists;
   which are repeated so often, are so variously exhibited, so frequently
   introduced with great pomp and solemnity, and are so abundantly sealed
   with typical and symbolical representations; I say, all these promises
   imply, that the Messiah should perfect the work of redemption: and this
   implies, that he should persevere in the work, which the Father had
   appointed him, beings in all things conformed to his Will. Thee
   promises were often confirmed by an oath. (See Isa. liv. 9.with the
   context; Isa. lxii. 18.) And it is represented as utterly impossible
   that these promises should fail. (Isa. xlix. 15.with the context, Isa.
   liv. 10.with the context; Isa. li. 4-8; Isa. xl. 8.with the context.)
   And therefore it was impossible that the Messiah should fail, or commit
   sin.

   6. It was impossible that the Messiah should fail of persevering in
   integrity and holiness, as the first Adam did, because this would have
   been inconsistent with the promises, which God made to the blessed
   Virgin, his mother, and to her husband; implying, that he should "save
   his people from their sins," that God would "give him the throne of his
   father David," that he should "reign over the house of Jacob for ever;"
   and that "of his kingdom there shall be no end." These promises were
   sure, and it was impossible they should fail, and therefore the Virgin
   Mary, in trusting fully to them, acted reasonably, having an immovable
   foundation of her faith; as Elizabeth observes, ( ver. 45.) "And
   blessed is she that believeth; for there shall be a performance of
   those things which were told her from the Lord."

   7. That it should have been possible that Christ should sin, and so
   fail in the work of our redemption, does not consist with the eternal
   purpose and decree of God, revealed in the Scriptures, that he would
   provide salvation for fallen man in and by Jesus Christ, and that
   salvation should be offered to sinners through the preaching of the
   gospel. Thus much is implied in many scriptures, (as 1 Cor. ii.
   7.--Eph. i. 4, 5; iii. 9-11.--1 Pet. I. 19, 20.) Such an absolute
   decree as this, Arminians allow to be signified in many texts; their
   election of nations and societies, and general election of the
   christian church, and conditional election of particular persons, imply
   this. God could not decree before the foundation of the world, to save
   all that should believe in and obey Christ, unless, he had absolutely
   decreed, that salvation should be provided, and effectually wrought out
   by Christ. And since (as the Arminians themselves strenuously maintain)
   a decree of God infers necessity; hence it became necessary, that
   Christ should persevere and actually work out salvation for us, and
   that he should not fail by the commission of sin.

   8. That it should have been possible for Christ's holiness to fail, is
   not consistent with what God promised to his Son, before all ages. For
   that salvation should be offered to men, through Christ, and bestowed
   on all his faithful followers, is at least implied in that certain and
   infallible promise spoken of by the apostle, (Tit. i. 2.) "In hope of
   eternal life; which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world
   began." This does not seem to be controverted by Arminians. [125]

   9. That it should be possible for Christ to fail of doing his Father's
   Will, is inconsistent with the promise made to the Father by the Son,
   the Logos that was with the Father from the beginning, before he took
   the human nature: as may be seen in Ps. xl. 6-8.(compared with the
   apostle's interpretation, Heb. x. 5-9.) "Sacrifice and offering thou
   didst not desire: mine ears hast thou opened, (or bored;)
   burnt-offering and sin-offering thou hast not required. Then said I,
   Lo, I come; in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to
   do thy Will, O my God, yea, thy law is within my heart." Where is a
   manifest allusion to the covenant, which the willing servant, who loved
   his master's service, made with his master, to be his servant for ever,
   on the day wherein he had his ear bored; which covenant was probably
   inserted in the public records, called the volume of the book, by the
   judges, who were called to take cognizance of the transaction; (Exod.
   xxi.) If the Logos, who was with the Father before the world, and who
   made the world, thus engaged in covenant to do the Will of the Father
   in the human nature, and the promise was as it were recorded, that it,
   might be made sure, doubtless it was impossible that it should fail;
   and so it was impossible that Christ should fail of doing the Will of
   the Father in the human nature.

   10. If it was possible for Christ to have failed of doing the Will of
   his Father, and so to have failed of effectually working out redemption
   for sinners, then the salvation of all the saints, who were saved from
   the beginning of the world, to the death of Christ, was not built on a
   firm foundation. The Messiah, and the redemption which he was to work
   out by his obedience unto death, was the saving foundation of all that
   ever were saved. Therefore, if when the Old-Testament saints had the
   pardon of their sins and the favour of God promised them, and salvation
   bestowed upon them, still it was possible that the Messiah, when he
   came, might commit sin, then all this was on a foundation that was not
   firm and stable, but liable to fail; something which it was possible
   might never be. God did as it were trust to what his Son had engaged
   and promised to do in future time, and depended so much upon it, that
   he proceeded actually to save men on the account of it, though it had
   been already done. But this trust and dependence of God, on the
   supposition of Christ's being liable to fail of doing his Will, was
   leaning on a staff that was weak, and might possibly break. The saints
   of old trusted on the promises of a future redemption to be wrought out
   and completed by the Messiah, and built their comfort upon it: Abraham
   saw Christ's day, and rejoiced; and he and the other Patriarchs died in
   the faith of the promise of it, (Heb. xi. 13.) But on this supposition,
   their faith, their comfort, and their salvation, was built on a
   fallible foundation; Christ was not to them "a tried stone, a sure
   foundation;" (Isa. xxviii. 16.) David entirely rested on the covenant
   of God with him, concerning the future glorious dominion and salvation
   of the Messiah; and said it was all his salvation, and all his desire;
   and comforts himself that this covenant was an "everlasting covenant,
   ordered in ail things and sure," (2 Sam. xxiii.5.) But if Christ's
   virtue might fail, he was mistaken: his great comfort was not built so
   "sure" as he thought it was, being founded entirely on the
   determinations of the Free Will of Christ's human soul; which was
   subject to no necessity, and might be determined either one way or the
   other. Also the dependence of those, who "looked for redemption in
   Jerusalem, and wailed for the consolation of Israel," (Luke ii. 25,
   38.) and the confidence of the disciples of Jesus, who forsook all and
   followed him, that they might enjoy the benefits of his future kingdom,
   were built on a sandy foundation.

   11. The man Christ Jesus, before he had finished his course of
   obedience, and while in the midst of temptations and trials, was
   abundant in positively predicting his own future glory in his kingdom,
   and the enlargement of his church, the salvation of the Gentiles
   through him, &c. and in promises of blessings he would bestow on his
   true disciples in his future kingdom; on which promises he required the
   full dependence of his disciples, (John xiv.) But the disciples would
   have no ground for such dependence, if Christ had been liable to fail
   in his work: and Christ himself would have been guilty of presumption,
   in so abounding in peremptory promises of great things, which depended
   on a mere contingence; viz. the determinations of his Free Will,
   consisting in a freedom ad ulrumque, to either sin or holiness,
   standing in indifference, and incident, in thousands of future
   instances, to go either one way or the other.

   Thus it is evident, that it was impossible that the Acts of the Will of
   the human soul of Christ should be otherwise than holy, and conformed
   to the Will of the Father; or, in other words, they were necessarily so
   conformed.

   I have been the longer in the proof of this matter, it being a thing
   denied by some of the greatest Arminians, by Episcopius in particular;
   and because I look upon it as a point clearly and absolutely
   determining the controversy between Calvinists and Arminians,
   concerning the necessity of such a freedom of Will as is insisted on by
   the latter, in order to moral agency, virtue, command or prohibition,
   promise or threatening, reward or punishment, praise or dispraise,
   merit or demerit. I now therefore proceed,

   II. To consider whether christ, in his holy behaviour on earth, was not
   thus a moral agent, subject to commands, promises, &c.

   Dr. Whitby very often speaks of what he calls a freedom ad utrumlibet,
   without necessity, as requisite to law and commands: and speaks of
   necessity as entirely inconsistent with injunctions and prohibitions.
   But yet we read of Christ being the subject of His Father's commands,
   (John x. 18; xv. 10.) And Christ tells us, that every thing that he
   said, or did, was in compliance with "commandments he had received of
   the Father;" (John xii. 49, 50; xiv. 31.) And we often read of Christ's
   obedience to his Father's commands,(Rom. v. 19. Phil. ii. 18. Heb. v.
   8.)

   The forementioned writer represents promises offered as motives to
   person to do their duty, or a being moved and induced by promises, as
   utterly inconsistent with a state wherein persons have not a liberty ad
   utrumlibet, but are necessarily determined to one. (See particularly,
   p. 298, and 311.) But the thing which this writer asserts, is
   demonstrably false, if the christian religion be true. If there be any
   truth in Christianity or the Holy Scriptures, the man Christ Jesus had
   his Will infallibly and unalterably determined to good, and that alone;
   but yet he had promises of glorious rewards made to him, on condition
   of his persevering in and perfecting the work which God had appointed
   him; (Isa. liii. 10, 11, 12. Psal. ii.; cx. Isa. xlix. 7, 8, 9.) In
   Luke xxii. 28, 20.Christ says to his disciples, "Ye are they which have
   continued with me in my temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom,
   as my Father hath appointed unto me." The word most properly signifies
   to appoint by covenant, or promise. The plain meaning of Christ's words
   is this: "As you have partaken of my temptations and trials, and have
   been steadfast, and have overcome; I promise to make you partakers of
   my reward, and to give you a kingdom; as the Father has promised me a
   kingdom for continuing steadfast and overcoming in those trials." And
   the words are well explained by those in Rev. iii. 21." To him that
   overcometh, will I grant to sit with me on my throne; even as I also
   overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." And Christ had
   not only promises of glorious success and rewards made to his obedience
   and sufferings, but the Scriptures plainly represent him as using these
   promises for motives and inducements to obey and suffer; and
   particularly that promise of a kingdom which the Father had appointed
   him, or sitting with the Father on his throne; (as in Heb. xii. 1, 2.)
   "Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth easily beset us,
   and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking
   unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that
   was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set
   down on the right hand of the throne of God."

   And how strange would it be to hear any Christian assert, that the holy
   and excellent temper and behaviour of Jesus Christ, and that obedience
   which he performed under such great trials, was not virtuous or
   praiseworthy; because his Will was not free ad utrumque, to either
   holiness or sin, but was unalterably determined to one; that upon this
   account, there is no virtue at all in all Christ's humility, meekness,
   patience, charity, forgiveness of enemies, contempt of the world,
   heavenly-mindedness, submission to the Will of God, perfect obedience
   to his commands unto death, even the death of the cross, his great
   compassion to the afflicted, his unparalleled love to mankind, his
   faithfulness to God and man, under such great trials; his praying for
   his enemies, even when nailing him to the cross; that virtue, when
   applied to these things, is but an empty name; that there was no merit
   in any of these things; that is, that Christ was worthy of nothing at
   all on account of them, worthy of no reward, no praise, no honour or
   respect from God or man; because his will was not indifferent, and free
   either to these things, or the contrary; but under such a strong
   inclination or bias to the things that were excellent, as made it
   impossible that he should choose the contrary; that upon this account,
   to use Dr. Whitby's language, it would be sensibly unreasonable that
   the human nature should be rewarded for any of these things.

   According to this doctrine, that creature who is evidently set forth in
   Scripture as the first-born of every creature, as having in all things
   the pre-eminence, and as the highest of all creatures in virtue,
   honour, and worthiness of esteem, praise, and glory, on account of his
   virtue, is less worthy of reward or praise, than the very least of
   saints; yea, no more worthy than a clock or mere machine, that is
   purely passive, and moved by natural necessity.

   If we judge by scriptural representations of things, we have reason to
   suppose, that Christ took on him our nature, and dwelt with us in this
   world, in a suffering state, not only to satisfy for our sins; but that
   he, being in our nature and circumstances, and under our trials, might
   be our most fit and proper example, leader, and captain, in the
   exercise of glorious and victorious virtue, and might be a visible
   instance of the glorious end and reward of it; that we might see in Him
   the beauty, amiableness, and true honour and glory, and exceeding
   benefit, of that virtue, which it is proper for us human beings to
   practice; and might thereby learn, and be animated, to seek the like
   glory and honour, and to obtain the like glorious reward. (See Heb. ii.
   9-14; v. 8, 9.; xii. 1, 2, 3. John xv. 10. Rom. viii. 17. 2 Tim. ii.
   11, 12. 1 Pet. ii. 19, 20; iv. 1-3.) But if there was nothing of any
   virtue or merit, or worthiness of any reward, glory, praise, or
   commendation at all, in all that he did, because it was all necessary,
   and he could not help it; then how is here any thing so proper to
   animate and incite us, free creatures, by patient continuance in
   well-doing, to seek for honour glory, and virtue?

   God speaks of himself as peculiarly well pleased with the righteousness
   of this distinguished servant. (Isa. xlii. 21.) "The Lord is well
   pleased for his righteousness' sake." The sacrifices of old are spoken
   of as a sweet savor to God, but the obedience of Christ as far more
   acceptable than they. (Psal. xl. 6, 7.) "Sacrifice and offering thou
   didst not desire: mine ear hast thou opened [as thy servant performing
   willing obedience;] burnt- offering and sin-offering hast thou not
   required. Then said I, Lo, I come, [as a servant that cheerfully
   answers the calls of his master:] I delight to do thy will, O my God,
   and thy law is within mine heart." (Matt. xvii. 5.) "This is my beloved
   Son, in whom I am well-pleased." And Christ tells us expressly, that
   the Father loves Him for that wonderful instance of his obedience, his
   voluntary yielding himself to death, in compliance with the Father's
   command, (John x. 17, 18.) "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I
   lay down my life:--No man taketh it from me; but I lay it down of
   myself--This commandment received I of my Father."

   And if there was no merit in Christ's obedience unto death, if it was
   not worthy of praise, and of the most glorious rewards, the heavenly
   hosts were exceedingly mistaken, by the account that is given of them,
   (Rev. v. 8-12.) "The four beasts, and the four and twenty elders, fell
   down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials
   full of odours;--and they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to
   take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain.--And
   I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne,
   and the beasts, and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand
   times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud
   voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches,
   and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing."

   Christ speaks of the eternal life which he was to receive, as the
   reward of his obedience to the Father's commandments. (John xii. 49,
   50.)" I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he
   gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak: and I
   know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak
   therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak."--God promises
   to divide him a portion with the great, &c. for his being his righteous
   servant, for his glorious virtue under such great trials and
   afflictions. (Isa. liii. 11, 12.) "He shall see the travail of his soul
   and be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
   many; for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a
   portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong,
   because he hath poured out his soul unto death." The Scriptures
   represent God as rewarding him far above all his other servants. (Phil.
   ii. 7-9.) "He took on him the form of a servant, and was made in the
   likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
   himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross:
   wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name above
   every name." (Psal. xlv. 7.) "Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest
   wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of
   gladness above thy fellows."

   There is no room to pretend, that the glorious benefits bestowed in
   consequence of Christ's obedience, are not properly of the nature of a
   reward. What is a reward, in the most proper sense, but a benefit
   bestowed in consequence of something morally excellent in quality or
   behaviour, in testimony of well-pleasedness in that moral excellency,
   and of respect and favour on that account? If we consider the nature of
   a reward most strictly, and make the utmost of it, and add to the
   things contained in this description proper merit or worthiness, and
   the bestowment of the benefit in consequence of a promise; still it
   will be found, there is nothing belonging to it, but what the Scripture
   most expressly ascribes to the glory bestowed on Christ, after his
   sufferings; as appears from what has been already observed: there was a
   glorious benefit bestowed in consequence of something morally
   excellent, being called Righteousness and Obedience; there was great
   favour, love, and well-pleasedness, for this righteousness and
   obedience, in the bestower; there was proper merit, or worthiness of
   the benefit, in the obedience; it was bestowed in fulfilment of
   promises, made to that obedience; and was bestowed therefore, or
   because he had performed that obedience.

   I may add to all these things, that Jesus Christ, while here in the
   flesh, was manifestly in a state of trial. The last Adam, as Christ is
   called, (1 Cor. xv. 45. Rom. v. 14.) taking on him the human nature,
   and so the form of a servant, and being under the law, to stand and act
   for us, was put into a state of trial, as the first Adam was.--Dr.
   Whitby mentions these three things as evidences of persons being in a
   state of trial, (on the five Points, p. 298, 299.) namely, their
   afflictions being spoken of as their trials or temptations, their being
   the subjects of promises, and their being exposed to Satan's
   temptations. But Christ was apparently the subject of each of these.
   Concerning promises made to him, I have spoken already. The
   difficulties and afflictions he met with in the course of his
   obedience, are called his temptations or trials, (Luke xxii. 28.) "Ye
   are they which have continued with me in my temptations or trials."
   (Heb. ii. 18.) "For in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted [or
   tried,] he is able to succor them that are tempted." And, (Heb. iv.
   15.) "We have not an high-priest, which cannot be touched with the
   feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we
   are, yet without sin." And as to his being tempted by Satan it is what
   none will dispute.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [125] See Dr. Whitby on the five Points, p. 48,49,50.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   The case of such as are given up of God to sin, and of fallen man in
   general, proves moral Necessity and Inability to be consistent with
   Blameworthiness.

   Dr. Whitby asserts freedom, not only from coaction, but Necessity, to
   be essential to any thing deserving the name of sin, and to an action
   being culpable; in these words, (Discourse on Five Points, edit. 3. p.
   348.) "If they be thus necessitated, then neither their sins of
   omission or commission could deserve that name: it being essential to
   the nature of sin, according to St. Austin's definition, that it be an
   action a quo liberum est abstinere. Three things seem plainly necessary
   to make an action or omission culpable; 1. That it be in our power to
   perform or forbear it: for, as Origen, and all the fathers, say, no man
   is blameworthy for not doing what he could not do." And elsewhere the
   Doctor insists, that "when any do evil of Necessity, what they do is no
   vice, that they are guilty of no fault, [126] are worthy of no blame,
   dispraise, [127] or dishonour, [128] but are unblamable." [129]

   If these things are true, in Dr. Whitby's sense of Necessity, they will
   prove all such to be blameless, who are given up of God to sin, in what
   they commit after they are thus given up,--That there is such a thing
   as men being judicially given up to sin, is certain, if the Scripture
   rightly informs us; such a thing being often there spoken of: as in
   Psal. lxxxi. 12."So I gave them up to their own hearts' lust, and they
   walked in their own counsels." (Acts vii. 42.) "Then God turned, and
   gave them up to worship the host of heaven." (Rom. i. 24.) "Wherefore,
   God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own
   hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves." (Rom. I.
   26.) "For this cause God gave them up to vile affections." (Rom. i.
   28.) "And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge,
   God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not
   convenient."

   It is needless to stand particularly to inquire, what God's "giving men
   up to their own hearts' lusts" signifies: it is sufficient to observe,
   that hereby is certainly meant God so ordering or disposing things, in
   some respect or other, either by doing or forbearing to do, as that the
   consequence should be men continuing in their sins. So much as men are
   given up to, so much is the consequence of their being given up,
   whether that be less or more. If God does not order things so, by
   action or permission, that sin will be the consequence, then the event
   proves that they are not given up to that consequence. If good be the
   consequence, instead of evil, then God's mercy is to be acknowledged in
   that good; which mercy must be contrary to God's judgment in giving up
   to evil. If the event must prove, that they are given up to evil as the
   consequence, then the persons, who are the subjects of this judgment,
   must be the subjects of such an event, and so the event is necessary.

   If not only coaction, but all Necessity, will prove men blameless, then
   Judas was blameless, after Christ had given him over, and had already
   declared his certain damnation, and that he should verily betray him.
   He was guilty of no sin in betraying his Master, on this supposition;
   though his so doing is spoken of by Christ as the most aggravated sin,
   more heinous than the sin of Pilate in crucifying him. And the Jews in
   Egypt, in Jeremiah's time, were guilty of no sin, in their not
   worshiping the true God, after God had "sworn by his great name, that
   his name should be no more named in the mouth of any man of Judah, in
   all the land of Egypt," (Jer. xliv. 26.

   Dr. Whitby (Disc. on five Points, p. 302, 303.) denies, that men, in
   this world, are ever so given up by God to sin, that their Wills should
   be necessarily determined to evil; though he owns, that hereby it may
   become exceeding difficult for men to do good, having a strong bent and
   powerful inclination to what is evil.--But if we should allow the case
   to be just as he represents, the judgment of giving up to sin will no
   better agree with his notions of that liberty, which is essential to
   praise or blame, than if we should suppose it to render the avoiding of
   sin impossible. For if an impossibility of avoiding sin wholly excuses
   a man; then for the same reason, its being difficult to avoid it,
   excuses him in part; and this just in proportion to the degree of
   difficulty.--If the influence of moral impossibility or inability be
   the same, to excuse persons in not doing or not avoiding any thing, as
   that of natural inability, (which is supposed,) then undoubtedly, in
   like manner, mortal difficulty has the same influence to excuse with
   natural difficulty. But all allow, that natural impossibility wholly
   excuses, and also that natural difficulty excuses in part, and makes
   the act or omission less blamable in proportion to the difficulty. All
   natural difficulty, according to the plainest dictates of the light of
   nature, excuses in some degree, so that the neglect is not so blamable,
   as if there had been no difficulty in the case: and so the greater the
   difficulty is, still the more excusable, in proportion to the increase
   of the difficulty. And as natural impossibility wholly excuses, and
   excludes all blame, so the nearer the difficulty approaches to
   impossibility, still the nearer a person is to blamelessness in
   proportion to that approach. And if the case of moral impossibility or
   Necessity, be just the same with natural Necessity or coaction, as to
   its influence to excuse a neglect, then also, for the same reason, the
   case of natural difficulty does not differ in influence, to excuse a
   neglect, from moral difficulty, arising from a strong bias or bent to
   evil, such as Dr. Whitby owns in the case of those that are given up to
   their own hearts' lusts. So that the fault of such persons must be
   lessened, in proportion to the difficulty, and approach to
   impossibility. If ten degrees of moral difficulty make the action quite
   impossible, and so wholly excuse, then if there be nine degrees of
   difficulty, the person is in great part excused, and is nine degrees in
   ten less blameworthy, than if there had been no difficulty at all; and
   he has but one degree of blameworthiness. The reason is plain, on
   Arminian principles; viz. because as difficulty, by antecedent bent and
   bias on the Will, is increased, liberty of indifference, and
   self-determination in the Will, is diminished; so much hindrance,
   impediment is there, in the way of the Will acting freely, by mere
   self-determination. And if ten degrees of such hindrance take away all
   such liberty, then nine degrees take away nine parts in ten, and leave
   but one degree of liberty. And therefore there is but one degree of
   blameableness, cateris paribus, in the neglect; the man being no
   further blamable in what he does, or neglects, than he has liberty in
   that affair: for blame or praise (say they) arises wholly from a good
   use or abuse of liberty.

   From all which it follows, that a strong bent and bias one way, and
   difficulty of going the contrary, never causes a person to be at all
   more exposed to sin, or any thing blamable: because, as the difficulty
   is increased, so much the less is required and expected. Though in one
   respect, exposedness to sin is increased, viz. by an increase of
   exposedness to the evil action or omission; yet it is diminished in
   another respect, to balance it; namely, as the sinfulness or
   blamableness of the action or omission is diminished in the same
   proportion. So that, on the whole, the affair, as to exposedness to
   guilt or blame, is left just as it was.

   To illustrate this, let us suppose a scale of a balance to be
   intelligent, and a free agent, and indued with a self-moving power, by
   virtue of which it could act and produce effects to a certain degree,
   ex. gr. to move itself up or down with a force equal to a weight of ten
   pounds; and that it might therefore be required of it, in ordinary
   circumstances, to move itself down with that force; for which it has
   power and full liberty, and therefore would be blameworthy if it failed
   of it. But then let us suppose a weight of ten pounds to be put in the
   opposite scale, which in force entirely counterbalances its self-moving
   power, and so renders it impossible for it to move down at all; and
   therefore wholly excuses it from any such motion. But if we suppose
   there to be only nine pounds in the opposite scale, this renders its
   motion not impossible, but yet more difficult; so that it can now only
   move down with the force of one pound: but however, this is all that is
   required of it under these circumstances; it is wholly excused from
   nine parts of its motion: and if the scale, under these circumstances,
   neglect to move, and remain at rest, all that it will be blamed for,
   will be its neglect of that one tenth part of its motion; for which it
   had as much liberty and advantage, as in usual circumstances it has for
   the greater motion, which in such a case would be required. So that
   this new difficulty does not at all increase its exposedness to any
   thing blameworthy.

   And thus the very supposition of difficulty in the way of a man's duty,
   or proclivity to sin, through a being given up to hardness of heart, or
   indeed by any other means whatsoever, is an inconsistence, according to
   Dr. Whitby's notions of liberty, virtue and vice, blame and praise. The
   avoiding of sin and blame, and the doing of what is virtuous and
   praiseworthy, most be always equally easy.

   Dr. Whitby's notions of liberty, obligation, virtue. sin, &c. led him
   into another great inconsistence. He abundantly insists, that necessity
   is inconsistent with the nature of sin or fault. He says, in the
   forementioned treatise, (p. 14.) Who can blame a person for doing what
   he could not help? And, (p. 15.) It being sensibly unjust, to punish
   any man for doing that which was never in his power to avoid. And, (p.
   341.) to confirm his opinion, he quotes one of the fathers, saying, Why
   doth God command, if man hath not free will and power to obey? And
   again, in the same and the next page, Who will not cry out, that it is
   folly to command him, that hath not liberty to do what is commanded;
   and that it is unjust to condemn him, that has it not in his power to
   do what is required? And, (p. 373.) he cites another saying, A law is
   given to him that can turn to both parts; i.e. obey or transgress it;
   but no law can be against him who is bound by nature.

   And yet the same Dr. Whitby asserts, that fallen man is not able to
   perform perfect obedience. In p. 165, he has these words: "The nature
   of Adam had power to continue innocent, and without sin; whereas, it is
   certain our nature never had." But if we have not power to continue
   innocent and without sin, then sin is not inconsistent with Necessity,
   and we may be sinful in that which we have not power to avoid; and
   those things cannot be true, which he asserts elsewhere, namely, "That
   if we be necessitated, neither sins of omission nor commission, would
   deserve that name," (p. 348.) If we have it not in our power to be
   innocent, then we have it not in our power to be blameless; and if so,
   we are under a Necessity of being blameworthy. And how does this
   consist with what he so often asserts, that Necessity is inconsistent
   with blame or praise? If we have it not in our power to perform perfect
   obedience to all the commands of God, then we are under a Necessity of
   breaking some commands, in some degree; having no power to perform so
   much as is commanded. And if so, why does he cry out of the
   unreasonableness and folly of commanding beyond what men have power to
   do?

   Arminians in general are very inconsistent with themselves, in what
   they say of the Inability of fallen man in this respect. They
   strenuously maintain, that it would be unjust in God, to require any
   thing of us beyond our present power and ability to perform; and also
   hold that we are now unable to perform perfect obedience, and that
   Christ died to satisfy for the imperfections of our obedience, and has
   made way, that our imperfect obedience might be accepted instead of
   perfect; wherein they seem insensibly to run themselves into the
   grossest inconsistence. For (as I have observed elsewhere) "they hold
   that God, in mercy to mankind, has abolished that rigorous constitution
   or law, that they were under originally, and instead of it, has
   introduced a more mild constitution, and put us under a new law, which
   requires no more than imperfect sincere obedience, in compliance with
   our poor infirm impotent circumstances since the fall."

   Now how can these things be made consistent? I would ask, of what law
   are these imperfections of our obedience a breach? If they are a breach
   of no law that we were ever under, then they are not sins. And if they
   be not sins, what need of Christ dying to satisfy for them? But if they
   are sins, and the breach of some law, what law is it? They cannot be a
   breach of their new law, for that requires no other than imperfect
   obedience, or obedience with imperfections: and therefore to have
   obedience attended with imperfections, is no breach of it; for it is as
   much as it requires. And they cannot be a breach of their old law: for
   that, they say, is entirely abolished; and we never were under
   it.--They say, it would not be just in God to require of us perfect
   obedience, because it would not be just to require more than we can
   perform, or to punish us for failing of it. And, therefore, by their
   own scheme, the imperfections of our obedience do not deserve to be
   punished. What need therefore of Christ dying, to satisfy for them?
   What need of his suffering, to satisfy for that which is no fault, and
   in its own nature deserves no suffering? What need of Christ dying, to
   purchase, that our imperfect obedience should be accepted, when,
   according to their scheme, it would be unjust in itself, that any other
   obedience than imperfect should be required? What need of Christ dying
   to make way for God's accepting of such obedience, as it would be
   unjust in him not to accept? Is there any need of Christ dying to
   prevail with God not to do unrighteously?--If it be said, that Christ
   died to satisfy that old law for us, that so we might not be under it,
   but that there might be room for our being under a more mild law; still
   I would inquire, what need of Christ dying, that we might not be under
   a law, which (by their principles) it would be in itself unjust that we
   should be under, whether Christ had died or no, because, in our present
   state, we are not able to keep it?

   So the Arminians are inconsistent with themselves, not only, in what
   they say of the need of Christ's satisfaction to atone for those
   imperfections, which we cannot avoid, but also in what they say of the
   grace of God, granted to enable men to perform the sincere obedience of
   the new law. "I grant indeed, (says Dr. Stebbing, [130] ) that by
   original sin, we are utterly disabled for the performance of the
   condition, without new grace from God. But I say then, that he gives
   such a grace to all of us, by which the performance of the condition,
   is truly possible; and upon this ground he may and doth most
   righteously require it." If Dr. Stebbing intends to speak properly, by
   grace he must mean, that assistance which is of grace, or of free
   favour and kindness. But yet in the same place he speaks of it as very
   unreasonable, unjust, and cruel, for God to require that, as the
   condition of pardon, that is become impossible by original sin. If it
   be so, what grace is there in giving assistance and ability to perform
   the condition of pardon? Or why is that called by the name of grace,
   that is an absolute debt, which God is bound to bestow, and which it
   would be unjust and cruel in him to withhold, seeing he requires that,
   as the condition of pardon, which he cannot perform without it?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [126] Discourse on the five Points, p. 347, 360, 361, 377

   [127] 303, 326, 329, and many other places.

   [128] 371.

   [129] 304, 361.

   [130] Treatise of the Operations of the Spirit. 2 edit. P. 112,113.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Command and Obligation to Obedience, consistent with moral Inability to
   obey. [131]

   It being so much insisted on by Arminian writers, that necessity is
   inconsistent with law or command, and particularly, that it is absurd
   to suppose God by his command should require that of men which they are
   unable to do; not allowing in this case for any difference between
   natural and moral Inability; I would therefore now particularly
   consider this matter.--And for greater clearness I would distinctly lay
   down the following things.

   I. The Will itself, and not only those actions which are the effects of
   the Will, is the proper object of Precept or Command. That is, such a
   state or acts of men's Wills, are in many cases properly required of
   them by Commands; and not only those alterations in the state of their
   bodies or minds that are the consequences of volition. This is most
   manifest; for it is the soul only that is properly and directly the
   subject of Precepts or Commands; that only being capable of receiving
   or perceiving Commands. The motions or state of the body are matter of
   Command, only as they are subject to the soul, and connected with its
   acts. But now the soul has no other faculty whereby it can, in the most
   direct and proper sense, consent, yield to, or comply with any Command,
   but the faculty of the Will; and it is by this faculty only, that the
   soul can directly disobey, or refuse compliance: for the very notions
   of consenting, yielding, accepting, complying, refusing, rejecting, &c.
   are, according to the meaning of the terms, nothing but certain acts of
   the Will. Obedience, in the primary nature of it, is the submitting and
   yielding of the Will of one, to the Will of another. Disobedience is
   the not consenting, not complying of the Will of the commanded, to the
   manifested Will of the commander. Other acts that are not the acts of
   the Will, as certain motions of the body and alterations in the soul,
   are Obedience or Disobedience only indirectly, as they are connected
   with the state or actions of the Will, according to an established law
   of nature. So that it is manifest, the Will itself may be required: and
   the being of a good Will is the most proper, direct, and immediate
   subject of Command; and if this cannot be prescribed or required by
   Command or Precept, nothing can; for other things can be required no
   otherwise than as they depend upon, and are the fruits of a good Will.

   Corol. 1. If there be several acts of the Will, or a series of acts,
   one following another, and one the effect of another, the first and
   determining act is properly the subject of Command, and not only the
   consequent acts, which are dependent upon it. Yea, this more especially
   is that to which Command or Precept has a proper respect; because it is
   this act that determines the whole affair: in this act the Obedience or
   Disobedience lies, in a peculiar manner; the consequent acts being all
   governed and determined by it. This governing act must be the proper
   object of Precept, or none.

   Corol. 2. It also follows, from what has been observed, that if there
   be any act, or exertion of the soul, prior to all free acts of choice
   in the case, directing and determining what the acts of the Will shall
   be; that act of the soul cannot properly be subject to any Command or
   Precept, in any respect whatsoever, either directly or indirectly,
   immediately or remotely. Such acts cannot be subject to Commands
   directly, because they are no acts of the Will; being by the
   supposition prior to all acts of the Will, determining and giving rise
   to all its acts: they not being acts of the Will, there can be in them
   no consent to or compliance with any Command. Neither can they be
   subject to Command or Precept indirectly or remotely; for they are not
   so much as the effects or consequences of the Will, being prior to all
   its acts. So that if there be any Obedience in that original act of the
   soul, determining all volitions, it is an act of Obedience wherein the
   Will has no concern at all; it preceding every act of Will. And
   therefore, if the soul either obeys or disobeys in this act, it is
   wholly involuntarily; there is no willing Obedience or rebellion, no
   compliance or opposition of the Will in the affair: and what sort of
   Obedience or rebellion is this?

   And thus the Arminian notion of the freedom of the Will consisting in
   the soul's determining its own acts of Will, instead of being essential
   to moral agency, and to men being the subjects of moral government, is
   utterly inconsistent with it. For if the soul determines all its acts
   of Will, it is therein subject to no Command or moral government, as
   has been now observed; because its original determining act is no act
   of Will or choice, it being prior, by the supposition, to every act of
   Will. And the soul cannot be the subject of Command in the act of the
   Will itself, which depends on the foregoing determining act, and is
   determined by it; inasmuch as this is necessary, being the necessary
   consequence and effect of that prior determining act, which is not
   voluntary. Nor can the man be the subject of Command or government in
   his external actions; because these are all necessary, being the
   necessary effects of the acts of the Will themselves. So that mankind,
   according to this scheme, are subjects of Command or moral government
   in nothing at all; and all their moral agency is entirely excluded, and
   no room is left for virtue or vice in the world.

   So that the Arminian scheme, and not that of the Calvinists, is utterly
   inconsistent with moral government, and with all use of laws, precepts,
   prohibitions, promises, or threatenings. Neither is there any way
   whatsoever to make their principles consist with these things. For if
   it be said, that there is no prior determining act of the soul,
   preceding the acts of the Will, but that volitions are events that come
   to pass by pure accident, without any determining cause, this is most
   palpably inconsistent with all use of laws and precepts; for nothing is
   more plain than that laws can be of no use to direct and regulate
   perfect accident: which, by the supposition of its being pure accident,
   is in no case regulated by any thing preceding; but happens, this way
   or that, perfectly by chance, without any cause or rule. The perfect
   uselessness of laws and precepts also follows from the Arminian notion
   of indifference, as essential to that liberty, which is requisite to
   virtue or vice. For the end of laws is to bind to one side; and the end
   of Commands is to turn the Will one way: and therefore they are of no
   use, unless they turn or bias the Will that way. But if liberty
   consists in indifference, then their biassing the Will one way only,
   destroys liberty; as it puts the Will out of equilibrium. So that the
   will, having a bias, through the influence of binding law, laid upon
   it, is not wholly left to itself, to determine itself which way it
   will, without influence from without.

   II. Having shown that the Will itself, especially in those acts which
   are original, leading and determining in any case, is the proper
   subject of Precept and Command--and not only those alterations in the
   body, &c. which are the effects of the Will--I now proceed, in the
   second place, to observe, that the very opposition or defect of the
   Will itself, in its original and determining act in the case, to a
   thing proposed or commanded, or its failing of compliance, implies a
   moral inability to that thing: or, in other words, whenever a Command
   requires a certain state or act of the Will, and the person commanded,
   notwithstanding the Command and the circumstances under which it is
   exhibited, still finds his Will opposite or wanting, in that, belonging
   to its state or acts, which is original and determining in the affair,
   that man is morally unable to obey that Command.

   This is manifest from what was observed in the first part concerning
   the nature of moral Inability, as distinguished from natural: where it
   was observed, that a man may then be said to be morally unable to do a
   thing, when he is under the influence or prevalence of a contrary
   inclination, or has a want of inclination, under such circumstances and
   views. It is also evident, from what has been before proved, that the
   Will is always, and in every individual act, necessarily determined by
   the strongest motive; [132] and so is always unable to go against the
   motive, which, all things considered, has now the greatest strength and
   advantage to move the Will.--But not further to insist on these things,
   the truth of the position now laid down, viz. that when the Will is
   opposite to, or failing of a compliance with, a thing, in its original
   determination or act, it is not able to comply, appears by the
   consideration of these two things.

   1. The Will in the time of that diverse or opposite leading act or
   inclination, and when actually under its influence, is not able to
   exert itself to the contrary, to make an alteration, in order to a
   compliance. The inclination is unable to change itself; and that for
   this plain reason, that it is unable to incline to change itself.
   Present choice cannot at present choose to be otherwise: for that would
   be at present to choose something diverse from what is at present
   chosen. If the Will, all things now considered, inclines or chooses to
   go that way, then it cannot choose, all things now considered, to go
   the other way, and so cannot choose to be made to go the other way. To
   suppose that the mind is now sincerely inclined to change itself to a
   different inclination, is to suppose the mind is now truly inclined
   otherwise than it is now inclined. The Will may oppose some future
   remote act that it is exposed to, but not its own present act.

   2. As it is impossible that the Will should comply with the thing
   commanded, with respect to its leading act, by any act of its own, in
   the time of that diverse or opposite leading and original act, or after
   it has actually come under the influence of that determining choice or
   inclination; so it is impossible it should be determined to a
   compliance by any foregoing act; for, by the very supposition, there is
   no foregoing act; the opposite or noncomplying act being that act which
   is original and determining in the case. Therefore it must be so, that
   if this first determining act be found non-complying, on the proposal
   of the command, the mind is morally unable to obey. For to suppose it
   to be able to obey, is to suppose it to be able to determine and cause
   its first determining act to be otherwise, and that it has power better
   to govern and regulate its first governing and regulating act, which is
   absurd; for it is to suppose a prior act of the Will, determining its
   first determining act; that is, an act prior to the first, and leading
   and governing the original and governing act of all; which is a
   contradiction.

   Here if it should be said, that although the mind has not any ability
   to will contrary to what it does will, in the original and leading act
   of the Will, because there is supposed to be no prior act to determine
   and order it otherwise, and the Will cannot immediately change itself,
   because it cannot at present incline to a change; yet the mind has an
   ability for the present to forbear to proceed to action, and taking
   time for deliberation; which may be an occasion of the change of the
   inclination.

   I answer, (1.) In this objection, that seems to be forgotten which was
   observed before, viz. that the determining to take the matter into
   consideration, is itself an act of the Will: and if this be all the act
   wherein the mind exercises ability and freedom, then this, by the
   supposition, must be all that can be commanded or required by precept.
   And if this act be the commanding act, then all that has been observed
   concerning the commanding act of the Will remains true, that the very
   want of it is a moral Inability to exert it, &c. (2.) We are speaking
   concerning the first and leading act of the Will about the affair; and
   if determining to deliberate, or, on the contrary, to proceed
   immediately without deliberating, be the first and leading act; or
   whether it be or no, if there be another act before it, which
   determines that; or whatever be the original and leading act; still the
   foregoing proof stands good, that the non-compliance of the leading act
   implies moral Inability to comply.

   If it should be objected, that these things make all moral Inability
   equal, and suppose men morally unable to will otherwise than they
   actually do will, in all cases, and equally so in every instance.--In
   answer to this objection, I desire two things may be observed.

   First, That if by being equally unable, be meant, as really unable;
   then, so far as the Inability is merely moral, it is true; the Will, in
   every instance, acts by moral necessity, and is morally unable to act
   otherwise, as truly and properly in one case as another; as, I humbly
   conceive, has been perfectly and abundantly demonstrated by what has
   been said in the preceding part of this essay. But yet, in some
   respect, the Inability may be said to be greater in some instances than
   others: though the man may be truly unable, (if moral Inability can
   truly be called Inability,) yet he may be further from being able to do
   some things than others. As it is in things, which men are naturally
   unable to do. A person, whose strength is no more than sufficient to
   lift the weight of one hundred pounds, is as truly and really unable to
   lift one hundred and one pounds, as ten thousand pounds; but yet he is
   further from being able to lift the latter weight than the former; and
   so, according to the common use of speech, has a greater Inability for
   it. So it is in moral Inability. A man is truly morally unable to
   choose contrary to a present inclination, which in the least degree
   prevails; or, contrary to that motive, which, all things considered,
   has strength and advantage now to move the Will, in the least degree,
   superior to all other motives in view: but yet he is further from
   ability to resist a very strong habit, and a violent and deeply rooted
   inclination, or a motive vastly exceeding all others in strength. And
   again, the Inability may, in some respects, be called greater in some
   instances than others, as it may be more general and extensive to all
   acts of that kind. So men may be said to be unable in a different
   sense, and to be further from moral ability, who have that moral
   Inability which is general and habitual, than they who have only that
   Inability which is occasional and particular. [133] Thus in cases of
   natural Inability; he that is born blind may be said to be unable to
   see, in a different manner, and is, in some respects, further from
   being able to see, than he whose sight is hindered by a transient cloud
   or mist.

   And besides, that which was observed in the first part of this
   discourse, concerning the Inability which attends a strong and settled
   habit, should be there remembered; viz. that a fixed habit is attended
   with this peculiar moral Inability, by which it is distinguished from
   occasional volition, namely, that endeavours to avoid future volitions
   of that kind, which are agreeable to such a habit, much more frequently
   and commonly prove vain and insufficient. For though it is impossible
   there should be any sincere endeavours against a present choice, yet
   there may be against volitions of that kind, when viewed at a distance.
   A person may desire and use means to prevent future exercises of a
   certain inclination; and, in order to it, may wish the habit might be
   removed; but his desires and endeavours may be ineffectual. The man may
   be said in some sense to be unable; yea, even as the word unable is a
   relative term, and has relation to ineffectual endeavours; yet not with
   regard to present, but remote endeavours.

   Secondly, It must be borne in mind, according to what was observed
   before, that indeed no Inability whatsoever, which is merely moral, is
   properly called by the name of Inability; and that in the strictest
   propriety of speech, a man may be said to have a thing in his power, if
   he has it at his election, and he cannot be said to be unable to do a
   thing, when he can, if he now pleases, or whenever he has a proper,
   direct, and immediate desire for it. As to those desires and
   endeavours, that may be against the exercises of a strong habit, with
   regard to which men may be said to be unable to avoid those exercises,
   they are remote desires and endeavours in two respects. First, as to
   time; they are never against present volitions, but only against
   volitions of such a kind, when viewed at a distance. Secondly, as to
   their nature; these opposite desires are not directly and properly
   against the habit and inclination itself, or the volitions in which it
   is exercised; for these, in themselves considered, are agreeable: but
   against something else that attends them, or is their consequence; the
   opposition of the mind is leveled entirely against this; the volitions
   themselves are not at all opposed directly, and for their own sake; but
   only indirectly and remotely, on the account of something foreign.

   III. Though the opposition of the Will itself, or the very want of Will
   to a thing commanded, implies a moral Inability to that thing; yet, if
   it be, as has been already shown, that the being of a good state or act
   of Will, is a thing most properly required by Command; then, in some
   cases, such a state or act of Will may properly be required, which at
   present is not, and which may also be wanting after it is commanded.
   And therefore those things may properly be commanded, for which men
   have a moral Inability.

   Such a state or act of the Will, may be required by Command, as does
   not already exist. For if that volition only may be commanded to be,
   which already is, there could be no use of precept: Commands in all
   cases would be perfectly vain and impertinent. And not only may such a
   Will be required, as is wanting before the Command is given, but also
   such as may possibly be wanting afterwards; such as the exhibition of
   the Command may not be effectual to produce or excite. Otherwise, no
   such thing as disobedience to a proper and rightful Command is possible
   in any case; and there is no case possible, wherein there can be a
   faulty disobedience. Which Arminians cannot affirm, consistently with
   their principle: for this makes obedience to just and proper Commands
   always necessary, and disobedience impossible. And so the Arminian
   would overthrow himself, yielding the very point we are upon, which he
   so strenuously denies, viz. that Law and Command are consistent with
   necessity.

   If merely that inability will excuse disobedience, which is implied in
   the opposition or defect of inclination, remaining after the Command is
   exhibited, then wickedness always carries that in it which excuses it.
   By how much the more wickedness there is in a man's heart, by so much
   is his inclination to evil the stronger, and by so much the more,
   therefore, has he of moral Inability to the good required. His moral
   Inability consisting in the strength of his evil inclination, is the
   very thing wherein his wickedness consists; and yet, according to
   Arminian principles, it must be a thing inconsistent with wickedness;
   and by how much the more he has of it, by so much is he the further
   from wickedness.

   Therefore, on the whole, it is manifest, that moral Inability alone
   (which consists in disinclination) never renders any thing improperly
   the subject matter of Precept or Command, and never can excuse any
   person in disobedience, or want of conformity to a command.

   Natural Inability, arising from the want of natural capacity, or
   external hindrance, (which alone is properly called Inability,) without
   doubt wholly excuses, or makes a thing improperly the matter of
   Command. If men are excused from doing or acting any good thing,
   supposed to be commanded, it must be through some defect or obstacle
   that is not in the Will itself, but either in the capacity of
   understanding, or body, or outward circumstances.--Here two or three
   things may be observed,

   1. As to spiritual acts, or any good thing in the state or imminent
   acts of the Will itself, or of the affections, (which are only certain
   modes of the exercise of the Will,) if persons are justly excused, it
   must be through want of capacity in the natural faculty of
   understanding. Thus the same spiritual duties, or holy affections and
   exercises of heart, cannot be required of men, as may be of angels; the
   capacity of understanding being so much inferior. So men cannot be
   required to love those amiable persons, whom they have had no
   opportunity to see, or hear of, or know in any way agreeable to the
   natural state and capacity of the human understanding. But the
   insufficiency of motives will not excuse; unless their being
   insufficient arises not from the moral state of the Will or inclination
   itself, but from the state of the natural understanding. The great
   kindness and generosity of another may be a motive insufficient to
   excite gratitude in the person that receives the kindness, through his
   vile and ungrateful temper: in this case, the insufficiency of the
   motive arises from the state of the Will or inclination of heart, and
   does not at all excuse. But if this generosity is not sufficient to
   excite gratitude, being unknown, there being no means of information
   adequate to the state and measure of the person's faculties, this
   insufficiency is attended with a natural Inability, which entirely
   excuses it.

   2. As to such motions of body, or exercises and alterations of mind,
   which do not consist in the imminent acts or state of the Will
   itself--but are supposed to be required as effects of the Will, in
   cases wherein there is no want of a capacity of understanding--that
   Inability, and that only, excuses, which consists in want of connexion
   between them and the Will. If the Will fully complies, and the proposed
   effect does not prove, according to the laws of nature, to be connected
   with his volition, the man is perfectly excused; he has a natural
   Inability to the thing required. For the Will itself, as has been
   observed, is all that can be directly and immediately required by
   Command; and other things only indirectly, as connected with the Will.
   If therefore, there be a full compliance of Will, the person has done
   his duty; and if other things do not prove to be connected with his
   volition, that is not criminally owing to him.

   3. Both these kinds of natural Inability, and all Inability that
   excuses, may be resolved into one thing; namely, want of natural
   capacity or strength; either capacity of understanding, or external
   strength. For when there are external defects and obstacles, they would
   be no obstacles, were it not for the imperfection and limitations of
   understanding and strength.

   Corol. If things for which men have a moral Inability may properly be
   the matter of Precept or Command, then they may also of invitation and
   counsel. Commands and invitations come very much to the same thing; the
   difference is only circumstantial: Commands are as much a manifestation
   of the Will of him that speaks, as invitations, and as much testimonies
   of expectation of compliance. The difference between them lies in
   nothing that touches the affair in hand. The main difference between
   Command and invitation consists in the enforcement of the Will of him
   who commands or invites. In the latter it is his kindness, the goodness
   from which his Will arises: in the former it is his authority. But
   whatever be the ground of Will in him that speaks, or the enforcement
   of what he says, yet, seeing neither his Will, nor his expectation, is
   any more testified in the one case than the other; therefore, a person
   being directed by invitation, is no more an evidence of insincerity in
   him that directs--in manifesting either a Will or expectation which he
   has not--than a person being known to be morally unable to do what he
   is directed by command is an evidence of insincerity. So that all this
   grand objection of Arminians against the Inability of fallen men to
   exert faith in Christ, or to perform other spiritual duties, from the
   sincerity of God's counsels and invitations, must be without force.
   [134]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [131] The subject of "obligation to obedience," or moral obligation,
   though expressed in the title of this section, is not professedly
   handled by our author, either here or in any other part of the work.
   His professed object in this place is to prove that obligation to obey
   commands is not weakened by moral inability. But though this conclusion
   is established by many considerations, yet the nature and grounds of
   obligation are not pointed out, which might afford evidence WHY moral
   obligation is consistent with moral inability? The subject is
   confessedly profound; but, perhaps, the following series of remarks may
   contribute in some degree to assist our inquiries and to bring them to
   a satisfactory conclusion. 1. Obligation, if we regard the term, is a
   binding power, or an irresistible force; but, in reference to morality
   and voluntary actions, obligation is expressive of a hypothetical
   indispensable connexion between an antecedent and a consequent; or
   between an end proposed, and the means of obtaining it. Thus, if a
   moral agent would attain the end, he is obliged or bound indispensably,
   to use the required means. And, on the contrary, if a moral agent adopt
   a different antecedent form what is required, not only he shall not
   attain to the proposed consequent, but another consequent is to follow,
   indispensably connected with the antecedent actually adopted, by a
   necessity of consequences. Therefore, 1. The consequent or the end,
   which is proposed by the moral Governor, is always a supposed good; for
   it would be unworthy of a governor wise and good to propose any other,
   especially as the antecedent prescribed and required is indispensably
   connected with it. But if the connexion be broken by the free agent, by
   the adoption of an antecedent naturally connected with a different
   consequent, he then becomes naturally obliged, or forced, to sustain a
   proportionable evil. 2. In the system of moral government, it is the
   prerogative of the supreme Governor to propose the consequent of the
   indispensable connexion; and it is the part of the moral agent, who in
   the act of choice is left free, to choose the antecedent, which the
   governor has objectively furnished, and indispensably required. To this
   choice his is morally or hypothetically bound, yet is naturally free;
   and if the required choice be made, the good follows; but if not, the
   corresponding evil follows. For instance; if the forgiveness of sin be
   the consequent proposed, and repentance the antecedent required: the
   agent is morally bound to repent, but naturally free. If, however, he
   break through the moral bond, which is done by abusing his natural
   freedom, or continuing his wrong choice, forgiveness does not follow,
   but he stands exposed to the natural and threatened consequence of that
   wrong choice, or impenitence. 3. Hence it is obvious, that in the
   system of Providence, and the execution of all decretive designs, it is
   the prerogative of the Sovereign of the universe to establish the chain
   of all antecedents, and the consequents follow from the nature of
   things: but in the system of moral government, it is equally obvious,
   the reverse takes place; for here the supreme Governor proposes, and
   establishes objectively, the chain of consequents, while the moral
   agent, or the obligee, establishes optionally the antecedents; and as
   the actual choice of an antecedent is, such will be the actual
   consequence. When the moral agent chooses that antecedent which is
   required, or which is conformable to rectitude, the proposed consequent
   is obtained by the nature of things; but when that which is not
   required, or is not conformable to rectitude, is chosen for an
   antecedent, the evil consequence flows from the same nature of things,
   that is from the essence of eternal truth. 4. Required antecedents are
   either a state of mind, or voluntary actions; according as the
   particular consequent proposed may be. For example, if happiness be the
   end or consequent proposed, holiness, or a holy state of mind, is the
   mean, or antecedent required. If we would see the Lord, we must be
   holy, or pure in heart, by a new birth unto righteousness. If
   justification be the end proposed, believing is a mean required. For to
   us righteousness shall be imputed, IF we believe. If a subsequent
   favourable treatment of the obligee be the end proposed; obedience, or
   conformity to rule, is the mean required. 5. When an agent is said to
   be obliged in or by any thing or consideration, that thing or
   consideration in or by which he is obliged, is to be considered as the
   consequent proposed; and the state or act leading to it is the
   antecedent required. To be obliged in conscience, in duty, in law, in
   honour &c., expresses the end to be obtained by a certain state or
   conduct as the mean or antecedent required. Thus for instance, if
   conscience be satisfied, if duty be discharged, if law be conformed to,
   or if honour be secured, the required antecedent means must be adopted,
   or such acts must be performed. 6. If the required antecedents be not
   performed, it is manifest that the free agent has voluntarily
   established other antecedents, and the injurious consequents of these
   last flow (as before observed) from the nature of things; which
   consequents will be similar or dissimilar to those proposed by the
   supreme Governor, in proportion, as the antecedent established
   voluntarily by the agent, is similar or dissimilar to what was
   required. Hence we may see the true standard and measure of guilt, and
   of the different gradations of praise or blame. 7. Having considered
   the nature of moral obligation, let us now advert to the subject of it.
   This inquiry has more immediately for its object the qualifications of
   the moral agent, or those considerations whereby he stands obliged, in
   contradistinction to those beings in the universe that are not moral
   agents. An attentive and long-continued investigation of the subject
   has taught us, that they are included in these three particulars: (1.)
   A natural capacity of moral enjoyment. (2.) A sufficiency of suitable
   means. And (3.) A freedom form compulsion in the choice of
   means.--Whatever being is possessed of these qualifications is morally
   obliged; for he has a suitable ability to establish his own antecedents
   as required, in order that the proposed consequents may follow. 8. The
   first qualification is a natural capacity of moral enjoyments. This
   belongs to no being that is not a free agent; but to every being who is
   so, it inseparably belongs. This, more than any superior degree of
   reason, (however great, and however forcible the influence from that
   superiority.) constitutes the chief and most essential difference
   between men and brutes. That such a capacity is an indispensably
   requisite qualification, is clear. For free agency necessarily implies,
   a consequent moral advantage, or a natural good to be morally enjoyed,
   either explicitly proposed by the moral Governor, or fairly implied in
   the system of moral government; but this could not be proposed if there
   were no capacity of enjoyment as now stated. And this consequent
   advantage may properly be called the perpetual enjoyment of God, the
   chief good; because the chief end of all subordinate enjoyments, as
   well as of all obedience, and the sum total of all happiness, is the
   conscious enjoyment of divine favour and excellence. 9. The second
   qualification is a sufficiency of suitable means. This is indispensably
   requisite; for to require an end while the means are our of the agent's
   reach, or physically out of his power, and that under the forfeiture of
   the governor's displeasure, is of the very essence of in justice. But
   the divine Governor is "a God of truth, and without in iniquity: just
   and right is he." And that these means ought to be sufficient and
   suitable in their own nature to attain the end, in other words, that
   the antecedents required to be adopted by the agent, are infallibly
   connected with the proposed consequent, is equally plain, for the same
   reason that there should be any means at all. For means in themselves
   insufficient and unsuitable have no true connexion with the end
   proposed; even as a law in itself bad, has morally no obliging power.
   10. The third qualification is a freedom from constraint and compulsion
   in the choice of means, or in the voluntary establishment of
   antecedents. By "constraint" and "compulsion" we mean a physical
   interference with the free agent in his act of choice, in such a sense,
   as that the choice would not be the genuine effect of the motive; or,
   that the nature of the fruit should not correspond with the nature of
   the tree; but some extraneous force interposing would make the nature
   of the volition to be different form the nature of the mind or
   disposition, which other wise would be its immediate cause. 11. Divine
   influence is admitted to be requisite, in order to prepare the state of
   the mind for a right choice, even as a good tree is requisite for the
   good fruit; but this is no interference with the act of choice itself,
   nor has it the least tendency to break the connexion between motive and
   choice, or between the mind and its volition.--Such influence, indeed,
   forms one glorious link of the decretive chain, which the sovereign
   Governor has established as so many antecedents; and a right choice, in
   a free agent thus divinely influenced, or formed anew, is the
   unrestrained and unimpelled effect which follows by a necessity of
   consequence. In other words, no bad choice can possibly follow, but by
   a failure in the cause, the mind or disposition itself. 12. On this
   principle it is, that the sovereign Being himself never errs in his
   choice. The source from which the act of choice proceeds is perfectly
   good, (an infinitely holy nature,) and the connexion between this cause
   and the effect, which is a right choice, is infallibly and in the
   nature of things necessarily secure. Hence it is that we never admit,
   or suspect, an error in his choice, however great his freedom; and
   hence we have a firm ground of confidence, that the Judge of the whole
   earth will do right. 13. The three qualifications mentioned belong to
   man as a free agent; but we must not confound this idea with that of a
   subject of moral government. An infant may be the subject of
   government, both human and divine; but cannot be, properly speaking, a
   free agent. Hence it follows that the first of the qualifications
   mentioned alone is essential to constitute a subject of moral
   government, in a the most extensive sense of the term; but in order to
   constitute that class of subjects who are also free agents, the other
   two are essential. 14. When these three qualifications are found in any
   free agent, nothing more is requisite to constitute moral obligation.
   An end is proposed--means firmly connected with that end are afforded,
   and required to be used - these means are physically in the power of
   the agent - who is also free from all constraint and compulsion in his
   act of choice. If these qualifications are not sufficient morally to
   oblige, we are fully persuaded nothing can be sufficient.--As to the
   notion, that moral ability is necessary to constitute moral obligation,
   which is maintained alike by many Arminians and most Antinomians, )for
   extremes will sometimes meet,) our author abundantly demonstrates its
   futility and absurd contradictions.--W.

   [132] Our author does not mean by "motive," the object presented to the
   mind according to its intrinsic worth; but he takes into the account
   also the state of the mind itself, in reference to that object,
   according to which will be the appearance of it. Therefore, strictly
   speaking, the motive, as he has intimated at the commencement of this
   work, denotes the object as it stands in the view of the mind. If we do
   not maintain this distinction, the dispute will soon degenerate into a
   confused logomachy; and we should be forced, in defending this
   position--that the will is "necessarily determined by the strongest
   motive"--to adopt this, the most absurd of all conclusions, that the
   will of every man in the present state always chooses what is really
   best, or never errs in its elections. Whereas the world is full of
   errors and delusions; things the most excellent in themselves, are
   commonly rejected, and others the most worthless are preferred. But
   this could not happen, except on this principle, that the reality of
   worth differs, in those instances, from the appearance of it. In such
   cases, the difference is not in the object, but in the mind, when the
   choice takes place. For instance; suppose the blessed God in his true
   character as revealed in the Scriptures, the chief and an unchangeable
   good, be proposed to the contemplation of a wicked man, and his will
   rejects that good. Now, as the mind is incapable of rejecting a good,
   or of choosing an evil, as such; it is plain, that the proper and
   immediate cause of difference between the reality and the appearance of
   good, is in the state of the mind. Here lies the essence of an
   erroneous choice,--the will preferring an object which is apparently
   but not really preferable. Hence it follows irrefragably, that the
   state of the mind is the true and proper source of a right and wrong
   choice. This is it that influences the appearance of an object, so as
   to stand in the apprehension and practical judgement of the mind as
   worse or better than it really is. Therefore, the true state of the
   mind and the real state of the object of choice, united, are the
   genuine parents of the objective appearance in the mind, morally
   considered, or according to the qualities of good and evil; and this
   offspring--objective appearance-- is what our author calls "the
   strongest motive."--W.

   [133] See this distinction of moral Inability explained in Part. Sect.
   IV.

   [134] On the subject of Sincerity or Insincerity in prohibitions,
   commands, counsels, invitations, and the like, in cases where God
   foreknows that the event will not take place by the compliance of the
   moral agent addressed, we may remark a few particulars in addition to
   our author's reasoning: 1. The sincerity of prohibitions and commands,
   counsels and invitations, and the like, is foundeth--not in the event
   of things as good or bad, or the knowledge of events, or the purpose
   that secures some, or the necessity of consequence from which others
   flow, nor in the moral ability of the agent, but--in the very nature
   and tendency of the things themselves which are prohibited, commanded,
   or proposed, as good or evil, either intrinsically, if of a moral
   nature, or else relatively, if of positive appointment. Therefore, 2.
   Whether the event be compliance or non-compliance, the command, or
   invitation, &c. is perfectly sincere. For, in truth, these are neither
   more nor less than testimonies respecting the goodness or badness of
   the things in question, in the sense before mentioned, and the
   consequent obligations of the agent respecting them, under a forfeiture
   either declared or implied. Consequently, 3. Insincerity can attach to
   a command only on supposition that the goodness or badness of the event
   were the ground of the signified will, while at the same time another
   event, diverse from that which actually takes place, was purposed by
   the same will. But, 4. Strictly speaking, no events, as such, are the
   objects of purpose; but rather, the purpose respects the good
   antecedents, whereby good events, following by the necessity of
   consequence, are infallibly secured. Besides, 5. It is highly absurd,
   as must appear from the nature of law and obligation, to suppose that
   the sincerity of legislative or inviting will should depend on the
   event of compliance or non-compliance. Surely the sincerity of a
   lawgiver is not affected, whether all obey, or only some, or even none.
   Legislation is a testimony with sanctions, that the thing prohibited is
   evil, or the thing commanded is good, to the party. Hence, 6. The
   consequent, whether good or bad, is objectively established, or
   hypothethically proposed, by the legislator: and the antecedent is
   supposed to be within the reach, or, physically considered, placed
   within the power, of the agent. Therefore, 7. The agent's abuse of his
   physical power, in reference to the antecedent, constitutes the
   criminality, and the right use of it constitutes the virtue, of an
   action. And then alone is physical power, in fact, used aright when it
   is the instrument of moral rectitude, or a right state of mind. Do men
   gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so, every good tree
   bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil
   fruit. A good tree (as such ) cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither
   can a corrupt tree (as such ) bring forth good fruit.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   That Sincerity of Desires and Endeavours, which is supposed to excuse
   in the non-performance of things in themselves good, particularly
   considered.

   It is much insisted on by many, that some men, though they are not able
   to perform spiritual duties, such as repentance of sin, love to God, a
   cordial acceptance of Christ as exhibited and offered in the gospel,
   &c. yet may sincerely desire and endeavor after these things; and
   therefore must be excused; it being unreasonable to blame them for the
   omission of those things, which they sincerely desire and endeavour to
   do, but cannot. Concerning this matter, the following things may be
   observed.

   1. What is here supposed, is a great mistake, and gross absurdity; even
   that men may sincerely choose and desire those spiritual duties of
   love, acceptance, choice, rejection, &c. consisting in the exercise of
   the Will itself, or in the disposition and inclination of the heart;
   and yet not able to perform or exert them. This is absurd, because it
   is absurd to suppose that a man should directly, properly, and
   sincerely incline to have an inclination, which at the same time is
   contrary to his inclination: for that is to suppose him not to be
   inclined to that which he is inclined to. If a man, in the state and
   acts of his Will and inclination, properly and directly falls in with
   those duties, he therein performs them: for the duties themselves
   consist in that very thing; they consist in the state and acts of the
   Will being so formed and directed. If the soul properly and sincerely
   falls in with a certain proposed act of Will or choice, the soul
   therein makes that choice its own. Even as when a moving body falls in
   with a proposed direction of its motion, that is the same thing as to
   move in that direction.

   2. That which is called a Desire and Willingness for those inward
   duties, in such as do not perform them, has respect to these duties
   only indirectly and remotely, and is improperly so called; not only
   because (as was observed before) it respects those good volitions only
   in a distant view, and with respect to future time; but also because
   evermore, not these things themselves, but something else that is
   foreign, is the object that terminates these volitions and Desires.

   A drunkard, who continues in his drunkenness, being under the power of
   a violent appetite to strong drink, and without any love to virtue; but
   being also extremely covetous and close, and very much exercised and
   grieved at the diminution of his estate, and prospect of poverty, may
   in a sort desire the virtue of temperance; and though his present Will
   is to gratify his extravagant appetite, yet he may wish he had a heart
   to forbear future acts of intemperance, and forsake his excesses,
   through an unwillingness to part with his money: but still he goes on
   with his drunkenness; his wishes and endeavours are insufficient and
   ineffectual: such a man has no proper, direct, sincere Willingness to
   forsake this vice, and the vicious deeds which belong to it; for he
   acts voluntarily in continuing to drink to excess: his Desire is very
   improperly called a Willingness to be temperate; it is no true Desire
   of that virtue; for it is not that virtue, that terminates his wishes;
   nor have they any direct respect at all to it. It is only the saving of
   his money, or the avoiding of poverty, that terminates and exhausts the
   whole strength of his Desire. The virtue of temperance is regarded only
   very indirectly and improperly, even as a necessary means of gratifying
   the vice of covetousness.

   So, a man of an exceedingly corrupt and wicked heart, who has no love
   to God and Jesus Christ, but, on the contrary, being very profanely and
   carnally inclined, has the greatest distaste of the things of religion,
   and enmity against them; yet being of a family, that, from one
   generation to another, have most of them died, in youth, of an
   hereditary consumption; and so having little hope of living long; and
   having been instructed in the necessity of a supreme love to Christ,
   and latitude for his death and sufferings, in order to his salvation
   from eternal misery; if under these circumstances he should, through
   fear of eternal torments, wish he had such a disposition; but his
   profane and carnal heart remaining, he continues still in his habitual
   distaste of; and enmity to God and religion, and wholly without any
   exercise of that love and gratitude, (as doubtless the very devils
   themselves, notwithstanding all the devilishness of their temper, would
   wish for a holy heart, if by that means they could get out of hell:) in
   this case, there is no sincere Willingness to love Christ and choose
   him as his chief good: these holy dispositions and exercises are not at
   all the direct object of the Will: they truly share no part of the
   inclination or desire of the soul; but all is terminated on deliverance
   from torment: and these graces and pious volitions, notwithstanding
   this forced consent, are looked upon as in themselves undesirable; as
   when a sick man desires a dose he greatly abhors, in order to save his
   life. From these things it appears,

   3. That this indirect Willingness is not that exercise of the Will
   which the command requires; but is entirely a different one; being a
   volition of a different nature, and terminated altogether on different
   objects; wholly falling short of that virtue of Will, to which the
   command has respect,

   4. This other volition, which has only some indirect concern with the
   duty required, cannot excuse for the want of that good will itself,
   which is commanded; being not the thing which answers and fulfils the
   command, and being wholly destitute of the virtue which the command
   seeks.

   Further to illustrate this matter: If a child has a most excellent
   father that has ever treated him with fatherly kindness and tenderness,
   and has every way, in the highest degree, merited his love and dutiful
   regard, and is withal very wealthy; but the son is of so vile a
   disposition, that he inveterately hates his father; and yet,
   apprehending that his hatred of him is like to prove his ruin, by
   bringing him finally to those abject circumstances, which are
   exceedingly adverse to his avarice and ambition; he, therefore, wishes
   it were otherwise: but yet remaining under the invincible power of his
   vile and malignant disposition, he continues still in his settled
   hatred of his father. Now, if such a son's indirect Willingness to love
   and honour his father, at all acquits or excuses before God, for his
   failing of actually exercising these dispositions towards him, which
   God requires, it must be on one of these accounts. (1.) Either, That it
   answers and fulfils the command. But this it does not by the
   supposition; because the thing commanded is love and honour to his
   worthy parent. If the command be proper and just, as is supposed, then
   it obliges to the thing commanded; and so nothing else but that can
   answer the obligation. Or, (2.) It must be at least, because there is
   that virtue or goodness in his indirect Willingness, that is equivalent
   to the virtue required; and so balances or countervails it, and makes
   up for the want of it. But that also is contrary to the supposition.
   The Willingness the son has merely from a regard to money and honour,
   has no goodness in it, to countervail the want of the pious filial
   respect required.

   Sincerity and reality, in that indirect Willingness, which has been
   spoken of, does not make it the better. That which is real and hearty
   is often called sincere; whether it be in virtue or vice. Some persons
   are sincerely bad; others are sincerely good; and others may be sincere
   and hearty in things, which are in their own nature indifferent; as a
   man may be sincerely desirous of eating when he is hungry. But being
   sincere, hearty, and in good earnest, is no virtue, unless it be in a
   thing that is virtuous. A man may be sincere and hearty in joining a
   crew of pirates, or a gang of robbers. When the devils cried out, and
   besought Christ not to torment them, it was no mere pretense; they were
   very hearty in their desires not to be tormented: but this did not make
   their Will or Desire virtuous. And if men have sincere Desires, which
   are in their kind and nature no better, it can be no excuse for the
   want of any required virtue.

   And as a man's Sincerity in such an indirect Desire or willingness to
   do his duty, as has been mentioned, cannot excuse for the want of
   performance; so it is with Endeavours arising from such a Willingness.
   The Endeavours can have no more goodness in them, than the Will of
   which they are the effect and expression. And, therefore, however
   sincere and real, and however great a person's Endeavours are; yea,
   though they should be to the utmost of his ability; unless the Will
   from which they proceed be truly good and virtuous, they can be of no
   avail or weight whatsoever in a moral respect. That which is not truly
   virtuous is, in God's sight, good for nothing: and so can be of no
   value, or influence, in his account, to make up for any moral defect.
   For nothing can counterbalance evil, but good. If evil be in one scale,
   and we put a great deal into the other of sincere and earnest Desires,
   and many and great Endeavours; yet, if there be no real goodness in
   all, there is no weight in it; and so it does nothing towards balancing
   the real weight, which is in the opposite scale. It is only like
   subtracting a thousand noughts from before a real number, which leaves
   the sum just as it was.

   Indeed such Endeavours may have a negatively good influence. Those
   things, which have no positive virtue, have no positive moral
   influence; yet they may be an occasion of persons avoiding some
   positive evils. As if a man were in the water with a neighbor to whom
   he had ill will, and who could not swim, holding him by his hand; this
   neighbor was much in debt to him,--the man is tempted to let him sink
   and drown--but refuses to comply with the temptation; not from love to
   his neighbor, but from the love of money, and because by his drowning
   he should lose his debt; that which he does in preserving his neighbor
   from drowning, is nothing good in the sight of God: yet hereby he
   avoids the greater guilt that would have been contracted, if he had
   designedly let his neighbor sink and perish. But when Arminians, in
   their disputes with Calvinists, insist so much on sincere Desires and
   Endeavours, as what must excuse men, must be accepted of God, &c. it is
   manifest they have respect to some positive moral weight or influence
   of those Desires and Endeavours. Accepting, justifying, or excusing on
   the account of sincere Endeavours, (as they are called,) and men doing
   what they can, &c. has relation to some moral value, something that is
   accepts as good, and as such, countervailing some defect.

   But there is a great and unknown deceit, arising from the ambiguity of
   the phrase, sincere Endeavours. Indeed there is a vast indistinctness
   and unfixedness in most, or at least very many of the terms used to
   express things pertaining to moral and spiritual matters. Whence arise
   innumerable mistakes, strong prejudices, inextricable confusion, and
   endless controversy.--The word sincere is most commonly used to signify
   something that is good: men are habituated to understand by it the same
   as honest and upright; which terms excite an idea of something good in
   the strictest and highest sense; good in the sight of him, who sees not
   only the outward appearance, but the heart. And, therefore, men think
   that if a person be sincere, he will certainly be accepted. If it be
   said that any one is sincere in his Endeavours, this suggests, that his
   heart is good, that there is no defect of duty, as to virtuous
   inclination; he honestly and uprightly desires and endeavours to do as
   he is required; and this leads them to suppose, that it would be very
   hard and unreasonable to punish him, only because he is unsuccessful in
   his Endeavours, the thing endeavored after being beyond his
   power.--Whereas it ought to be observed, that the word sincere has
   these different significations.

   1. Sincerity, as the word is sometimes used, signifies no more than
   reality of Will and Endeavour, with respect to any thing that is
   professed or pretended; without any consideration of the nature of the
   principle or aim, whence this real Will and true Endeavour arises. If a
   man has some real Desire either direct or indirect to obtain a thing,
   or does really endeavour after it, he is said sincerely to desire or
   endeavour, without any consideration of the goodness of the principle
   from which he acts, or any excellency or worthiness of the end for
   which he acts. Thus a man who is kind to his neighbour's wife, who is
   sick and languishing, and very helpful in her case, makes a show of
   desiring and endeavouring her restoration to health and vigor; and not
   only makes such a show, but there is a reality in his pretense, he does
   heartily and earnestly desire to have her health restored, and uses his
   true and utmost Endeavours for it: he is said sincerely to desire and
   endeavour after it, because he does so truly or really; though perhaps
   the principle he acts from, is no other than a vile and scandalous
   passion; having lived in adultery with her, he earnestly desires to
   have her health and vigor restored, that he may return to his criminal
   pleasures. Or,

   2. By Sincerity is meant, not merely a reality of Will and Endeavour of
   some sort, and from some consideration or other, but a virtuous
   Sincerity. That is, that in the performance of those particular acts,
   that are the matter of virtue or duty, there be not only the matter,
   but the form and essence of virtue, consisting in the aim that governs
   the act, and the principle exercised in it. There is not only the
   reality of the act, that is as it were the body of the duty; but also
   the soul, which should properly belong to such a body. In this sense, a
   man is said to be sincere, when he acts with a pure intention; not from
   sinister views: he not only in reality desires and seeks the thing to
   be done, or qualification to be obtained, for some end or other; but he
   wills the thing directly and properly, as neither forced nor bribed;
   the virtue of the thing is properly the object of the Will.

   In the former sense, a man is said to be sincere, in opposition to a
   mere pretense, and show of the particular thing to be done or
   exhibited, without any real Desire or Endeavour at all. In the latter
   sense, a man is said to be sincere, in opposition to that show of
   virtue there is in merely doing the matter of duty, without the reality
   of the virtue itself in the soul. A man may be sincere in the former
   sense, and yet in the latter be in the sight of God, who searches the
   heart, a vile hypocrite.

   In the latter kind of sincerity, only, is there any thing truly
   valuable or acceptable in the sight of God. And this is what in
   Scripture is called Sincerity, uprightness, integrity, "truth in the
   inward parts," and "being of a perfect heart." And if there be such a
   Sincerity, and such a degree of it as there ought to be, and there be
   any thing further that the man is not able to perform, or which does
   not prove to be connected with his sincere Desires and Endeavours, the
   man is wholly excused and acquitted in the sight of God; his Will shall
   surely be accepted for his deed: and such a sincere Will and Endeavour
   is all that in strictness is required of him, by any command of God.
   But as to the other kind of Sincerity of Desires and Endeavours, having
   no virtue in it, (as was observed before,) it can be of no avail before
   God, in any case, to recommend, satisfy, or excuse, and has no positive
   moral weight or influence whatsoever.

   Corol. 1. Hence it may be inferred, that nothing in the reason and
   nature of things appears from the consideration of any moral weight in
   the former kind of Sincerity, leading us to suppose, that God has made
   any positive promises of salvation, or grace, or any saving assistance,
   or any spiritual benefit whatsoever, to any Desires, prayers,
   Endeavours, striving, or obedience of those, who hitherto have no true
   virtue or holiness in their hearts; though we should suppose all the
   Sincerity, and the utmost degree of Endeavour, that is possible to be
   in person without holiness.

   Some object against God requiring, as the condition of salvation, those
   holy exercises, which are the result of a supernatural renovation; such
   as a supreme respect to Christ, love to God, loving holiness for its
   own sake, &c. that these inward dispositions and exercises are above
   men's power, as they are by nature; and therefore that we may conclude,
   that when men are brought to be sincere in their Endeavours, and do as
   well as they can, they are accepted; and that this must be all that God
   requires, in order to their being received as the objects of his
   favour, and must be what God has appointed as the condition of
   salvation. Concerning this, I would observe, that in such manner of
   speaking as "men being accepted because they are sincere, and do as
   well as they can," there is evidently a supposition of some virtue,
   some degree of that which is truly good; though it does not go so far
   as were to be wished. For if men do what they can, unless their so
   doing be from some good principle, disposition, or exercise of heart,
   some virtuous inclination or act of the Will; their so doing what they
   can, is in some respect not a whit better than if they did nothing at
   all. In such a case, there is no more positive moral goodness in a man
   doing what he can, than in a windmill doing what it can; because the
   action does no more proceed from virtue: and there is nothing in such
   Sincerity of Endeavour, or doing what we can, that should render it any
   more a fit recommendation to positive favour and acceptance, or the
   condition of any reward or actual benefit, than doing nothing; for both
   the one and the other are alike nothing, as to any true moral weight or
   value.

   Corol. 2. Hence also it follows, there is nothing that appears in the
   reason and nature of things, which can justly lead us to determine,
   that God will certainly give the necessary means of salvation, or some
   way or other bestow true holiness and eternal life on those heathens,
   who are sincere (in the sense above explained) in their Endeavours to
   find out the Will of the Deity, and to please him, according to their
   light, that they may escape his future displeasure and wrath, and
   obtain happiness in the future state, through his favour
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Liberty of Indifference, not only not necessary to Virtue, but utterly
   inconsistent with it; and all, either virtuous or vicious habits or
   inclinations, inconsistent with Arminian notions of Liberty and moral
   Agency.

   To suppose such a freedom of Will, as Arminians talk of, to be
   requisite to Virtue and Vice, is many ways contrary to common sense.

   If Indifference belong to Liberty of Will, as Arminians suppose, and it
   be essential to a virtuous action, that it be performed in a state of
   Liberty, as they also suppose; it will follow, that it is essential to
   a virtuous action, that it be performed in a state of Indifference: and
   if it be performed in a state of Indifference, then doubtless it must
   be performed in the time of Indifference. And so it will follow, that
   in order to the Virtue of an act, the heart must be indifferent in the
   time of the performance of that act, and the more indifferent and cold
   the heart is with relation to the act performed, so much the better;
   because the act is performed with so much the greater Liberty. But is
   this agreeable to the light of nature? Is it agreeable to the notions
   which mankind in all ages have of Virtue, that it lies in what is
   contrary to Indifference, even in the tendency and inclination of the
   heart to virtuous action; and that the stronger the inclination, and so
   the further from Indifference, the more virtuous the heart, and so much
   the more praiseworthy the act which proceeds from it?

   If we should suppose (contrary to what has been before demonstrated)
   that there may be an act of Will in a state of Indifference; for
   instance, this act, viz. The Will determining to put itself out of a
   state of Indifference, and to give itself a preponderation one way;
   then it would follow, on Arminian principles, that this act or
   determination of the Will is that alone wherein Virtue consists,
   because this only is performed, while the mind remains in a state of
   Indifference, and so in a state of Liberty: for when once the mind is
   put out of its equilibrium, it is no longer in such a state; and
   therefore all the acts, which follow afterwards, proceeding from bias,
   can have the nature neither of Virtue nor Vice. Or if the thing which
   the Will can do, while yet in a state of Indifference, and so of
   Liberty, be only to suspend acting, and determine to take the matter
   into consideration; then this determination is that alone wherein
   Virtue consists, and not proceeding to action after the scale is turned
   by consideration. So that it will follow, from these principles, that
   whatever is done after the mind, by any means, is once out of its
   equilibrium, and arises from an inclination, has nothing of the nature
   of Virtue or Vice, and is worthy of neither blame or praise. But how
   plainly contrary is this to the universal sense of mankind, and to the
   notion they have of sincerely virtuous actions! Which is, that they
   proceed from a heart well disposed and well inclined; and the stronger,
   the more fixed and determined, the good disposition of the heart, the
   greater the sincerity of Virtue, and so the more of its truth and
   reality. But if there be any acts, which are done in a state of
   equilibrium, or spring immediately from perfect Indifference and
   coldness of heart, they cannot arise from any good principle or
   disposition in the heart; and, consequently, according to common sense,
   have no sincere goodness in them, having no Virtue of heart in them. To
   have a virtuous heart, is to have a heart that favours Virtue, and is
   friendly to it, and not one perfectly cold and indifferent about it.

   And besides, the actions that are done in a state of Indifference, or
   that arise immediately out of such a state, cannot be virtuous,
   because, by the supposition, they are not determined by any preceding
   choice. For if there be preceding choice, then choice intervenes
   between the act and the state of Indifference; which is contrary to the
   supposition of the act arising immediately out of Indifference. But
   those acts which are not determined by preceding choice, cannot be
   virtuous or vicious, by Arminian principles, because they are not
   determined by the Will. So that neither one way, nor the other, can any
   actions be virtuous or vicious, according to those principles. If the
   action be determined by a preceding act of choice, it cannot be
   virtuous; because the action is not done in a state of Indifference,
   nor does immediately arise from such a state; and so is not done in a
   state of Liberty, If the action be not determined by a preceding act of
   choice, then it cannot be virtuous; because then the Will is not
   self-determined in it. So that it is made certain, that neither Virtue
   nor Vice can ever find any place in the universe!

   Moreover, that it is necessary to a virtuous action that it be
   performed in a state of Indifference, under a notion of that being a
   state of liberty, is contrary to common sense; as it is a dictate of
   common sense, that Indifference itself, in many cases, is vicious, and
   so to a high degree. As if when I see my neighbour or near friend, and
   one who has in the highest degree merited of me, in extreme distress,
   and ready to perish, I find an Indifference in my heart with respect to
   any thing proposed to be done, which I can easily do, for his relief.
   So if it should be proposed to me to blaspheme God, or kill my father,
   or do numberless other things, which might be mentioned; the being
   indifferent, for a moment, would be highly vicious and vile.

   And it may be further observed, that to suppose this Liberty of
   Indifference is essential to Virtue and Vice, destroys the great
   difference of degrees of the guilt of different crimes, and takes away
   the heinousness of the most flagitious, horrid iniquities; such as
   adultery, bestiality, murder, perjury, blasphemy, &c. For, according to
   these principles, there is no harm at all in having the mind in a state
   of perfect Indifference with respect to these crimes; nay, it is
   absolutely necessary in order to any Virtue in avoiding them, or Vice
   in doing them. But for the mind to be in a state of Indifference with
   respect to them, is to be next door to doing them: it is then
   infinitely near to choosing, and so committing the fact: for
   equilibrium is the next step to a degree of preponderation; and one,
   even the least degree of preponderation (all things considered) is
   choice. And not only so, but for the Will to be in a state of perfect
   equilibrium with respect to such crimes, is for the mind to be in such
   a state, as to be full as likely to choose them as to refuse them, to
   do them as to omit them. And if our minds must be in such a state,
   wherein it is as near to choosing as refusing, and wherein it must of
   necessity, according to the nature of things, be as likely to commit
   them, as to refrain from them; where is the exceeding heinousness of
   choosing and committing them? If there be no harm in often being in
   such a state, where in the probability of doing and forbearing are
   exactly equal, there being an equilibrium, and no more tendency to one
   than the other; then, according to the nature and laws of such a
   contingence, it may be expected, as an inevitable consequence of such a
   disposition of things, that we should choose them as often as reject
   them: that it should generally so fall out is necessary, as equality in
   the effect is the natural consequence of the equal tendency of the
   cause, or of the antecedent state of things from which the effect
   arises. Why then should we be so exceedingly to blame, if it does so
   fall out?

   It is many ways apparent, that the Arminian scheme of Liberty is
   utterly inconsistent with the being of any such things as either
   virtuous or vicious habits or dispositions. If Liberty of Indifference
   be essential to moral Agency, then there can be no Virtue in any
   habitual inclinations of the heart; which are contrary to Indifference,
   and imply in their nature the very destruction and exclusion of it.
   They suppose nothing can be virtuous in which no Liberty is exercised;
   but how absurd is it to talk of exercising Indifference under bias and
   preponderation!

   And if self-determining power in the Will be necessary to moral Agency,
   praise, blame, &c. then nothing done by the Will can be any further
   praiseworthy or blameworthy, than so far as the Will is moved, swayed,
   and determined by itself, and the scales turned by the sovereign power
   the Will has over itself. And therefore the Will must not be out of its
   balance, preponderation must not be determined and effected
   before-hand; and so the self-determining act anticipated. Thus it
   appears another way, that habitual bias is inconsistent with that
   Liberty, which Arminians suppose to be necessary to Virtue or Vice; and
   so it follows, that habitual bias itself cannot be either virtuous or
   vicious.

   The same thing follows from their doctrine concerning the Inconsistence
   of Necessity with Liberty, praise, dispraise, &c. None will deny, that
   bias and inclination may be so strong as to be invincible, and leave no
   possibility of the Will determining contrary to it; and so be attended
   with Necessity. This Dr. Whitby allows concerning the Will of God,
   angels, and glorified saints, with respect to good; and the Will of
   devils, with respect to evil. Therefore, if Necessity be inconsistent
   with Liberty; then, when fixed inclination is to such a degree of
   strength, it utterly excludes all Virtue, Vice, praise, or blame. And,
   if so, then the nearer habits are to this strength, the more do they
   impede Liberty, and so diminish praise and blame. If very strong habits
   destroy Liberty, the lesser ones proportionably hinder it, according to
   their degree of strength. And therefore it will follow, that then is
   the act most virtuous or vicious, when performed without any
   inclination or habitual bias at all; because it is then performed with
   most Liberty.

   Every prepossessing fixed bias on the mind brings a degree of moral
   inability for the contrary; because so far as the mind is biased and
   prepossessed, so much hindrance is there of the contrary. And therefore
   if moral inability be inconsistent with moral Agency, or the nature of
   Virtue and Vice, then, so far as there is any such thing as evil
   disposition of heart, or habitual depravity of inclination; whether
   covetousness, pride, malice, cruelty, or whatever else; so much the
   more excusable persons are; so much the less have their evil acts of
   this kind the nature of Vice. And on the contrary, whatever excellent
   dispositions and inclinations they have so much are they the less
   virtuous.

   It is evident, that no habitual disposition of heart can be in any
   degree virtuous or vicious, or the actions which proceed from them at
   all praiseworthy or blameworthy. Because, though we should suppose the
   habit not to be of such strength, as wholly to take away all moral
   ability and self-determining power; or may be partly from bias, and in
   part from self-determination; yet in this case, all that is from
   antecedent bias must be set aside, as of no consideration; and in
   estimating the degree of Virtue or Vice, no more must be considered
   than what arises from self-determining power, without any influence of
   that bias, because Liberty is exercised in no more: so that all that is
   the exercise of habitual inclination is thrown away, as not belonging
   to the morality of the action. By which it appears, that no exercise of
   these habits, let them be stronger or weaker, can ever have any thing
   of the nature of either Virtue or Vice.

   Here if any one should say, that notwithstanding all these things,
   there may be the nature of Virtue and Vice in the habits of the mind;
   because these habits may be the effects of those acts, wherein the mind
   exercised Liberty; that however the forementioned reasons will prove
   that no habits, which are natural, or that are born or created with us,
   can be either virtuous or vicious; yet they will not prove this of
   habits, which have been acquired and established by repeated free acts.

   To such an objector I would say, that this evasion will not at all help
   the matter. For if freedom of Will be essential to the very nature of
   Virtue and Vice, then there is no Virtue or Vice but only in that very
   thing, wherein this Liberty is exercised. If a man in one or more
   things, that he does, exercises Liberty, and then by those acts is
   brought into such circumstances, that his Liberty ceases, and there
   follows a long series of acts or events that come to pass necessarily;
   those consequent acts are not virtuous or vicious, rewardable or
   punishable; but only the free acts that established this necessity; for
   in them alone was the man free. The following effects, that are
   necessary, have no more of the nature of Virtue or Vice, than health or
   sickness of body have properly the nature of Virtue or Vice, being the
   effects of a course of free acts of temperance or intemperance; or than
   the good qualities of a clock are of the nature of Virtue, which are
   the effects of free acts of the artificer; or the goodness and
   sweetness of the fruits of a garden are moral Virtues, being the
   effects of the free and faithful acts of the gardener. If Liberty be
   absolutely requisite to the morality of actions, and necessity wholly
   inconsistent with it, as Arminians greatly insist; then no necessary
   effects whatsoever, let the cause be never so good or bad, can be
   virtuous or vicious; but the Virtue or Vice must be only in the free
   cause. Agreeably to this, Dr. Whitby supposes, the necessity that
   attends the good and evil habits of the saints in heaven, and damned in
   hell, which are the consequence of their free acts in their state of
   probation, are not rewardable or punishable.

   On the whole, it appears, that if the notions of Arminians concerning
   Liberty and moral Agency be true, it will follow, that there is no
   virtue in any such habits or qualities as humility, meekness, patience,
   mercy, gratitude, generosity, heavenly-mindedness; nothing at all
   praiseworthy in loving Christ above father and mother, wife and
   children, or our own lives; or in delight in holiness, hungering and
   thirsting after righteousness, love to enemies, universal benevolence
   to mankind: and, on the other hand, there is nothing at all vicious, or
   worthy of dispraise, in the most sordid, beastly, malignant, devilish
   dispositions; in being ungrateful, profane, habitually hating God, and
   things sacred and holy; or in being most treacherous, envious, and
   cruel towards men. For all these things are dispositions and
   inclinations of the heart. And in short, there is no such thing as any
   virtuous or vicious quality of mind; no such thing as inherent virtue
   and holiness, or vice and sin: and the stronger those habits or
   dispositions are, which used to be called virtuous and vicious, the
   further they are from being so indeed; the more violent men's lusts
   are, the more fixed their pride, envy, ingratitude, and maliciousness,
   still the further are they from being blameworthy. If there be a man
   that by his own repeated acts, or by any other means, is come to be of
   the most hellish disposition, desperately inclined to treat his
   neighbours with injuriousness, contempt, and malignity; the further
   they should be from any disposition to be angry with him, or in the
   least to blame him. So, on the other hand, if there be a person, who is
   of a most excellent spirit, strongly inclining him to the most amiable
   actions, admirably meek, benevolent, &c. so much is he further from any
   thing rewardable or commendable. On which principles, the man Jesus
   Christ was very far from being praiseworthy for those acts of holiness
   and kindness which he performed, these propensities being strong in his
   heart. And above all, the infinitely holy and gracious God is
   infinitely remote from any thing commendable, his good inclinations
   being infinitely strong, and he, therefore, at the utmost possible
   distance from being at Liberty. And in all cases, the stronger the
   inclinations of any are to Virtue, and the more they love it, the less
   virtuous, and the more they love wickedness, the less vicious they
   are.--Whether these things are agreeable to Scripture, let every
   Christian, and every man who has read the Bible, judge: and whether
   they are agreeable to common sense, let every one judge, that has human
   understanding in exercise.

   And, if we pursue these principles, we shall find that Virtue and Vice
   are wholly excluded out of the world; and that there never was, nor
   ever can be, any such thing as one or the other; either in God, angels,
   or men. No propensity, disposition, or habit can be virtuous or
   vicious, as has been shown; because they, so far as they take place,
   destroy the freedom of the Will, the foundation of all moral Agency,
   and exclude all capacity of either Virtue or Vice.---And if habits and
   dispositions themselves be not virtuous nor vicious, neither can the
   exercise of these dispositions be so: for the exercise of bias is not
   the exercise of free self-determining Will, and so there is no exercise
   of Liberty in it. Consequently, no man is virtuous or vicious, either
   in being well or ill disposed, nor in acting from a good or bad
   disposition. And whether this bias or disposition be habitual or not,
   if it exists but a moment before the act of Will which is the effect of
   it, it alters not the case, as to the necessity of the effect. Or if
   there be no previous disposition at all, either habitual or occasional,
   that determines the act, then it is not choice that determines it: it
   is therefore a contingence, that happens to the man, arising from
   nothing in him; and is necessary, as to any inclination or choice of
   his; and, therefore, cannot make him either the better or worse; any
   more than a tree is better than other trees, because it oftener happens
   to be lighted upon by a nightingale; or a rock more vicious than other
   rocks, because rattle-snakes have happened oftener to crawl over it.
   So, that there is no Virtue nor Vice in good or bad dispositions,
   either fixed or transient; nor any Virtue or Vice in acting from any
   good or bad previous inclination; nor yet any Virtue or Vice in acting
   wholly without any previous inclination. Where then Shall we find room
   for virtue or vice?
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Arminian notions of moral Agency inconsistent with all Influence of
   Motive and Inducement, in either virtuous or vicious actions.

   As Arminian notions of that liberty which is essential to virtue or
   vice, are inconsistent with common sense, in their being inconsistent
   with all virtuous or vicious habits and dispositions; so they are no
   less inconsistent with all influence of Motives in moral actions.--Such
   influence equally against those notions of liberty, whether there be,
   previous to the act of choice, a preponderancy of the inclination, or a
   preponderancy of those circumstances, which have a tendency to move the
   inclination. And, indeed, it comes to just the same thing: to say, the
   circumstances of the mind are such as tend to sway and turn its
   inclination one way, is the same thing, as to say, the inclination of
   the mind, as under such circumstances, tends that way.

   Or if any think it most proper to say, that Motives do alter the
   inclination, and give a net bias to the mind, it will not alter the
   case, as to the present argument. For if Motives operate by giving the
   mind an inclination, then they operate by destroying the mind's
   indifference, and laying it under a bias. But to do this, is to destroy
   the Arminian freedom: it is not to leave the Will to its own
   self-determination, but to bring it into subjection to the power of
   something extrinsic, which operates upon it, sways and determines it,
   previous to its own determination. So that what is done from Motive,
   cannot he either virtuous or vicious. Besides, if the acts of the Will
   are excited by Motives, those Motives are the causes of those acts of
   the Will; which makes the acts of the Will necessary; as effects
   necessarily follow the efficiency of the cause. And if the influence
   and power of the Motive causes the volition, then the influence of the
   Motive determines volition, and volition does not determine itself; and
   so is not free, in the sense of Arminians, (as has been largely shown
   already,) and consequently can be neither virtuous nor vicious.

   The supposition which has already been taken notice of as an
   insufficient evasion in other cases, would be, in like manner,
   impertinently alleged in this case; namely, the supposition that
   liberty consist in a power of suspending action for the present, in
   order to deliberation. If it should be said, Though it be true, that
   the Will is under a necessity of finally following the strongest
   Motive; yet it may, for the present, forbear to act upon the Motive
   presented, till there has been opportunity thoroughly to consider it,
   and compare its real weight with the merit of other Motives. I answer
   as follows:

   Here again, it must be remembered, that if determining thus to suspend
   and consider, be that act of the Will, wherein alone liberty is
   exercised, then in this all virtue and vice must consist; and the acts
   that follow this consideration, and are the effects of it, being
   necessary, are no more virtuous or vicious than some good or bad
   events, which happen when they are fast asleep, and are the
   consequences of what they did when they were awake. Therefore, I would
   here observe two things:

   1. To suppose, that all virtue and vice, in every case, consists in
   determining, whether to take time for consideration or not, is not
   agreeable to common sense, For, according to such a supposition, the
   most horrid crimes, adultery, murder, sodomy, blasphemy, &c. do not at
   all consist in the horrid nature of the things themselves, but only in
   the neglect of thorough consideration before they were perpetrated,
   which brings their viciousness to a small matter, and makes all crimes
   equal. If it be said, that neglect of consideration, when such heinous
   evils are proposed to choice, is worse than in other cases: I answer,
   this is inconsistent, as it supposes the very thing to be, which, at
   the same time, is supposed not to be; it supposes all moral evil, all
   viciousness and heinousness, does not consist merely in the want of
   consideration. It supposes some crimes in themselves, in their own
   nature, to be more heinous than others, antecedent to consideration, or
   inconsideration, which lays the person under a previous obligation to
   consider in some cases more than others.

   2. If it were so, that all virtue and vice, in every case, consisted
   only in the act of the Will, whereby it determines whether to consider
   or no, it would not alter the case in the least, as to the present
   argument. For still in this act of the Will on this determination, it
   is induced by some Motive, and necessarily follows the strongest
   Motive; and so is necessarily, even in that act wherein alone it is
   either virtuous or vicious.

   One thing more I would observe, concerning the inconsistence of
   Arminian notions of moral Agency with the Influence of Motives.--I
   suppose none will deny, that it is possible for such powerful Motives
   to be set before the mind, exhibited in so strong a light, and under
   such advantageous circumstances, as to be invincible; and such as the
   mind cannot but yield to. In this case, Arminians will doubtless say,
   liberty is destroyed. And if so, then if Motives are exhibited with
   half so much power, they hinder liberty in proportion to their
   strength, and go halfway towards destroying it. If a thousand degrees
   of Motive abolish all liberty, then five hundred take it half away. If
   one degree of the influence of Motive does not at all infringe or
   diminish liberty, then no more do two degrees; for nothing doubled, is
   still nothing. And if two degrees do not diminish the Will's liberty,
   no more do four, eight, sixteen, or six thousand. For nothing however
   multiplied comes to but nothing. If there be nothing in the nature of
   Motive or moral suasion, that is at all opposite to liberty, then the
   greatest degree of it cannot hurt liberty. But if there be somewhat, in
   the nature of the thing, against liberty, then the least degree of it
   hurts in some degree; and consequently diminishes virtue. If invincible
   Motives to that action which is good, take away all the freedom of the
   act, and so all the virtue of it; then the more forcible the Motives
   are, so much the worse, so much the less virtue; and the weaker the
   Motives are, the better for the cause of virtue; and none is best of
   all.

   Now let it be considered, whether these things are agreeable to common
   sense. If it should be allowed, that there are some instances wherein
   the soul chooses without any Motive, what virtue can there be in such a
   choice? I am sure there is no prudence or wisdom in it. Such a choice
   is made for no good end; being made for no end at all. If it were for
   any end, the view of the end would be the Motive exciting to the act;
   and if the act be for no good end, and so from no good aim, then there
   is no good intention in it: and, therefore, according to all our
   natural notions of virtue, no more virtue in it than in the motion of
   the smoke, which is driven to and fro by the wind, without any aim or
   end in the thing moved, and which knows not whither, nor wherefore, it
   is moved.

   Corol. 1. By these things it appears, that the argument against the
   Calvinists, taken from the use of counsels, exhortations, invitations,
   expostulations, &c. so much insisted on by Arminians, is truly against
   themselves. For these thing's can operate no other way to any good
   effect, than as in them is exhibited Motive and Inducement, tending to
   excite and determine the acts of the Will. [135] But it follows, on
   their principles, that the acts of Will excited by such causes, cannot
   be virtuous; because, so far as they are from these, they are not from
   the Will's self-determining power. Hence it will follow, that it is not
   worth while to offer any arguments to persuade men to any virtuous
   volition or voluntary action; it is in vain to set before them the
   wisdom and amiableness of ways of virtue, or the odiousness and folly
   of way of vice. This notion of liberty and moral Agency frustrates all
   endeavours to draw men to virtue by instruction or persuasion, precept
   or example: for though these things may induce them to what is
   materially virtuous, yet at the same time they take away the form of
   virtue, because they destroy liberty; as they, by their own power, put
   the Will out of its equilibrium, determine and turn the scale, and take
   the work of self-determining power out of its hands. And the clearer
   the instructions given, the more powerful the arguments used, and the
   more moving the persuasions or examples, the more likely they are to
   frustrate their own design; because they have so much the greater
   tendency to put the Will out of its balance, to hinder its freedom of
   self-determination; and so to exclude the very form of virtue, and the
   essence of whatsoever is praiseworthy.

   So it clearly follows, from these principles, that God has no hand in
   any man's virtue, nor does at all promote it, either by a physical or
   moral influence; that none of the moral methods he uses with men to
   promote virtue in the world, have any tendency to the attainment of
   that end; that all the instructions he has given men, from the
   beginning of the worked to this day, by prophets or apostles, or by his
   Son Jesus Christ; that all his counsels, invitations, promises,
   threatenings, warnings, and expostulations; that all means he has used
   with men, in ordinances, or providences; yea, all influences of his
   Spirit, ordinary and extraordinary, have had no tendency at all to
   excite any one virtuous act of the mind, or to promote any thing
   morally good and commendable, in any respect.--For there is no way that
   these or any other means can promote virtue, but one of these three.
   Either, (1.) By a physical operation on the heart. But all effects that
   are wrought in men in this way, have no virtue in them, by the
   concurring voice of all Arminians. Or, (2.) Morally, by exhibiting
   Motives to the understandings, to excite good acts in the Will. But it
   has been demonstrated, that volitions excited by Motives, are
   necessary, and not excited by a self-moving power; and therefore, by
   their principles, there is no virtue in them. Or, (3.) By merely giving
   the Will an opportunity to determine itself concerning the objects
   proposed, either to choose or reject, by its own uncaused, unmoved,
   uninfluenced self-determination. And if this be all, then all those
   means do no more to promote virtue than vice: for they do nothing but
   give the Will opportunity to determine itself either way, either to
   good or bad, without laying it under any bias to either: and so there
   is really as much of an opportunity given to determine in favour of
   evil, as of good.

   Thus that horrid blasphemous consequence will certainly follow from the
   Arminian doctrine, which they charge on others; namely, that God acts
   an inconsistent part in using so many counsels, warnings, invitations,
   entreaties, &c. with sinners, to induce them to forsake sin, and turn
   to the ways of virtue; and that all are insincere and fallacious. It
   will follow, from their doctrine, that God does these things when he
   knows, at the same time, that they have no manner of tendency to
   promote the effect he seems to aim at; yea, knows that if they have any
   influence, this very influence will be inconsistent with such an
   effect, and will prevent it. But what an imputation of insincerity
   would this fix on him, who is infinitely holy and true!--So that theirs
   is the doctrine which, if pursued in its consequences, does horribly
   reflect on the Most High, and fix on him the charge of hypocrisy; and
   not the doctrine of the Calvinist, according to their frequent and
   vehement exclamations and invectives.

   Corol 2. From what has been observed in this section, it again appears,
   that Arminian principles and notions, when fairly examined and pursued
   in their demonstrable consequences, do evidently shut all virtue out of
   the world, and make it impossible that there should ever be any such
   thing, in any case; or that any such thing should ever be conceived of.
   For, by these principles, the very notion of virtue or vice implies
   absurdity and contradiction. For it is absurd in itself, and contrary
   to common sense, to suppose a virtuous act of mind without any good
   intention or aim; and, by their principles, it is absurd to suppose a
   virtuous act with a good intention or aim; for to act for an end, is to
   act from a Motive. So that if we rely on these principles, there can be
   no virtuous act with a good design and end; and it is self-evident,
   there can be none without: consequently there can be no virtuous act at
   all.

   Corol. 3. It is manifest, that Arminian notions of moral Agency, and
   the being of a faculty of Will, cannot consist together; and that if
   there can be any such thing as either a virtuous or vicious act, it
   cannot be an act of the Will; no Will can be at all concerned in it.
   For that act which is performed without inclination, without Motive,
   without end, must be performed without any concern of the Will. To
   suppose an act of the Will without these, implies a contradiction. If
   the soul in its act has no motive or end; then, in that act (as was
   observed before) it seeks nothing, goes after nothing, exerts no
   inclination to any thing; and this implies, that in that act it desires
   nothing, and chooses nothing; so that there is no act of choice in the
   case: and that is as much as to say, there is no act of Will in the
   case. Which very effectually shuts all vicious and virtuous acts out of
   the universe; inasmuch as, according to this, there can be no vicious
   or virtuous act wherein the Will is concerned: and according to the
   plainest dictates of reason, and the light of nature, and also the
   principles of Arminians themselves, there can be no virtuous or vicious
   act wherein the Will is not concerned. And therefore there is no room
   for any virtuous or vicious acts at all.

   Corol. 4. If none of the moral actions of intelligent beings are
   influenced by either previous inclination or Motive, another strange
   thing will follow; and this is, that God not only cannot foreknow any
   of the future moral actions of his creatures, but he can make no
   conjecture, can give no probable guess concerning them. For all
   conjecture in things of this nature must depend on some discerning or
   apprehension of these two things, previous Disposition and Motive,
   which, as has been observed, Arminian notions of moral Agency, in their
   real consequence, altogether exclude.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [135] The true reason why counsels, exhortations, &c. commonly called
   motives, are consistent with the doctrine of necessity held by
   Calvinists, may be here noticed, in addition to some hints before
   given. In order to this, we must guard against ambiguity in the word
   "motive," which at one time is intended for the object exhibited,
   abstractedly considered: at another, the object concretively, as it
   stands in the view of the mind. The opposers of that necessity for
   which our author pleads must in order to make even a show of
   consistency, understand the word "motive" in the first of these
   acceptations. And if so, it is nothing marvellous that they should
   maintain the existence of a power in the human mind which can, on the
   one hand, successfully oppose the strongest possible motive; an don the
   other, be determined by a weaker, and even sometimes by the weakest
   motive. For how often is the most insignificant bauble preferred to
   infinite excellence! But consistent Calvinists do not understand the
   term in any such manner, but rather as an effect compounded of the
   state of the mind and the real object. And, seeing the object, in
   itself considered, is not changed by mental perception, the difference
   of the effect, or change of mental view, must arise from the mind
   itself. Hence one motive, in the Arminian sense, may produce, in the
   other acceptation of the term, a thousand different motives, according
   to the different mental states to which the object is presented.
   Therefore counsels, exhortations, invitations, &c. are most rationally
   employed by Calvinists; for that which determines the human will to
   action, is the motive as it is perceived, or that which results from an
   application of the object to the mind. According to them, without an
   object presented there can be no motive, anymore than there can be a
   motive without a mind to which it is presented. Without evangelical
   truth, and an evangelical mind, or disposition, there can be no
   evangelical determining motive. Consequently, if the mind be at all
   roused from ignorance and apathy, determining motives must be produced
   in it by a representation of objects, by counsels, exhortations,
   invitations, expostulations, &c. These will succeed, or fail of
   success, morally, according to the state of the mind. But as the agent
   is free from co-action, constraint, and compulsion, in the act of
   choosing, the true inferences--not that such use of the means is
   unsuitable or inconsistent, but--that here is clearly implied the great
   necessity, the rationality, and the perfect consistency of prayer to
   the God of grace, for success on the use of means. Paul may plant, and
   Apollos may water, but God giveth the increase. To influence the mind
   without moral motives, is the prerogative of God. All hearts are in his
   hand to form them as he pleases. If the tree be good by sovereign
   influence, or a new birth, the fruit of love to God and hatred to sin,
   holy fear, unfeigned faith, humble hope, &c. will follow, according to
   the objects presented. A crop will not follow without the union of two
   things, seed and soil. If both be good, the crop will be good, but not
   otherwise. That motive which determines the will, cannot arise from any
   other cause than the object and the disposition united. And then only
   can the determining motive be good, when it results from a good object
   applied to a good disposition, or state of mind. These things duly
   considered will sufficiently prove why Calvinists use counsels,
   exhortations, invitations, &c.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART IV.

   wherein the chief grounds of the reasonings of arminians, in support
   and defence of the fore-mentioned notions of liberty, moral agency, &c.
   And against the opposite doctrine, are considered.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   The Essence of the virtue and vice of dispositions of the heart and
   acts of the Will, lies not in their Cause, but their Nature. [136]

   One main foundation of the reasons, which are brought to establish the
   forementioned notions of liberty, virtue, vice, &c. is a supposition,
   that the virtuousness of the dispositions, or acts of the Will,
   consists not in the nature of these dispositions or acts of the Will,
   but wholly in the Origin or Cause of them: so that if the disposition
   of the mind, or acts of the Will, be never so good, yet if the Cause of
   the disposition or act be not our virtue, there is nothing virtuous or
   praiseworthy in it; and, on the contrary, if the Will, in its
   inclination or acts, be never so bad, yet unless it arises from
   something that is our vice or fault, there is nothing vicious or
   blameworthy in it. Hence their grand objection and pretended
   demonstration, or self- evidence, against any virtue and
   commendableness, or vice and blameworthiness, of those habits or acts
   of the Will, which are not from some virtuous or vicious determination
   of the Will itself.

   Now, if this matter be well considered, it will appear to be altogether
   a mistake, yea, a gross absurdity; and that it is most certain, that if
   there be any such thing, as a virtuous or vicious disposition, or
   volition of mind, the virtuousness or viciousness of them consists not
   in the Origin or Cause of these things, but in the Nature of them.

   If the Essence of virtuousness or commendableness, and of viciousness
   or fault, does not lie in the Nature of the dispositions or acts of
   mind, which are said to be our virtue or our fault, but in their Cause,
   then it is certain it lies no where at all. Thus, for instance, if the
   vice of a vicious act of Will, lies not in the Nature of the act, but
   the Cause; so that its being of a bad Nature will not make it at all
   our fault, unless it arises from some faulty determination of ours, as
   its Cause, or something in us that is our fault; then, for the same
   reason, neither can the viciousness of that Cause lie in the Nature of
   the thing itself, but in its Cause: that evil determination of ours is
   not our fault, merely because it is of a bad Nature, unless it arises
   from some Cause in us that is our fault. And when we are come to this
   higher Cause, still the reason of the thing holds good; though this
   Cause be of a bad Nature, yet we are not at all to blame on that
   account, unless it arises from something faulty in us. Nor yet can
   blameworthiness lie in the Nature of this Cause, but in the Cause of
   that. And thus we must drive faultiness back from step to step, from a
   lower Cause to a higher, in infinitum; and that is, thoroughly to
   banish it from the world, and to allow it no possibility of existence
   any where in the universality of things. On these principles, vice, or
   moral evil, cannot consist in any thing that is an effect; because
   fault does not consist in the Nature of things, but in their Cause; as
   well as because effects are necessary, being unavoidably connected with
   their Cause: therefore the Cause only is to blame. And so it follows,
   that faultiness can lie only in that Cause, which is a Cause only, and
   no effect of anything. Nor yet can it lie in this; for then it must lie
   in the Nature of the thing itself; not in its being from any
   determination of ours, nor anything faulty in us which is the Cause,
   nor indeed from any Cause at all; for, by the supposition, it is no
   effect, and has no Cause. And thus, he that will maintain, it is not
   the Nature of habits or acts of Will that makes them virtuous or
   faulty, but the Cause, must immediately run himself out of his own
   assertion; and in maintaining it, will insensibly contradict and deny
   it.

   This is certain, that if effects are vicious and faulty, not from their
   Nature, or from any thing inherent in them, but because they are from a
   bad Cause, it must be on account of the badness of the Cause: a bad
   effect in the Will must be bad, because the Cause is bad, or of an evil
   Nature, or has badness as a quality inherent in it: and a good effect
   in the Will must be good, by reason of the goodness of the Cause, or
   its being of a good Kind and Nature. And if this be what is meant, the
   very supposition of fault and praise lying not in the Nature of the
   thing, but the Cause, contradicts itself, and does at least resolve the
   Essence of virtue and vice into the Nature of things, and supposes it
   originally to consist in that.--And if a caviler has a mind to run from
   the absurdity, by saying, "No, the fault of the thing, which is the
   Cause, lies not in this, that the Cause itself is of an evil Nature,
   but that the Cause is evil in that sense, that it is from another bad
   Cause." Still the absurdity will follow him; for, if so, then the Cause
   before charged is at once acquitted, and all the blame must be laid to
   the higher Cause, and must consist in that's being evil, or of an evil
   Nature. So now, we are come again to lay the blame of the thing
   blameworthy, to the Nature of the thing, and not to the Cause. And if
   any is so foolish as to go higher still, and ascend from step to step,
   till he is come to that which is the first Cause concerned in the whole
   affair, and will say, all the blame lies in that; then, at last, he
   must be forced to own, that the faultiness of the thing, which he
   supposes alone blameworthy, lies wholly in the Nature of the thing, and
   not in the Original or Cause of it; for the supposition is, that it has
   no Original, it is determined by no act of ours, is caused by nothing
   faulty in us, being absolutely without any Cause. And so the race is at
   an end, but the evader is taken in his flight.

   It is agreeable to the natural notions of mankind, that moral evil,
   with its desert of dislike and abhorrence, and all its other ill
   deservings, consists in a certain deformity in the Nature of certain
   dispositions of the heart and acts of the Will; and not in the
   deformity of something else, diverse from the very thing itself; which
   deserves abhorrence, supposed to be the Cause of it. Which would be
   absurd, because that would be to suppose a thing that is innocent and
   not evil, is truly evil and faulty, because another thing is evil. It
   implies a contradiction; for it would be to suppose, the very thing,
   which is morally evil and blameworthy, is innocent and not blameworthy;
   but that something else, which is its Cause, is only to blame. To say,
   that vice does not consist in the thing which is vicious, but in its
   Cause, is the same as to say, that vice does not consist in vice, but
   in that which produces it.

   It is true, a Cause may be to blame, for being the Cause of vice: it
   may be wickedness in the Cause that it produces wickedness. But it
   would imply a contradiction, to suppose that these two are the same
   individual wickedness. The wicked act of the Cause in producing
   wickedness, is one wickedness; and the wickedness produced, if there be
   any produced, is another. And therefore, the wickedness of the latter
   does not lie in the former, but is distinct from it; and the wickedness
   of both lies in the evil Nature of the things which are wicked.

   The thing, which makes sin hateful, is that by which it deserves
   punishment; which is but the expression of hatred. And that, which
   renders virtue lovely, is that on account of which it is fit to receive
   praise and reward; which are but the expressions of esteem and love.
   But that which makes vice hateful, is its hateful Nature; and that
   which renders virtue lovely, is its amiable Nature. It is a certain
   beauty or deformity that are inherent in that good or evil will, which
   is the soul of virtue and vice (and not in the occasion of it,) which
   is their worthiness of esteem or disesteem, praise or dispraise,
   according to the common sense of mankind. If the Cause or occasion of
   the rise of a hateful disposition or act of Will, be also hateful;
   suppose another antecedent evil will; that is entirely another sin,
   and, deserves punishment by itself, under a distinct consideration.
   There is worthiness of dispraise in the Nature of an evil volition, and
   not wholly in some foregoing act, which is its Cause; otherwise the
   evil volition, which is the effect, is no moral evil, any more than
   sickness, or some other natural calamity, which arises from a Cause
   morally evil.

   Thus, for instance, ingratitude is hateful and worthy of dispraise,
   according to common sense; not because something as bad, or worse than
   ingratitude, was the Cause that produced it; but because it is hateful
   in itself, by its own inherent deformity. So the love of virtue is
   amiable, and worthy of praise, not merely because something else went
   before this love of virtue in our minds, which caused it to take place
   there--for instance, our own choice; we choose to love virtue, and, by
   some method or other, wrought ourselves into the love of it--but
   because of the amiableness and condecency of such a disposition and
   inclination of heart. If that was the case, that we did choose to love
   virtue, and so produced that love in ourselves, this choice itself
   could be no otherwise amiable or praiseworthy, than as love to virtue,
   or soma other amiable inclination, was exercised and implied in it. If
   that choice was amiable at all, it must be so on account of some
   amiable quality in the Nature of the choice. If we chose to love
   virtue, not in love to virtue, or any thing that was good, and
   exercised no sort of good disposition in the choice, the choice itself
   was not virtuous nor worthy of any praise, according to common sense,
   because the choice was not of a good Nature.

   It may not be improper here to take notice of something said by an
   author, that has lately made a mighty noise in America. "A necessary
   holiness (says he [137] ) is no holiness.--Adam could not be originally
   created in righteousness and true holiness, because he must choose to
   be righteous, before he could be righteous. And therefore he must
   exist, he must be created, yea, he must exercise thought and
   reflection, before he was righteous." There is much more to the same
   effect, (p. 437, 438, 439, 440.) If these things are so, it will
   certainly follow, that the first choosing to be righteous is no
   righteous choice; there is no righteousness or holiness in it, because
   no choosing to be righteous goes before it. For he plainly speaks of
   choosing to be righteous, as what must go before righteousness; and
   that which follows the choice, being the effect of the choice, cannot
   be righteousness or holiness: for an effect is a thing necessary, and
   cannot prevent the influence or efficacy of its Cause; and therefore is
   unavoidably dependent upon the Cause; and he says a necessary holiness
   is no holiness. So that neither can a choice of righteousness be
   righteousness or holiness, nor can any thing that is consequent on that
   choice, and the effect of it, be righteousness or holiness; nor can any
   thing that is without choice, be righteousness or holiness. So that by
   his scheme, all righteousness and holiness is at once shut out of the
   world, and no door left open, by which it can ever possibly enter into
   the world.

   I suppose, the way that men came to entertain this absurd inconsistent
   notion--with respect to internal inclinations and volitions themselves,
   (or notions that imply it,) viz. that the Essence of their moral good
   or evil lies not in their Nature, but their Cause--was, that it is
   indeed a very plain dictate of common sense, that it is so with respect
   to all outward actions, and sensible motions of the body; that the
   moral good or evil of them does not lie at all in the motions
   themselves; which, taken by themselves, are nothing of a moral nature;
   and the Essence of all the moral good or evil that concerns them, lies
   in those internal dispositions and volitions which are the Cause of
   them. Now, being always used to determine this, without hesitation or
   dispute, concerning external Actions; which in the common use of
   language are signified by such phrases, as men's actions or their
   doings; hence, when they came to speak of volitions, and internal
   exercises of their inclinations, under the same denomination of their
   actions, or what they do, they unwarily determined the case must also
   be the same with these as with external actions; not considering the
   vast difference in the Nature of the case.

   If any shall still object and say, why is it not necessary that the
   Cause should be considered, in order to determine whether any thing be
   worthy of blame or praise? is it agreeable to reason and common sense,
   that a man is to be praised or blamed for that which he is not the
   Cause or author?

   I answer, such phrases as being the Cause, being the author, and the
   like, are ambiguous. They are most vulgarly understood for being the
   designing voluntary Cause, or Cause by antecedent choice: and it is
   most certain, that men are not, in this sense, the Causes or authors of
   the first act of their Wills, in any case; as certain as any thing is,
   or ever can be; for nothing can be more certain, than that a thing is
   not before it is, nor a thing of the same kind before the first thing
   of that kind; and so no choice before the first choice.--As the phrase,
   being the author, may be understood, not of being the producer by an
   antecedent act of Will, but as a person may be said to be the author of
   the act of Will itself, by his being the immediate agent, or the being
   that is acting, or in exercise in that act; if the phrase of being the
   author, is used to signify this, then doubtless common sense requires
   men being the authors of their own acts of Will, in order to their
   being esteemed worthy of praise or dispraise, on account of them. And
   common sense teaches, that they must be the authors of external
   actions, in the former sense, namely, their being the Causes of them by
   an act of Will or choice, in order to their being justly blamed or
   praised: but it teaches no such thing with respect to the acts of the
   Will themselves.--But this may appear more manifest by the things which
   will be observed in the following SECTION.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [136] This may appear to some to be an identical proposition "The
   essence of a thing lies in its nature;" but it is not wholly so, and
   the whole of the proposition is exceedingly important, on account of
   the negative part, or the incidental proposition it contains, viz. The
   essence of virtue and vice lies not in their cause. A single
   consideration may be sufficient to show the truth and importance of one
   part of this last proposition. If the essence of virtue lay in its
   cause, how could the first cause, or the uncaused nature, be virtuous?
   If therefore the first cause be virtuous, or have the essence of
   virtue, as all atheists will allow, it is plain that essence must lie
   in the nature of that cause itself. Hence, as God is the standard of
   all moral excellence, created natures are morally excellent in
   proportion as they resemble him. And as virtue is an imitable
   excellence, and as good reason can be assigned why the resemblance
   should not hold in this particular, it is highly probably, a priori,
   that, in reference to created natures, the essence of their virtue lies
   not in its cause. To demonstrate this last, is the design of the
   present section. Again, as the essence of virtue lies not in its cause,
   so neither does the essence of vice lie in its cause. But the
   philosophical ground of this part of the general proposition demands
   more particular attention. And as this proposition--"the essence of
   vice lies not in its cause," affects the whole system of morals, and
   indeed of theology, we beg leave to propose a series of remarks which,
   it is hoped, will cast some light on the subject. 1. Causes are of two
   kinds, and of two only, either positive or negative. Positive causes
   produce positive effects, from the first cause through all secondary
   causes: and these positive secondary causes are nothing else but so may
   decretive antecedents, which act physically and their consequences
   follow from the nature of things; even as number follows the repetition
   of units, or happiness results from true virtue. 2. The term "cause" is
   applied less properly to express a negative idea; for it expresses
   merely an antecedent of a consequent. For instance, if we say that a
   man cannot read because he is blind, or cannot walk because he has no
   legs, or cannot go to heaven because he does not love God, and the
   like; it is manifest that blindness, want of legs, and want of love to
   God, are "causes" only as antecedents are causes to their consequents,
   without positive influence. 3. Negative causes, though they have no
   positive operations in producing their consequents, are no less the
   ground of certainty than those causes, properly so called, which exist
   in physical operations. For the consequent follows the antecedent with
   equal certainty, whether the connexion be formed by decretive will and
   energy, as in all positive causes, or by the nature of things only,
   which is essential truth, as in all negative causes. 4. The cause of
   vicious acts, is a vicious disposition; in other words, it is the want,
   or the absence of a virtuous disposition. The essence of the vicious
   act, however, is not in the cause, or disposition. The vice of the
   disposition is one thing, and the vice of the act is another. For as
   the nature of the disposition, and the nature of the act, are
   different; so the vice, or the moral badness of the one, is a different
   badness from that of the other. The one and the other is a bad thing
   whatever be the cause, and irrespective of any. Hence, 5. Evil
   dispositions or acts should be denominated such, not from their cause
   but from their nature. Were it otherwise, personal fault, or blame,
   could never exist; for the vicious act would transfer the blame to the
   disposition, and the disposition to the cause of that; whereby persons
   would be free from blame, and this would attach to principles only. But
   to suppose a moral agent incapable of blameworthiness, which on the
   supposition would be the case, is a gross absurdity. It would be to
   suppose an accountable being, who at the same time can be accountable
   for nothing; and it would be to impute blame to principles, or a
   principle, which is incapable of moral agencies. 6. The cause of
   virtuous acts, or, if we may so speak, the soil in which they grow, is
   a previous inclination or disposition to good, before any actual choice
   takes place. This may be called a virtuous inclination, or disposition.
   But the original and predisposing cause of that, is divine energy,
   influx, or influence; in other words, an assimilating emanation form
   the holy nature and decretive will of God. 7. Nevertheless, this is not
   a good, or a virtue, attributable to man, until he is actually
   possessed of it, or it becomes his, as a quality of his nature. God,
   the Father of lights, from whom every good and perfect gift proceedeth,
   is the cause of that virtuous disposition; but while the virtue
   remained in the cause, and not in the man, it was no human virtue. Nor
   does the essence of human virtue lie in the communication itself, for
   this was the effect of divine will; but no will can alter the nature of
   virtue: therefore, the essence of virtue consists not in the cause,
   whether we understand by "cause", the Will that communicates the
   virtuous disposition, or the communication itself. Consequently, the
   absence of virtue is so completely confined to the disposition of the
   agent, and the consequent acts, as to exclude every thing else that may
   be termed its cause. 8. The cause of vicious acts, whatever it be, is
   opposite to the cause of virtuous acts; for these acts have
   diametrically opposite effects. That vicious acts have a cause, as well
   as virtuous ones, cannot be denied by any reflecting person, for this
   plain reason, that there is nothing in the universality of things,
   beings, qualities, &c. but had a cause, either positive or negative, as
   before explained. Neither agency, liberty, nor nay thing else,
   considered as an effect, or a consequent, can exist without a cause, or
   antecedent. The denial of this, and universal scepticism, are the same
   thing. Then all reasoning, and all common sense, vanish. Then body and
   spirit, cause and effects, good and evil, &c. are huddled up in endless
   confusion, without either first or last, great or small, order or
   proportion. 9. The original, predisposing cause of a vicious
   disposition, is the very opposite of the original, predisposing cause
   of a virtuous disposition. This last, it has been shown, is divine
   energy, which is a positive cause; the other, the opposite of this, is
   a negative cause. The cause of good, as before observed, is a cause
   properly so called, in the way of physical influence; but the cause of
   evil is called "a cause" improperly, as it implies no physical
   influence, but only stands as an antecedent to a consequent; from which
   however the consequent may be inferred with as much certainty as if the
   influence were physical and mechanical. Whether you suppose positive
   quantities, or negative quantities, consequences are equally certain,
   it is no less true that 5-2=3, than 1-33=6. Whether you say, If the sun
   were not, it would cause darkness; or say, If the sun shine, it will
   cause light; the difference is only in the nature of the cause, as
   either positive or negative, not in the certainty of the consequence.
   10. It would be very absurd and contradictory to say that the cause of
   vice is vicious. For that would be the same as to say, that a thing was
   before it existed. To be vicious is to have vice; and for this to be
   the cause of vice, is for it to be the cause of itself, or self-caused,
   which is absurd. It is therefore impossible that the cause of vice
   should be vicious; consequently the essence of vice is no where but in
   its own proper nature, to the exclusion of every cause whatever. And
   yet, as it is an effect, it must have a cause. 11. The principle
   question to be determined, in this investigation, is, What is precisely
   the original, predisposing, negative cause of a vicious disposition?
   The answer is plain and short; it is that property of a creature which
   renders it absolutely dependent for its being and well-being. Or, it is
   that property which is the very opposite too independence,
   self-sufficiency, and immutability: and therefore is a property
   peculiar to a creature, and cannot belong to God. 12. Nor can this be
   said to be an actually existing property form eternity; since it cannot
   belong to God, and nothing, the only alternative, has no property. It
   is not therefore the Manichean eternal evil principle, if by this be
   meant any thing actually existing, as coeval with a good principle.
   Good is a principle positively eternal; but what we speak of is a mere
   negative principle, and owes its existence as a property to a created
   nature; and were every creature annihilated, this property would also
   cease to be. 13. But what shall we call this principle, property, or
   predisposing cause of vice? Shall we call it defectibility, defect,
   limitation, or imperfection of existence? Not the first; for the
   question would return, What makes a creature defectible? Not the
   second; for the term is ambiguous, as there are several kinds of
   defect, natural and moral, and therefore, as the word is of common use,
   and of frequent occurrence, it would require perpetual explanations.
   Not the third, or the fourth; for the same reason. A term therefore not
   ambiguous, and sufficiently expressive, should be employed; as we
   employ technical terms to express a specific object. For this purpose,
   no term, perhaps, is less exceptionable, or more suitable, than passive
   power; for it is free from ambiguity, and is sufficiently expressive of
   the idea already explained. The idea of passivity is clearly implied in
   the name, as in the thing; and the term power seems preferable to
   property, or quality, because less ambiguous, and yet more expressive
   to convey the intended idea of metaphysical influence of cause and
   effect. 14. To which we may add, That "passive power" is by no means a
   new coined expression; but has often been used to express the very idea
   to which it is here applied. Thus, above a century and a half ago, that
   eminently pious and profoundly learned divine, Theophilus Gale, in his
   "Court of the Gentiles," says: "The root and origin of all creatural
   dependence, is the creature's passive power, and God's absolute
   dominion over it. - Now all limits as to nature and essence speak a
   mixture of nihility, passive power and dependence resulting therefrom;
   whence Damascene adds, The Deity only is impassible;' namely, because
   exempt form nihility, passive power, and dependence. This nihility or
   nothingness of the creature is the same with its passive power either
   physic or metaphysic, natural or obediential; whereby it is limited,
   and confined to such or such a degree of entity, existence, and
   operation." (Court of Gent. Part IV. B. ii. Ch. xi. 4.) 15. Now that
   the essence of vice consisteth not in this property is plain, in that
   passive power is essential to a creature, which vice neither is nor can
   be. It is the soul in which vice grows, and without which it could not
   grow, or have existence, but is not itself vicious; otherwise we should
   be forced to seek the cause of that cause in perpetual retrogradation,
   and move from one difficulty to another into endless absurdity. The
   predisposing cause of vice, therefore, is passive power which in itself
   is not vicious, or morally evil. But how moral evil came to exist, and
   what is its true origin, will be more conveniently considered in a
   subsequent part of this work. 16. As the essence of the virtue and vice
   of disposition and acts lies not in their cause, so neither does it lie
   in their effects; that is, dispositions and acts are not to be
   denominated virtuous or vicious on account of their effects or
   consequences, such as their being productive of happiness or misery.
   For as the properties of any thing must be different from those of its
   cause, however similar, so must those properties differ from their
   effects. The immediate effect of virtue is--not happiness to the
   individual, for instance, but--that the agent is approvable or
   praiseworthy. But were the essence of virtue to consist in "its
   tendency to ultimate happiness," as some have affirmed, immediate
   approbation and praise could not be safely given to any individual act
   or disposition, as its relation to ultimate happiness could not be
   ascertained but by the final event. If the essence of the virtue or
   vice were not in the act or disposition, but to be denominated from its
   effects, many other absurdities would follow. For instance, 17. That
   supposition, the supreme excellence of Jehovah would not be approvable
   and praiseworthy on its own account, or its intrinsic excellency, but
   only because of its effects and consequences. On that principle, to
   hate God would be nothing bad, it would have no intrinsic demerit; or
   to love God would be nothing good, nothing in itself praiseworthy, were
   it not for consequences. Which is not only absurd, but blasphemous also
   and shocking. 18. That sentiment is evidently founded on the
   supposition that every thing, property, quality, and event, is the
   fruit of divine will; and therefore that every thing must be equally
   good in itself, though relatively good or bad to the individual: even
   as matter and motion, and their laws, are equally good in themselves,
   but not relatively so to the individuals who suffer from them. But this
   is a great mistake, as it confounds things totally distinct in their
   nature, such as positive and negative causes, natural necessity and
   moral certainty. Decretive positions and their consequences are one
   ground of certainty; negative causes and their consequences are
   another; therefore, from the certainty of result in the divine view we
   cannot rightly infer that all results are decreed. Decretive positions
   comprehend neither negative causes, nor the nature of things. For an
   intelligent being to love God, is agreeable to the nature of things; it
   is what ought to be independent of any decretive position, or legal
   demand in reference to the case. In like manner, for an intelligent
   being to hate God is a voluntary contradiction to the nature of
   things--or the essence of eternal truth which is above all will, or is
   not founded in will--as well as to constitued law. Again, 19. To deny
   the "intrinsic merit and demerit of voluntary actions independent on
   their consequences," as some do, (Belaham's Elements, p. 309.) is to
   deny the nature of things; and this is nothing less than an attempt to
   divide eternal unity, to give the lie direct to essential truth, and to
   convert the first uncaused essence in to contradictory contingencies.
   The nature of things is nothing else, radically, but the nature of God,
   which is essential truth as well as essential goodness. Decretive
   positions, or an arbitrary constitution of things by divine will,
   therefore can no more alter the intrinsic merit or demerit of actions,
   affections, habits, or characters, then divine will can alter the
   character of essential truth, or choose real contradictions. Moreover,
   20. Ultimate happiness is the effect or consequence of virtue as a
   reward. Now to make the merit or excellence of virtue to depend on
   ultimate happiness, while happiness is the reward of virtue, is most
   inconsistent; it is to reward for nothing rewardable. If virtue be not
   of intrinsic worth, it must be a mere moral nothing, as to
   rewardableness, and therefore ultimate happiness would be a reward for
   a mere moral nothing; that is, happiness would be no reward, which is
   contradictory. 21. As to vice, its consequence is punishment. If indeed
   this consequence were the mere effect of arbitrary positions, or
   sovereign appointment: if it were the plan of God first to cause the
   existence of vice, and then to punish the subject of it, as what the
   good of the whole required, there would be great plausibility in the
   sentiment we oppose. But the assumption itself is fundamentally
   erroneous. It confounds hypothetical antecedents, as the whole of
   decretive plans may be termed, with that eternal truth which connects
   them with their consequences. To suppose the hatred of God, for
   instance, to have no intrinsic demerit in it, or that it is bad only as
   dependent on its consequences; is the same as to say, it is agreeable
   to the nature of things, comformable to eternal truth, that God should
   be hated, and therefore that he must approve of it--only to the agent
   it is attended with bad consequences. That is, on the supposition, God
   has appointed misery as the consequent, for doing nothing that is in
   itself bad; yea for doing what is perfectly innocent, agreeable to the
   nature of things, comformable to eternal truth, and acceptable to God,
   as every thing which he appoints must be. Whether such a sentiment be
   nearest a-kin to "profound philosophy" or to something else, let the
   competent reader judge.--W.

   [137] Scrip. Doc. Of Original Sin, p. 180. 3d Edit.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   The Falseness and Inconsistence of that metaphysical notion of Action,
   and Agency, which seems to be generally entertained by the defenders of
   the Arminian Doctrine concerning Liberty, moral Agency, &c.

   One thing, that is made very much a ground of argument and supposed
   demonstration by Arminians, in defense of the forementioned principles,
   concerning moral Agency, virtue, vice, &c., is their metaphysical
   notion of Agency and Action. They say, unless the soul has a
   self-determining power, it has no power of Action; if its volitions be
   not caused by itself, but are excited and determined by some extrinsic
   cause, they cannot be the soul's own acts; and that the soul cannot be
   active, but must be wholly passive, in those effects which it is the
   subject of necessarily, and not from its own free determination.

   Mr. Chubb lays the foundation of his scheme of Liberty, and of his
   arguments to support it, very much in this position, that man is an
   Agent, and capable of Action. Which doubtless is true: but
   self-determination belongs to his notion of Action, and is the very
   essence of it. Whence he infers, that it is impossible for a man to act
   and be acted upon, in the same thing, at the same time; and that no
   Action can be the effect of the Action of another: and he insists, that
   a necessary Agent, or an Agent that is necessarily determined to act,
   is a plain contradiction. [138]

   But those are a precarious sort of demonstrations, which men build on
   the meaning that they arbitrarily affix to a word; especially when that
   meaning is abstruse, inconsistent, and entirely diverse from the
   original sense of the word in common speech.

   That the meaning of the word Action, as Mr. Chubb and many others use
   it, is utterly unintelligible and inconsistent, is manifest, because it
   belongs to their notion of an Action, that it is something wherein is
   no passion or passiveness; that is, (according to their sense of
   passiveness,) it is under the power, influence, or Action of no cause.
   And this implies, that Action has no cause, and is no effect; for to be
   an effect implies passiveness, or the being subject to the power and
   Action of its cause. And yet they hold, that the mind's Action is the
   effect of its own determination, yea, the mind's free and voluntary
   determination; which is the same with free choice. So that Action is
   the effect of something preceding, even a preceding act of choice: and
   consequently, in this effect the mind is passive, subject to the power
   and Action of the preceding cause, which is the foregoing choice, and
   therefore cannot be active. So that here we have this contradiction,
   that Action is always the effect of foregoing choice, and therefore
   cannot be Action; because it is passive to the power of that preceding
   causal choice; and the mind cannot be active and passive in the same
   thing, at the same time. Again they say, necessity is utterly
   inconsistent with Action, and a necessary Action is a contradiction;
   and so their notion of Action implies contingence, and excludes all
   necessity. And therefore, their notion of Action implies, that it has
   no necessary dependence on, or connexion with, any thing foregoing; for
   such a dependence or connexion excludes contingence, and implies
   necessity. And yet their notion of Action implies necessity, and
   supposes that it is necessary, and cannot he contingent. For they
   suppose, that whatever is properly called Action, must be determined by
   the Will and free choice; and this is as much as to say, that it must
   he necessary, being dependent upon, and determined by, something
   foregoing; namely, a foregoing act of choice. Again, it belongs to
   their notion of Action, that it is the beginning of motion, or of
   exertion of power; but yet it is implied in their notion of Action,
   that it is not the beginning of motion or exertion of power, but is
   consequent and dependent on a preceding exertion of power, viz. the
   power of Will and choice: for they say there is no proper Action but
   what is freely chosen; or, which is the same thing, determined by a
   foregoing act of free choice. But if any of them shall see cause to
   deny this, and say they hold no such thing as that every Action is
   chosen or determined by a foregoing choice; but that the very first
   exertion of Will only, undetermined by any preceding act, is properly
   called Action; then I say, such a man's notion of Action implies
   necessity; for what the mind is the subject of, without the
   determination of its own previous choice, it is the subject of
   necessarily, as to any hand that free choice has in the affair; and
   without any ability the mind has to prevent it, by any will or election
   of its own; because by the supposition it precludes all previous acts
   of the Will or choice in the case, which might prevent it. So that it
   is again, in this other way, implied in their notion of act, that it is
   both necessary and not necessary, Again it belongs to their notion of
   an act, that it is no effect of a predetermining bias or
   preponderation, but springs immediately out of indifference; and this
   implies, that it cannot be from foregoing choice, which is foregoing
   preponderation: if it be not habitual, but occasional, yet if it causes
   the act, it is truly previous, efficacious, and determining. And yet,
   at the same time, it is essential to their notion of the act, that it
   is what the agent is the author of freely and voluntarily, and that is,
   by previous choice and design.

   So that, according to their notion of the act, considered with regard
   to its consequences, these following things are all essential to it;
   viz. That it should be necessary, and not necessary; that it should be
   from a cause, and no cause; that it should be the fruit of choice and
   design, and not the fruit of choice and design; that it should he the
   beginning of motion or exertion, and yet consequent on previous
   exertion; that it should be before it is; that it should spring
   immediately out of indifference and equilibrium, and yet be the effect
   of preponderation; that it should be self-originated, and also have its
   original from something else; that it is what the mind causes itself,
   of its own will, and can produce or prevent, according to its choice or
   pleasure, and yet what the mind has no power to prevent, precluding all
   previous choice in the affair.

   So that an act, according to their metaphysical notion of it, is
   something of which there is no idea; it is nothing but a confusion of
   the mind, excited by words without any distinct meaning, and is an
   absolute nonentity; and that in two respects: (1.) There is nothing in
   the world that ever was, is, or can be, to answer the things which must
   belong to its description, according to what they suppose to be
   essential to it. And, (2.) There neither is, nor ever was, nor can be,
   any notion or idea to answer the word, as they use and explain it. For,
   if we should suppose any such notion, it would many ways destroy
   itself. But it is impossible any idea or notion should subsist in the
   mind, whose very nature and essence which constitutes it, destroys
   it.--If some learned philosopher, who had been abroad, in giving an
   account of the curious observations he had made in his travels, should
   say, "He had been in Terra del Fuego, and there had seen an animal,
   which he calls by a certain name, that begat and brought forth itself,
   and yet had a sire and dam distinct from itself; that it had an
   appetite, and was hungry before it had a being; that his master, who
   led him, and governed him at his pleasure, was always governed by him,
   and driven by him where he pleased; that when he moved, he always took
   a step before the first step; that he went with his head first, and yet
   always went tail foremost; and this, though he had neither head nor
   tail:" it would be no impudence at all, to tell such a traveler, though
   a learned man, that he himself had no notion or idea of such an animal
   as he gave an account of, and never had, nor ever would have.

   As the forementioned notion of Action is very inconsistent, so it is
   wholly diverse from the original meaning of the word. The more usual
   signification of it, in vulgar speech, seems to be some motion or
   exertion of power, that is voluntary, or that is the effect of the
   Will; and is used in the same sense as doing: and most commonly it is
   used to signify outward Actions. So thinking is often distinguished
   from acting, and desiring and willing from doing.

   Besides this more usual and proper signification of the word Action,
   there are other ways in which the word is used, that are less proper,
   which yet have place in common speech. Oftentimes it is used to signify
   some motion or alteration in inanimate things, with relation to some
   object and effect. So the spring of a watch is said to act upon the
   chain and wheels; the sunbeams, to act upon plants and trees: and the
   fire, to act upon wood. Sometimes, the word is useful to signify
   motions, alterations, and exertions of power, which are seen in
   corporeal things, considered absolutely; especially when these motions
   seem to arise from some internal cause which is hidden; so that they
   have a greater resemblance of those motions of our bodies, which are
   the effects of natural volition, or invisible exertions of Will. So the
   fermentation of liquor, the operations of the loadstone, and of
   electrical bodies, are called the Action of these things. And sometimes
   the word Action is used to signify the exercise of thought, or of Will
   and inclination: so meditating, loving, hating, inclining,
   disinclining, choosing, and refusing, may be sometimes called acting;
   though more rarely (unless it be by philosophers and metaphysicians)
   than in any of the other senses.

   But the word is never used in vulgar speech for the self-determinate
   exercise of the Will, or an exertion of the soul that arises without
   any necessary connexion with any thing foregoing. If a man does
   something voluntarily, or as the effect of his choice, then in the most
   proper sense, and as the word is most originally and commonly used, he
   is said to act; but whether that choice or volition be self-determined,
   or no; whether it be connected with foregoing, habitual bias; whether
   it be the certain effect of the strongest motive, or some intrinsic
   cause, never comes into consideration in the meaning of the word.

   And if the word Action is arbitrarily used by some men otherwise, to
   suit some scheme of metaphysics or morality, no argument can reasonably
   be founded on such a use of this term, to prove any thing but their own
   pleasure. For divines and philosophers strenuously to urge such
   arguments, as though they were sufficient to support and demonstrate a
   whole scheme of moral philosophy and divinity, is certainly to erect a
   mighty edifice on the sand, or rather on a shadow. And though it may
   now perhaps, through custom, have become natural for then to use the
   word in this sense, (if that may be called a sense or meaning, which is
   inconsistent with itself,) yet this does not prove, that it is
   agreeable to the natural notions men have of things, or that there can
   be any thing in the creation that should answer such a meaning. And
   though they appeal to experience, yet the truth is, that men are so far
   from experiencing any such thing, that it is impossible for them to
   have any conception of it.

   If it should be objected, that Action and Passion are doubtless words
   of a contrary signification; but to suppose that the agent, in its
   Action, is under the power and influence of something intrinsic, is to
   confound Action and passion, and make them the same thing:

   I answer, that Action and Passion are doubtless, as they are sometimes
   used, words of opposite signification; but not as signifying opposite
   existences, but only opposite relations. The words cause and effect are
   terms of opposite signification; but, nevertheless, if I assert, that
   the same thing may, at the same time, in different respects and
   relations, be both cause and effect, this will not prove that I
   confound the terms. The soul may be both active and passive in the same
   thing in different respects; active with relation to one thing, and
   passive with relation to another. [139] The word Passion, when set in
   opposition to Action, or rather activeness, is merely a relative: it
   signifies no effect or cause, nor any proper existence; but is the same
   with Passiveness, or a being passive, or a being acted upon by
   something. Which is a mere relation of a thing to some power or force
   exerted by some cause, producing some effect in it, or upon it. And
   Action, when set properly in opposition to Passion, or Passiveness, is
   no real existence; it is not the same with an Action, but is a mere
   relation: it is the activeness of something on another thing, being the
   opposite relation to the other, viz. a relation of power, or force,
   exerted by some cause, towards another thing, which is the subject of
   the effect of that power. Indeed, the word Action is frequently used to
   signify something not merely relative, but more absolute, and a real
   existence; as when we say an Action; when the word is not used
   transitively, but absolutely, for some motion or exercise of body or
   mind, without any relation to any object or effect: and as used thus,
   it is not properly the opposite of Passion; which ordinarily signifies
   nothing absolute, but merely the relation of being acted upon. And
   therefore if the word Action be used in the like relative sense, then
   Action and Passion are only two contrary relations. And it is no
   absurdity to suppose, that contrary relations may belong to the same
   thing at the same time, with respect to different things. So to
   suppose, that there are acts of the soul by which a man voluntarily
   moves, and acts upon objects, and produces effects, which yet
   themselves are effects of something else, and wherein the soul itself
   is the object of something acting upon, and influencing that, do not at
   all confound Action and Passion. The words may nevertheless be properly
   of opposite signification: there may be as true and real a difference
   between acting and being caused to act, though we should suppose the
   soul to be both in the same volition, as there is between living and
   being quickened, or made to live. It is no more a contradiction, to
   suppose that Action may be the effect of some other cause, besides the
   agent, or being that acts, than to suppose, that life may be the effect
   of some other cause, besides the being that lives.

   What has led men into this inconsistent notion of Action, when applied
   to volition--as though it were essential to this internal Action, that
   the agent should be self-determined in it, and that the Will should be
   the cause of it--was probably this; that according to the sense of
   mankind, and the common use of language, it is so, with respect to
   men's external Actions; which originally, and according to the vulgar
   use and most proper sense of the word, are called Actions. Men in these
   are self-directed, self-determined, and their Wills are the cause of
   the motions of their bodies, and the external things done; so that
   unless men do them voluntarily, and of choice, and the Action be
   determined by their antecedent volition, it is no Action or doing of
   theirs. Hence some metaphysicians have been led unwarily, but exceeding
   absurdly, to suppose the same concerning volition itself, that that
   also must be determined by the Will; which is to be determined by
   antecedent volition, as the motion of the body is; not considering the
   contradiction it implies.

   But it is very evident, that in the metaphysical distinction between
   Action and passion, (though long since become common and the general
   vogue) due care has not been taken to conform language to the nature of
   things, or to any distinct, clear ideas. As it is in innumerable other
   philosophical metaphysical terms, used in these disputes; which has
   occasioned inexpressible difficulty, contention, error, and confusion.

   And thus probably it came to be thought, that necessity was
   inconsistent with Action, as these terms are applied to volition.
   First, these terms, Action and necessity are changed from their
   original meaning, as signifying external voluntary Action and
   constraint (in which meaning they are evidently inconsistent) to
   signify quite other things, viz. volition itself, and certainty of
   existence. And when the change of signification is made, care is not
   taken to make proper allowances and abatements for the difference of
   sense; but still the same things are unwarily attributed to Action and
   necessity, in the new meaning of the words, which plainly belonged to
   them in their first sense; and on this ground, maxims are established
   without any real foundation, as though they were the most certain
   truths, and the most evident dictates of reason.

   But, however strenuously it is maintained, that what is necessary
   cannot he properly called Action, and that a necessary Action is a
   contradiction, yet it is probable there are few Arminian divines, who
   thoroughly tried, would stand to these principles. They will allow,
   that God is, in the highest sense, an active Being, and thee highest
   Fountain of life and Action; and they would not probably deny, that
   what are called God's acts of righteousness, holiness, and
   faithfulness, are truly and properly God's acts, and God is really a
   holy Agent in them; and yet, I trust, they will not deny, that God
   necessarily acts justly and faithfully, and that it is impossible for
   him to act unrighteously and unholily.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [138] Were the human mind, indeed, not the subject of either passive
   power, on the one hand, as the predisposing cause of vice; or of divine
   holy influence, on the other, as the predisposing cause of real virtue;
   and were the determining motive what some have represented it to be,
   the object itself, irrespective of the changeable state of mind
   perceiving it; the objection, that "a necessary agent is a plain
   contradiction," or, in other words, that man is no proper agent, would
   be unanswerable. For the rank and place of man in creation, and his
   relative circumstances in the arrangement of providence, being the
   result of decretive appointment, if he himself were not liable to any
   change but by the same appointment, it would follow, that if the
   objects themselves determined him to choose, and to choose always
   according to the strongest motive, his very volitions in the acts
   themselves would be necessitated decretively, to the exclusion of all
   hypothetical or moral possibility of failure; and therefore could never
   be erroneous, any more than the first cause could act erroneously. On
   such principles, moral evil, vice or fault, could have no existence. No
   effect cold be otherwise than good, amiable, and perfectly innocent; a
   moral possibility of failure being excluded by natural necessity. For
   the volition itself to be so necessitated, and not in a moral or
   hypothetical manner only, is the same thing as giving it no opportunity
   of choice or preference, or constraining it to choose one way by a
   settled purpose, with a natural impossibility of acting otherwise. But
   if every act of man be thus the result of settled purpose, why should
   he be blamed for any one act whatever? He does nothing but what he is
   constrained, or decretively necessitated to perform, the contrary being
   rendered naturally impossible; and if he deserves no praise, he can
   incur no blame, any more than a clock for not keeping time. Such a
   necessary agent would be indeed a plain contradiction. There is much
   reason to apprehend that some philosophical necessarians have no better
   notion of agency than that which Mr. Chubb charges, and justly charges,
   with "a plain contradiction." For those who hold the sentiment, that
   every act, even as to its moral quality, and every event, are of
   decretive appointment, in subserviency to ultimate good, must allow, in
   order to be tolerably consistent, that the Supreme Being is "the only
   proper agent in the universe;" ( Belsham's Elements of the Philosophy
   of the Mind, p. 254.) and thus reduce human agency, and things else
   called agency in a creature, to an appointed necessary choice, however
   odious in its nature, mischievious in its tendency, or painful in
   experience. Thus, according to them, God is the only proper agent in
   all foul crimes and horrid blasphemies, on earth and in hell! They have
   a right to define their terms, and to say what they mean by agency in
   God, or in a creature, and to state their hypothesis accordingly; but
   others also have a right to deduce the genuine consequences of that
   hypothesis, and to show wherein its error lies.--The design of these
   notes is not to excite a spirit of unprofitable controversy, but to
   assist the serious inquirer in detecting errors and recognizing truths
   of radical importance in ethics and theology; and, it is hoped, that to
   promote these ends the following observations may conduce. 1. It is
   granted, that in reference to natural acts, the Supreme Being is the
   "only proper agent in the universe," as they all spring from his
   energy. In this respect he is the first cause of all causes,
   efficiently; and the description of the post is philosophically just:
   he "Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze, Glows in the stars, and
   blossoms in the trees, Lives through all life, extends through all
   extent, Spreads undivided, operates unspent." POPE 2. It is also
   granted, that, in all acts morally good, the created agent is the
   subject of necessity several ways. He has an active nature from
   decretive necessity, which it is not in his power to alter. He is also,
   accordingly, compelled to some act of choice, from the activity of his
   nature. He is, moreover, the subject of physical influence of a holy
   and purifying nature, whereby the goodness of his choice is infallibly
   secured; and without which there could be no assignable ground of
   certainty that any action would be morally good. There is also a
   necessity of connexion, arising from the nature of things, or the
   essence of truth, first between the disposition and the act, or that
   the act will be of the same nature, morally considered, with the
   disposition from which it proceeds; and secondly, between the act and
   the end, or consequent, which is happiness. 3. It is moreover allowed,
   that in all acts morally evil, the soul is passive in reference to that
   necessity of dependence which is inseparable from a created nature,
   which may be called passive power; without which the existence of moral
   evil would be impossible. This necessity also arises form the nature of
   things, not from decree; for no decree can alter its existence, (though
   it may, and actually does, counteract it.) any more than it can alter
   the state of a creature from dependence into independence on the first
   cause. A creature without passive power involves the most palpable
   absurdities. For its very definition is, "that property in a creature
   whereby it differs essentially form the independence, self-sufficience,
   and indefectibility of the Creator;" and to deny it, is to suppose that
   a creature may be independent, self-sufficient, and indefectible - that
   in these respects the creature and the Creator are on a par--that a
   necessary and a contingent being are the same, in those very things
   which constitute their essential difference! Were it not for this
   property in an agent, he could never sin; for all his acts would be
   physically necessary, without any hypothetical medium, or moral
   alternative. 4. He is a moral agent, whose volitions might have been
   otherwise than they are, if the motives, and consequently the state of
   his mind, had been otherwise. But to suppose that his volitions might
   have been otherwise than they are, the motives and the state of the
   mind being the same, would be to make him in his volitions the sport of
   chance, or a mere non-entity. 5. He then is a moral agent who has, in
   reference to volition, a moral alternative, or a hypothetical
   possibility of a different choice. Where this alternative, or this
   possibility, is not, there the agent (if he may be so called) is not
   morally obliged, and therefore is not accountable. 6. But if so, where
   does the ground of such an alternative lie? It lies in the agent's
   mind, or the disposition whence the volition springs, and whence its
   character is derived. If God influence the mind so as to make it, in a
   given degree, to resemble his own moral nature; in that degree would
   the choice made be morally good. But if passive power be not
   counteracted by such influence, (which being gracious, God is not bound
   in equity to do.) in any given degree, the nature of things, the
   essence of truth; connects, in a corresponding degree, the state of
   mind with the volition. 7. Hence it is plain, that moral influence, as
   such, effects nothing certain; but always requires a previous state of
   mind, in order to insure a certainty of good effect; and that previous
   state of mind is effected by no other possible means but a physical
   energy or agency, producing assimilation. There must be a virtuous mind
   before a virtuous choice; the quality of the act is derived from the
   agent. 8. One thing, which has been a source of much obscurity and
   confusion in reference to moral agency, is the supposition that the
   mind is equally free, in all respects, when choosing good and when
   choosing evil; in other words, that the one volition and the other
   becomes morally certain, form the same sort of necessity. But this is
   not the real case. Indeed the necessity of connexion between the
   previous state of mind and the corresponding volition, is the same; for
   it is, in each case, nothing else but the nature of things; but that
   necessity which effects a state of mind previous to good volitions, is
   as different from the other necessity which effects a state of mind
   previous to volitions morally evil, as light is from darkness. They
   proceed from opposite quarters, and operate in contrary directions. A
   holy disposition is generated by decretive holy influence; the other
   disposition (which ought not however to be called unholy) proceeds form
   the hypothetical nature of things. Such a disposition, though no
   morally vicious, yet generates vice in union with free agency. 9. It is
   highly worthy of remark, that though a good volition must proceed from
   a good heart, morally considered; yet a bad volition does not,
   originally and necessarily, proceed from a morally bad heart. The
   reason is, that the one state of heart proceeds form God., from his
   decretive holy will; the other proceeds form passive power, which is
   only a natural evil, and not a moral. Besides, were the disposition
   which immediately precedes a bad volition necessarily, or in a every
   case, evil, in a moral sense, either moral evil could have no place at
   all in the universe, no origin whatever, or else it must be the same as
   passive power. But passive power is a contrast, not to the moral
   perfections of God, but his natural; and has, when alone, no moral
   quality. And, seeing it belongs as a property to every creature, as
   such, were it any thing morally evil, moral evil would be essential to
   the very being of every creature; which is absurd. 10. Hence it is
   plain, that freedom is experienced in a higher sense or a greater
   degree, in bad volitions, than in good ones in such a sense, and to
   such a degree, as to justify this mode of expression. That man is
   necessitated to good, but free to evil. This however may need some
   explanatory qualification; for he is not so necessitated to good, as
   not to be morally or hypothetically free; nor so free to evil as not to
   be subject to a necessity of consequence. He who acts or chooses amiss
   without constraint, compulsion, or interfering voluntary force in that
   act, notwithstanding his passive power, is properly a free agent; for
   in the moral quality of the act, there is properly and strictly no will
   concerned but his own. But he who acts or chooses aright, is subject to
   a physical, decretive necessity, as to his disposition and a physical
   concourse of divine energy in the natural act of the will. He is indeed
   morally free, inasmuch as his volition might have been of a different,
   yea, of an opposite moral quality, if the state of his mind had been
   different. Hence it is evident, that in a good will, choice, or act,
   man is an agent in a less proper or secondary sense; but in a bad will,
   choice, or act, man is an agent, a moral agent, a free agent, in the
   most proper and strict sense. And in the production of an act morally
   good two wills are concerned, that of the agent, and the decretive will
   of God; in that of evil, only one, the agent's own will. 11. If the
   Supreme Being is the only proper agent in the universe, either moral
   agency is no proper agency, or else man is not a moral agent; and if
   so, his is not accountable, and has no concern in religion or morals.
   Besides, if God be the only proper agent in the universe, how come
   there to exist evil deeds? God's agency is good, else we have no
   evidence that he is a good being; but there are in the world evil deeds
   proceeding from evil minds, which common sense and universal consent
   allow, and the nature of the thing proves, to be properly evil
   agencies; consequently man is an agent, a moral agent, properly so
   called. 12. If there be no proper agent in the universe but the supreme
   Being, there is no evil in the nature of bad volitions, but only in
   their effects. Sin, on that supposition, is not bad in its own nature,
   but only injurious in it effects on the sinner. Sin is not to be hated,
   it seems, on its own account, as odious, but only shunned as dangerous.
   But as this must arise, according to the system of its abettors, from a
   sovereign appointment, it follows, that millions of beings are by this
   very appointment, doomed to the greatest sufferings in the universe,
   for that in which they had no proper agency--no possible alternative!
   Where is equity, of benevolence? The only clue out of this labyrinth,
   and out of many others formed by writers on human agency, is, we are
   fully persuaded , a right view of passive power, in its nature, origin,
   and tendency, in conjunction with a morally or hypothetically free
   choice. W.

   [139] This distinction is of considerable moment. The soul is passive,
   for instance, in reference to that necessity of dependence which is
   inseparable from a created nature; and when the subject of providential
   energy in natural acts; and also when the subject of that divine
   influence which purifies and enables the mind, and whereby holy effects
   are secured; and in all these respects it is passive at the very time
   that it is active in its choice or preference. In other words, the mind
   is necessitated in some respects; as, to exist, to think, to will, to
   suffer, or to enjoy; at the same instant that it is free in other
   respects, as, from contingence, (understanding thereby an event without
   any cause,) and from compulsions, or physical necessity in its acts as
   moral.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   The reasons why some think it contrary to common Sense, to suppose
   those things which are necessary to be worthy of either Praise or
   Blame.

   It is abundantly affirmed and urged by Arminian writers, that it is
   contrary to common Sense, and the natural notions and apprehensions of
   mankind, to suppose otherwise than that necessity (making no
   distinction between natural and moral necessity) is inconsistent, with
   Virtue and Vice, Praise and Blame, Reward and Punishment. And their
   arguments from hence have been greatly triumphed in; and have been not
   a little perplexing to many, who have been friendly to the truth, as
   clearly revealed in the Holy Scriptures: it has seemed to them indeed
   difficult, to reconcile Calvinistic doctrines with the notions men
   commonly have of justice and equity. And the true reasons of it seem to
   be the following:

   I. It is indeed a very plain dictate of common Sense, that natural
   necessity is wholly inconsistent with just Praise or Blame. If men do
   things which in themselves are very good, fit to be brought to pass,
   and attended with very happy effects, properly against their Wills; or
   do them from a necessity that is without their Wills, or with which
   their Wills have no concern or connexion; then it is a plain dictate of
   common Sense, that such doings are none of their virtue, nor have they
   any moral good in them; and that the persons are not worthy to be
   rewarded or praised; or at all esteemed, honoured, or loved on that
   account. And, on the other hand, that if, from like necessity, they do
   those things which in themselves are very unhappy and pernicious, and
   do them because they cannot help it; the necessity is such, that it is
   all one whether they will them, or no; and the reason why they are
   done, is from necessity only, and not from their Wills; it is a very
   plain dictate of common Sense, that they are not at all to blame; there
   is no vice, fault, or moral evil at all in the effect done; nor are
   they, who are thus necessitated, in any wise worthy to be punished,
   hated, or in the least disrespected, on that account.

   In like manner, if things in themselves good and desirable are
   absolutely impossible, with a natural impossibility, the universal
   reason of mankind teaches, that this wholly and perfectly excuses
   persons in their not doing them.

   And it is also a plain dictate of common Sense, that if the doing
   things, in themselves good, or avoiding things in themselves evil, is
   not absolutely impossible, with such a natural impossibility, but very
   difficult, with a natural difficulty; that is, a difficulty prior to,
   and not at all consisting in, Will and inclination itself, and which
   would remain the same, let the inclination be what it will; then a
   person's neglect or omission is excused in some measure, though not
   wholly; his sin is less aggravated, than if the thing to be done were
   easy. And if instead of difficulty and hindrance, there be a contrary
   natural propensity in the state of things, to the thing to be done, or
   effect to he brought to pass, abstracted from any consideration of the
   inclination of the heart; though the propensity be not so great as to
   amount to a natural necessity; yet being some approach to it, so that
   the doing of the good thing be very much from this natural tendency in
   the state of things, and but little from a good inclination; then it is
   a dictate of common Sense, that there is so much the less virtue in
   what is done; and so it is less praiseworthy and rewardable. The reason
   is easy, viz. because such a natural propensity or tendency is an
   approach to natural necessity; and the greater the propensity, still so
   much the nearer is the approach to necessity. And, therefore, as
   natural necessity takes away or shuts out all virtue, so this
   propensity approaches to an abolition of virtue; that is, it diminishes
   it. And, on the other hand, natural difficulty, in the state of things,
   is an approach to natural impossibility. And as the latter, when it is
   complete and absolute, wholly takes away Blame; so such difficulty
   takes away some Blame, or diminishes Blame; and makes the thing done to
   be less worthy of punishment.

   II. Men, in their first use of such phrases as these, must, cannot,
   cannot help it, cannot avoid it, necessary, unable, impossible,
   unavoidable, irresistible, &c., use them to signify a necessity of
   constraint or restraint, a natural necessity or impossibility; or some
   necessity that the Will has nothing to do in; which may be, whether men
   will or no; and which may be supposed to be just the same, let men's
   inclinations and desires be what they will. Such kind of terms, in
   their original use, I suppose among all nations, are relative; carrying
   in their signification (as was before observed) a reference or respect
   to some contrary Will, desire, or endeavour, which, it is supposed, is,
   or may be, in the case. All men find, and begin to find in early
   childhood, that there are innumerable things that cannot be done, which
   they desire to do; and innumerable things, which they are averse to,
   that must be, they cannot avoid them, they will be, whether they choose
   them or no. It is to express this necessity, which men so soon and so
   often find, and which so greatly and early affects them in innumerable
   cases, that such terms and phrases are first formed; and it is to
   signify such a necessity, that they are first used, and that they are
   most constantly used, in the common affairs of life; and not to signify
   any such metaphysical, speculative, and abstract notion, as that
   connexion in the nature or course of things, which is between the
   subject and predicative of a proposition, and which is the foundation
   of the certain truth of that proposition; to signify which, they who
   employ themselves in philosophical inquiries into the first origin and
   metaphysical relations and dependencies of things, have borrowed these
   terms, for want of others. But we grow up from our cradles in a use of
   such terms and phrases entirely different from this, and carrying a
   sense exceeding diverse from that in which they are commonly used in
   the controversy between Arminians and Calvinists. And it being, as was
   said before, a dictate of the universal sense of mankind, evident to us
   as soon as we begin to think, that the necessity signified by these
   terms, in the sense in which we first learn them, does excuse persons,
   and free them from all Fault or Blame; hence our idea of excusableness
   or faultlessness is tied to these terms and phrases by a strong habit,
   which is begun in childhood, as soon as we begin to speak, and grows up
   with us, and is strengthened by constant use and custom, the connexion
   growing stronger and stronger.

   The habitual connexion, which is in men's minds between Blamelessness
   and those forementioned terms, must, cannot, unable, necessary,
   impossible, unavoidable, &c. becomes very strong, because, as soon as
   ever men begin to use reason and speech, they have occasion to excuse
   themselves, from the natural necessity signified by these terms, in
   numerous instances.--I cannot do it--I could not help it.--And all
   mankind have constant and daily occasion to use such phrases in this
   sense, to excuse themselves and others, in almost all the concerns of
   life, with respect to disappointments, and things that happen, which
   concern and affect ourselves and others, that are hurtful, or
   disagreeable to us or them, or things desirable, that we or others fail
   to obtain.

   That our being accustomed to an union of different ideas, from early
   childhood, makes the habitual connexion exceeding strong, as though
   such connexion were owing to nature, is manifest in innumerable
   instances. It is altogether by such an habitual connexion of ideas,
   that men judge of the bigness or distance of the objects of sight, from
   their appearance. Thus it is owing to such a connexion early
   established, and growing up with a person, that he judges a mountain,
   which he sees at ten miles distance, to be bigger than his nose, or
   further off than the end of it. Having been used so long to join a
   considerable distance and magnitude with such an appearance, men
   imagine it is by a dictate of natural sense: whereas, it would be quite
   otherwise with one that had his eyes newly opened, who had been born
   blind: he would have the same visible appearance, but natural sense
   would dictate no such thing, concerning the magnitude or distance of
   what appeared.

   III. When men, after they had been so habituated to connect ideas of
   Innocency or Blamelessness with such terms, that the union seems to be
   the effect of mere nature, come to hear the same terms used, and learn
   to use them in the forementioned new and metaphysical sense, to signify
   quite another sort of necessity, which has no such kind of relation to
   a contrary supposable Will and endeavour; the notation of plain and
   manifest Blamelessness, by this means, is, by a strong prejudice,
   insensibly and unwarily transferred to a case to which it by no means
   belongs: the change of the use of the terms, to a signification which
   is very diverse, not being taken notice of, or adverted to. And there
   are several reasons why it is not.

   l. The terms, as used by philosophers, are not very distinct and clear
   in their meaning: few use them in a fixed determined sense. On the
   contrary, their meaning is very vague and confused. Which commonly
   happens to the words used to signify things intellectual and moral, and
   to express what Mr. Locke calls mixt modes. If men had a clear and
   distinct understanding of what is intended by these metaphysical terms,
   they would be able more easily to compare them with their original and
   common sense; and so would not be so easily led into delusion by words
   of this sort.

   2. The change of the signification of the terms is the more insensible,
   because the things signified, though indeed very different, yet do in
   some generals agree. In necessity, that which is vulgarly so called,
   there is a strong connexion between the thing said to be necessary, and
   some thing antecedent to it, in the order of nature; so there is also a
   philosophical necessity. And though in both kinds of necessity, the
   connexion cannot be called by that name, with relation to an opposite
   will or endeavour, to which it is superior; which is the case in vulgar
   necessity; yet in both, the connexion is prior to Will and endeavour,
   and so, in some respect, superior. In both kinds of necessity, there is
   a foundation for some certainty of the proposition, that affirms the
   event.--The terms used being the same, and the things signified
   agreeing in these and some other general circumstances; and the
   expressions as used by philosophers being not well defined, and so of
   obscure and loose signification; hence persons are not aware of the
   great difference; and the notions of innocence or faultiness, which
   were so strongly associated with them, and were strictly united in
   their minds, ever since they can remember, remain united with them
   still, as if the union were altogether natural and necessary; and they
   that go about to make a separation, seem to them to do great violence
   even to nature itself.

   IV. Another reason why it appears difficult to reconcile it with
   reason, that men should be blamed for that which is necessary, with a
   moral necessity, (which, as was observed before, is a species of
   philosophical necessity) is, that for want of due consideration, men
   inwardly entertain that apprehension, that this necessity may be
   against men's Wills and sincere endeavors. They go away with that
   notion, that men may truly will, and wish, and strive, that it may be
   otherwise; but that invincible necessity stands in the way. And many
   think thus concerning themselves: some wicked men think they wish that
   they were good, that they love God and holiness; but yet do not find
   that their wishes produce the effect.--The reasons why men think so,
   are as follow:

   1. They find what may be called an indirect willingness to have a
   better Will, in the manner before observed. For it is impossible, and a
   contradiction to suppose the Will to be directly and properly against
   itself. And they do not consider that this indirect willingness is
   entirely a different thing from properly willing what is the duty and
   virtue required; and that there is no virtue in that sort of
   willingness which they have. They do not consider, that the volitions,
   which a wicked man may have that he loved God, are no acts of the Will
   at all against the moral evil of not loving God; but only some
   disagreeable consequences. But the making of the requisite distinction
   requires more care of reflection and thought, than most men are used
   to. And men, through a prejudice in their own favour, are disposed to
   think well of their own desires and dispositions, and to account them
   good and virtuous, though their respect to virtue be only indirect and
   remote, and it is nothing at all that is virtuous that truly excites or
   terminates their inclinations.

   2. Another thing that insensibly leads and beguiles men into a
   supposition that this moral necessity or impossibility is, or may be,
   against men's Wills and true endeavors, is the derivation of the terms
   often used to express it. Such words for instance, as unable,
   unavoidable, impossible, irresistible; which carry a plain reference to
   a supposable power exerted, endeavors used, resistance made, in
   opposition to the necessity: and the persons that hear them, not
   considering, nor suspecting, but that they are used in their proper
   sense; that sense being therefore understood, there does naturally, and
   as it were necessarily, arise in their minds a supposition, that it may
   be so indeed, that true desires and endeavors may take place, but that
   invincible necessity stands in the way, and renders them vain and to no
   effect.

   V. Another thing which makes persons more ready to suppose it to be
   contrary to reason, that men should be exposed to the punishments
   threatened to sin, for doing those things which are morally necessary,
   or not doing those things morally impossible, is, that imagination
   strengthens the argument, and adds greatly to the power and influence
   of the seeming reasons against it, from the greatness of that
   punishment. To allow that they may be justly exposed to a small
   punishment, would not be so difficult. Whereas, if there were any good
   reason in the case, if it were truly a dictate of reason, that such
   necessity was inconsistent with faultiness, or just punishment, the
   demonstration would be equally certain with respect to a small
   punishment, or any punishment at all, as a very great one: but it is
   not equally easy to the imagination. They that argue against the
   justice of damning men for those things that are thus necessary, seem
   to make their argument the stronger, by setting forth the greatness of
   the punishment in strong expressions:--"That a man should be cast into
   eternal burnings, that he should be made to fry in hell to all
   eternity, for those things which he had no power to avoid, and was
   under a fatal, unfrustrable, invincible necessity of doing," &c.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   It is agreeable to common sense, and the natural notions of mankind, to
   suppose moral Necessity In be consistent with Praise and Blame, Reward
   and Punishment.

   Whether the reasons, that have been given, why it appears difficult to
   some persons, to reconcile with common sense the praising or blaming,
   rewarding or punishing, those things which are morally necessary, are
   thought satisfactory, or not; yet it most evidently appears, by the
   following things, that if this matter be rightly understood, setting
   aside all delusion arising from the impropriety and ambiguity of terms,
   this is not at all inconsistent with the natural apprehensions of
   mankind, and that sense of things which is found every where in the
   common people; who are furthest from having their thoughts perverted
   from their natural channel, by metaphysical and philosophical
   subtilties; but, on the contrary, altogether agreeable to, and the very
   voice and dictate of, this natural and vulgar sense.

   I. This will appear, if we consider what the vulgar notion of
   blameworthiness is. The idea which the common people, through all ages
   and nations, have of faultiness, I suppose to be plainly this; a person
   being or doing wrong, with his own will and pleasure; containing these
   two things: 1. His doing wrong, when he does as he pleases. 2. His
   pleasure being wrong. Or, in other words, perhaps more intelligibly
   expressing their notion; a person having his heart wrong, and doing
   wrong from his heart. And this is the sum total of the matter.

   The common people do not ascend up in their reflections and
   abstractions to the metaphysical sources, relations, and dependences of
   things, in order to form their notion of faultiness or blameworthiness.
   They do not wait till they have decided by their refinings, what first
   determines the Will; whether it be determined by something extrinsic,
   or intrinsic; whether volition determines volition, or whether the
   understanding determines the Will; whether there be any such tiling as
   metaphysicians mean by contingence (if they have any meaning); whether
   there be a sort of a strange unaccountable sovereignty in the Will, in
   the exercise of which, by its own sovereign acts, it brings to pass all
   its own sovereign acts. They do not take any part of their notion of
   Fault or Blame from the resolution of any such questions. If this were
   the case, there are multitudes, yea the far greater part of mankind,
   nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand, would live and die,
   without having any such notion, as that of Fault, ever entering into
   their heads, or without so much as once having any conception that any
   body was to be either blamed or commended for any thing. If this were
   the case, it would be a long time before men came to have such notions.
   Whereas it is manifest, they are in fact some of the first notions that
   appear in children; who discover, as soon as they can think, or speak,
   or act at all as rational creatures, a sense of desert. And, certainly,
   in forming their notion of it, they make no use of metaphysics. All the
   ground they go upon, consists in these two things: experience and a
   Natural sensation of a certain fitness or agreeableness, which there is
   in uniting such moral evil as is above described, viz. a being or doing
   wrong with the Will, and resentment in others, and pain inflicted on
   the person in whom this moral evil is. Which natural sense is what we
   call by the name of conscience.

   It is true, the common people and children, in their notion of any
   faulty act or deed, of any person, do suppose that it is the person's
   own act and deed. But this is all that belongs to what they understand
   by a thing being a person's own deed or action; even that it is
   something done by him of choice. That some exercise or motion should
   begin of itself, does not belong to their notion of an action, or
   doing. If so, it would belong to their notion of it, that it is the
   cause of its own beginning: and that is as much as to say, that it is
   before it begins to be. Nor is their notion of an action some motion or
   exercise, that begins accidentally, without any cause or reason; for
   that is contrary to one of the prime dictates of common sense, namely,
   that every thing that begins to be, has some cause or reason why it is.

   The common people, in their notion of a faulty or praiseworthy work
   done by any one, do suppose, that the man does it in the exercise of
   liberty. But then their notion of liberty is only a person having
   opportunity of doing as he pleases. They have no notion of liberty
   consisting in the Will first acting, and so causing its own acts;
   determining, and so causing its own determinations; or choosing, and so
   causing its own choice. Such a notion of liberty is what none have, but
   those that have darkened their own minds with confused metaphysical
   speculation, and abstruse and ambiguous terms. If a man is not
   restrained from acting as his Will determines, or constrained to act
   otherwise; then he has liberty, according to common notions of liberty,
   without taking into the idea that grand contradiction of all, the
   determinations of a man's free Will being the effects of the
   determinations of his free Will.--Nor have men commonly any notion of
   freedom consisting in indifference. For if so, then it would be
   agreeable to their notion, that the greater indifference men act with,
   the more freedom they act with; whereas, the reverse is true. He that
   in acting proceeds with the fullest inclination, does what he does with
   the greatest freedom, according to common sense. And so far is it from
   being agreeable to common sense, that such liberty as consists in
   indifference is requisite to Praise or Blame, that, on the contrary,
   the dictate of every man's natural sense through the world is, that the
   further he is from being indifferent in his acting good or evil, and
   the more he does either with full and strong inclination, the more is
   he esteemed or abhorred, commended or condemned.

   II. If it were inconsistent with the common sense of mankind, that men
   should be either blamed or commended in any volitions, in case of moral
   Necessity or impossibility; then it would surely also be agreeable to
   the same sense and reason of mankind, that the nearer the case
   approaches to such a moral Necessity or impossibility--either through a
   strong antecedent moral propensity, on the one hand, [140] or a great
   antecedent opposition and difficulty, on the other--the nearer does it
   approach to a person being neither blamable nor commendable: so that
   acts exerted with such preceding propensity, would be worthy of
   proportionably less Praise; and when omitted, the act being attended
   with such difficulty, the omission would be worthy of the less Blame.
   It is so, as was observed before, with natural Necessity and
   impossibility, propensity and difficulty: as it is a plain dictate of
   the sense of all mankind, that natural Necessity and impossibility take
   away all Blame and Praise; and therefore, that the nearer the approach
   is to these, through previous propensity or difficulty, so Praise and
   Blame are proportionally diminished. And if it were as much a dictate
   of common sense, that moral Necessity of doing, or impossibility of
   avoiding, takes away all Praise and Blame, as that natural Necessity or
   impossibility does; then, by a perfect parity of reason, it would be as
   much the dictate of common sense, that an approach of moral Necessity
   of doing, or impossibility of avoiding, diminishes Praise and Blame, as
   that an approach to natural Necessity and impossibility does so. It is
   equally the voice of common sense, that persons are excusable in part,
   in neglecting things difficult against their Wills, as that they are
   excusable wholly in neglecting things impossible against their Wills.
   And if it made no difference, whether the impossibility were natural
   and against the Will, or moral, lying in the Will, with regard to
   excusableness; so neither would it make any difference, whether the
   difficulty, or approach to Necessity, be natural, against the Will, or
   moral, lying in the propensity of the Will.

   But it is apparent, that the reverse of these things is true. If there
   be an approach to a moral Necessity in a man's exertion of good acts of
   Will, they being the exercise of a strong propensity to good, and a
   very powerful love to virtue; it is so far from being the dictate of
   common sense, that he is less virtuous, and the less to be esteemed,
   loved, and praised; that it is agreeable to the natural notions of all
   mankind, that he is so much the better man, worthy of greater respect,
   and higher commendation. And the stronger the inclination is, and the
   nearer it approaches to Necessity in that respect; or to impossibility
   of neglecting the virtuous act, or of doing a vicious one; still the
   more virtuous, and worthy of higher commendation. And, on the other
   hand, if a man exerts evil acts of mind; as, for instance, acts of
   pride or malice from a rooted and strong habit or principle of
   haughtiness and maliciousness, and a violent propensity of heart to
   such acts; according to the natural sense of men, he is so far from
   being the less hateful and blamable on that account, that he is so much
   the more worthy to be detested and condemned, by all that observe him.

   Moreover, it is manifest that it is no part of the notion, which
   mankind commonly have of a blamable or praiseworthy act of the Will,
   that it is an act which is not determined by an antecedent bias or
   motive, but by the sovereign power of the Will itself; because, if so,
   the greater hand such causes have in determining any acts of the Will,
   so much the less virtuous or vicious would they be accounted; and the
   less hand, the more virtuous or vicious. Whereas, the reverse is true;
   men do not think a good act to be the less praiseworthy, for the agent
   being much determined in it by a good inclination or a good motive, but
   the more. And if good inclination, or motive, has but little influence
   in determining the agent, they do not think his act so much the more
   virtuous, but the less. And so concerning evil acts, which are
   determined by evil motives or inclinations.

   Yea, if it be supposed, that good or evil dispositions are implanted in
   the hearts of men, by nature itself, (which, it is certain, is vulgarly
   supposed in innumerable cases,) yet it is not commonly supposed, that
   men are worthy of no Praise or Dispraise for such dispositions;
   although what is natural, is undoubtedly necessary, nature being prior
   to all acts of the Will whatsoever. Thus, for instance, if a man
   appears to be of a very haughty or malicious disposition, and is
   supposed to be so by his natural temper, it is no vulgar notion, no
   dictate of the common sense and apprehension of men, that such
   dispositions are no vices or moral evils, or that such persons are not
   worthy of disesteem, or odium and dishonour; or that the proud or
   malicious acts which flow from such natural dispositions, are worthy of
   no resentment. Yea, such vile natural dispositions, and the strength of
   them, will commonly be mentioned rather as an aggravation of the wicked
   acts, that come from such a fountain, than an extenuation of them. It
   being natural for men to act thus, is often observed by men in the
   height of their indignation: they will say, "It is his very nature: he
   is of a vile natural temper; it is as natural to him to act so, as it
   is to breathe; he cannot help serving the devil," &c. But it is not
   thus with regard to hurtful mischievous things, that any are the
   subjects or occasions of, by natural necessity, against their
   inclinations. In such a case, the necessity, by the common voice of
   mankind, will be spoken of as a full excuse.--Thus it is very plain,
   that common sense makes a vast difference between these two kinds of
   necessity, as to the judgment it makes of their influence on the moral
   quality and desert of men's actions.

   And these dictates are so natural and necessary, that it may be very
   much doubted whether the Arminians themselves have ever got rid of
   them; yea, their greatest doctors, that have gone furthest in defence
   of their metaphysical notions of liberty, and have brought their
   arguments to their greatest strength, and as they suppose, to a
   demonstration, against the consistence of virtue and vice with any
   necessity: it is to be questioned, whether there is so much as one of
   them, but that, if he suffered very much from the injurious acts of a
   man, under the power of an invincible haughtiness and malignancy of
   temper, would not, from the forementioned natural sense of mind, resent
   it far otherwise, than if as great sufferings came upon him from the
   wind that blows and the fire that burns by natural necessity; and
   otherwise than he would, if he suffered as much from the conduct of a
   man perfectly delirious; yea, though he first brought his distraction
   upon him some way by his own fault.

   Some seem to disdain the distinction that we make between natural and
   moral Necessity, as though it were altogether impertinent in this
   controversy; "that which is necessary, say they, is necessary; it is
   that which must be, and cannot be prevented. And that which is
   impossible, is impossible, and cannot be done; and, therefore, none can
   be to blame for not doing it." And such comparisons are made use of, as
   the commanding of a man to walk, who has lost his legs, and condemning
   him and punishing him for not obeying; inviting and calling upon a man,
   who is shut up in a strong prison, to come forth, &c. But in these
   things Arminians are very unreasonable. Let common sense determine
   whether there be not a great difference between these two cases: the
   one, that of a man who has offended his prince, and is cast into
   prison; and after he has lain there a while, the king comes to him,
   calls him to come forth; and tells him, that if he will do so, and will
   fall down before him and humbly beg his pardon, he shall he forgiven,
   and set at liberty, and also be greatly enriched, and advanced to
   honour: the prisoner heartily repents of the folly and wickedness of
   his offence against his prince, is thoroughly disposed to abase
   himself, and accept of the king's offer; but is confined by strong
   walls, with gates of brass, and bars of iron. The other case is, that
   of a man who is of a very unreasonable spirit, of a haughty,
   ungrateful, wilful disposition; and moreover, has been brought up in
   traitorous principles; and has his heart possessed with an extreme and
   inveterate enmity to his lawful sovereign; and for his rebellion is
   cast into prison, and lies long there, loaded with heavy chains, and in
   miserable circumstances. At length the compassionate prince comes to
   the prison, orders his chains to be knocked off, and his prison-doors
   to be set wide open; calls to him, and tells him, if he will come forth
   to him, and fall down before him, acknowledge that he has treated him
   unworthily, and ask his forgiveness; he shall be forgiven, set at
   liberty, and set in a place of great dignity and profit in his court.
   But he is so stout, and full of haughty malignity, that he cannot be
   willing to accept the offer; his rooted strong pride and malice have
   perfect power over him, and as it were bind him, by binding his heart:
   the opposition of his heart has the mastery over him, having an
   influence on his mind far superior to the king's grace and
   condescension, and to all his kind offers and promises. Now, is it
   agreeable to common sense, to assert and stand to it, that there is no
   difference between these two cases, as to any worthiness of blame in
   the prisoners; because, forsooth, there is a necessity in both, and the
   required act in each case is impossible 1 It is true, a man's evil
   dispositions may be as strong and immovable as the bars of a castle.
   But who cannot see, that when a man, in the latter case, is said to be
   unable to obey the command, the expression is used improperly, and not
   in the sense it has originally and in common speech? and that it may
   properly be said to be in the rebel's power to come out of prison,
   seeing he can easily do it if he pleases; though by reason of his vile
   temper of heart, which is fixed and rooted, it is impossible that it
   should please him?

   Upon the whole, I presume there is no person of good understanding, who
   impartially considers these things, but will allow, that it is not
   evident, from the dictates of common sense, or natural notions, that
   moral Necessity is inconsistent with Praise and Blame. And, therefore,
   if the Arminians would prove any such inconsistency, it must be by some
   philosophical and metaphysical arguments, and not common sense.

   There is a grand illusion in the pretended demonstration of Arminians
   from common sense. The main strength of all these demonstrations lies
   in that prejudice, that arises through the insensible change of the use
   and meaning of such terms as liberty , able, unable, necessary,
   impossible, unavoidable, invincible, action, &c. from their original
   and vulgar sense, to a metaphysical sense, entirely diverse; and the
   strong connexion of the ideas of blamelessness, &c. with some of these
   terms, by a habit contracted and established, while these terms were
   used in their first meaning. This prejudice and delusion, is the
   foundation of all those positions they lay down as maxims, by which
   most of the scriptures they allege in this controversy, are
   interpreted, and on which all their pompous demonstrations from
   Scripture and reason depend. From this secret delusion and prejudice
   they have almost all their advantages: it is the strength of their
   bulwarks, and the edge of their weapons. And this is the main ground of
   all the right they have to treat their neighbours in so assuming a
   manner, and to insult others, perhaps as wise and good as themselves,
   as "weak bigots, men that dwell in the dark caves of superstition,
   perversely set, obstinately shutting their eyes against the noon-day
   light, enemies to common sense, maintaining the first-born of
   absurdities," &c. &c. But perhaps, an impartial consideration of the
   things which have been observed in the preceding parts of this inquiry,
   may enable the lovers of truth better to judge, whose doctrine is
   indeed absurd, abstruse, self-contradictory, and inconsistent with
   common sense, and many ways repugnant to the universal dictates of the
   reason of mankind.

   Corol. From the things which have been observed, it will follow, that
   it is agreeable to common sense to suppose, that the glorified saints
   have not their freedom at all diminished, in any respect; and that Cod
   himself has the highest possible freedom, according to the true and
   proper meaning of the term; and that he is, in the highest possible
   respect, an agent, and active in the exercise of his infinite holiness;
   though he acts therein, in the highest degree, necessarily: and his
   actions of this kind are in the highest, most absolutely perfect,
   manner virtuous and praiseworthy; and are so, for that very reason,
   because they are most perfectly necessary.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [140] It is here argued, on supposition that not all propensity implies
   moral necessity, but only some very high degree; which none will deny.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Objections, that this scheme of Necessity renders all Means and
   Endeavours for avoiding Sin, or obtaining Virtue and Holiness, vain,
   and to no purpose; and that it makes men no more than mere machines, in
   affairs of morality and religion, answered.

   Arminians say, If sin and virtue come to pass by a Necessity consisting
   in a sure connexion of causes and effects, antecedents and consequents,
   it can never be worth while to use any Means or Endeavours to obtain
   the one, and avoid the other; seeing no Endeavours can alter the
   futurity of the event, which is become necessary by a connexion already
   established.

   But I desire, that this matter may be fully considered; and that it may
   be examined with a thorough strictness, whether it will follow that
   Endeavours and Means, in order to avoid or obtain any future thing,
   must be more in vain, on the supposition of such a connexion of
   antecedents and consequents, than if the contrary be supposed.

   For Endeavours to be in vain, is for them not to be successful; that is
   to say, for them not eventually to be the Means of the thing aimed at,
   which cannot be, but in one of these two ways; either, first, That
   although the Means are used, yet the event aimed at does not follow;
   or, secondly, If the event does follow, it is not because of the Means,
   or from any connexion or dependence of the event on the Means, the
   event would have come to pass as well without the Means as with them.
   If either of these two things are the case, then the Means are not
   properly successful, and are truly in vain. The success or non-success
   of Means, in order to an effect, or their being in vain or not in vain,
   consists in those Means being connected, or not connected, with the
   effect, in such a manner as this, viz. That the effect is with the
   Means, and not without them; or. that the being of the effect is, on
   the one hand, connected with Means, and the want of the effect, on the
   other hand, is connected with the want of the Means. If there be such a
   connexion as this between Means and end, the Means are not in vain: the
   more there is of such a connexion, the further they are from being in
   vain; and the less of such a connexion, the more they are in vain.

   Now, therefore, the question to be answered--in order to determine,
   whether it follows from this doctrine of the necessary connexion
   between foregoing things, and consequent ones, that Means used in order
   to any effect, are more in vain than they would be otherwise--is,
   whether it follows from it, that there is less of the forementioned
   connexion between Means and effect; that is, whether on the supposition
   of there being a real and true connexion between antecedent things and
   consequent ones, there must be less of a connexion between Means and
   effect, than on the supposition of there being no fixed connexion
   between antecedent things and consequent ones: and the very stating of
   this question is sufficient to answer it. It must appear to every one
   that will open his eyes, that this question cannot be affirmed, without
   the grossest absurdity and inconsistence. Means are foregoing things,
   and effects are following things: And if there were no connexion
   between foregoing things and following ones, there could be no
   connexion between Means and end; and so all Means would be wholly vain
   and fruitless. For it is only by virtue of some connexion, that they
   become successful: It is some connexion observed, or revealed, or
   otherwise known, between antecedent things and following ones, that
   directs in the choice of Means. And if there were no such thing as an
   established connexion, there could be no choice, as to Means; one thing
   would have no more tendency to an effect, than another; there would be
   no such thing as tendency in the case. All those things, which are
   successful Means of other things, do therein prove connected
   antecedents of them: and therefore to assert, that a fixed connexion
   between antecedents and consequents makes Means vain and useless, or
   stands in the way to hinder the connexion between Means and end, is
   just so ridiculous, as to say, that a connexion between antecedents and
   consequents stands in the way to hinder a connexion between antecedents
   and consequents.

   Nor can any supposed connexion of the succession or train of
   antecedents and consequents, from the very beginning of all things, the
   connexion being made already sure and necessary, either by established
   laws of nature, or by these together with a decree of sovereign
   immediate interpositions of divine power, on such and such occasions,
   or any other way (if any other there be); I say, no such necessary
   connexion of a series of antecedents and consequents can in the least
   tend to hinder, but that the Means we use may belong to the series; and
   so may be some of those antecedents which are connected with the
   consequents we aim at, in the established course of things. Endeavours
   which we use, are things that exist; and, therefore, they belong to the
   general chain of events; all the parts of which chain are supposed to
   be connected: and so Endeavours are supposed to be connected with some
   effects, or some consequent things or other. And certainly this does
   not hinder but that the events they are connected with, may be those
   which we aim at, and which we choose, because we judge them most likely
   to have a connexion with those events, from the established order and
   course of things which we observe, or from something in divine
   revelation.

   Let us suppose a real and sure connexion between a man having his eyes
   open in the clear day-light, with good organs of sight, and seeing; so
   that seeing is connected with his opening his eyes, and not seeing with
   his not opening his eyes; and also the like connexion between such a
   man attempting to open his eyes, and his actually doing it: the
   supposed established connexion between these antecedents and
   consequents, let the connexion be never so sure and necessary,
   certainly does not prove that it is in vain, for a man in such
   circumstances to attempt to open his eyes, in order to seeing: his
   aiming at that event, and the use of the Means, being the effect of his
   Will, does not break the connexion, or hinder the success.

   So that the objection we are upon does not lie against the doctrine of
   the Necessity of events by a certainty of connexion and consequence: On
   the contrary, it is truly forcible against the Arminian doctrine of
   contingence and self-determination; which is inconsistent with such a
   connexion. If there be no connexion between those events, wherein
   virtue and vice consist, and any thing antecedent; then, there is no
   connexion between these events and any Means or Endeavours used in
   order to them: and if so, then those means must be in vain. The less
   there is of connexion between foregoing things and following ones, so
   much the less there is between Means and end, Endeavours and success;
   and in the same proportion are Means and Endeavours ineffectual and in
   vain.

   It will follow from Arminian principles, that there is no degree of
   connexion between virtue or vice, and any foregoing event or thing: or,
   in other words, that the determination of the existence of virtue or
   vice does not in the least depend on the influence of any thing that
   comes to pass antecedently, as its cause, Means, or ground; because, so
   far as it is so, it is not from self-determination: and, therefore, so
   far there is nothing of the nature of virtue or vice. And so it
   follows, that virtue and vice are not at all, in any degree, dependent
   upon, or connected with, as, any foregoing event or existence, its
   cause, ground, or Means. And if so, then all foregoing Means must be
   totally in vain.

   Hence it follows, that there cannot, in any consistence with the
   Arminian scheme, be any reasonable ground of so much as a conjecture
   concerning the consequence of any Means and Endeavours, in order to
   escaping vice or obtaining virtue, or any choice or preference of
   Means, as having a greater probability of success by some than others;
   either from any natural connexion or dependence of the end on the
   Means, or through any divine constitution, or revealed way of God,
   bestowing or bringing to pass these things, in consequence of any
   Means, Endeavours, Prayers, or Deeds. Conjectures, in this latter case,
   depend on a supposition, that God himself is the Giver or determining
   Cause of the events sought: but if they depend on self-determination,
   then God is not the determining or disposing Author of them: and if
   these things are not of his disposal, then no conjecture can be made,
   from any revelation he has given, concerning any method of his disposal
   of them.

   Yea, on these principles, it will not only follow, that men cannot have
   any reasonable ground of judgment or conjecture, that their Means and
   Endeavours to obtain virtue or avoid vice will be successful, but they
   may be sure, they will not; they may be certain, that they will be in
   vain; and that if ever the thing, which they seek, comes to pass, it
   will not be at all owing to the Means they use. For Means and
   Endeavours can have no effect at all, in order to obtain the end, but
   in one of these two ways: either, (1.) Through a natural tendency and
   influence, to prepare and dispose the mind more to virtuous acts,
   either by causing the disposition of the heart to be more in favour of
   such acts, or by bringing the mind more into the view of powerful
   motives and inducements; or, (2.) By putting persons more in the way of
   God's bestowment of the benefit. But neither of these can be the case.
   Not the latter; for, as has been just now observed, it does not consist
   with the Arminian notion of self-determination, which they suppose
   essential to virtue, that God should be the bestower, or (which is the
   same thing) the determining, disposing author of virtue. Not the
   former; for natural influence and tendency suppose causality,
   connexion, and necessity of event, which are inconsistent with Arminian
   liberty. A tendency of Means, by biassing the heart in favour of
   virtue, or by bringing the Will under the influence and power of
   motives in its determinations, are both inconsistent with Arminian
   liberty of Will, consisting in indifference, and sovereign
   self-determination, as has been largely demonstrated.

   But for the more full removal of this prejudice against the doctrine of
   necessity, which has been maintained, as though it tended to encourage
   a total neglect of all Endeavours as vain, the following things may be
   considered.

   The question is not, Whether men may not thus improve this doctrine: we
   know that many true and wholesome doctrines are abused: but, whether
   the doctrine gives any just occasion for such an improvement; or
   whether, on the supposition of the truth of the doctrine, such a use of
   it would not be unreasonable? If any shall affirm, that it would not,
   but that the very nature of the doctrine is such as gives just occasion
   for it, it must be on this supposition; namely, that such an invariable
   necessity of all things already settled, must render the interposition
   of all Means, Endeavours, Conclusions or Actions, of ours, in order to
   the obtaining any future end whatsoever, perfectly insignificant;
   because they cannot in the least alter or vary the course and series of
   things, in any event or circumstance; all being already fixed
   unalterably by necessity: and that therefore it is folly, for men to
   use any Means for any end; but their wisdom, to save themselves the
   trouble of Endeavours, and take their ease. No person can draw such an
   inference from this doctrine, and come to such a conclusion, without
   contradicting himself, and going counter to the very principles he
   pretends to act upon: for he comes to a conclusion, and takes a course,
   in order to an end, even his ease, or saving himself from trouble; he
   seeks something future, and uses Means in order to a future thing, even
   in his drawing up that conclusion, that he will seek nothing, and use
   no Means in order to any thing in future; he seeks his future ease, and
   the benefit and comfort of indolence. If prior necessity, that
   determines all things, makes vain all actions or conclusions of ours,
   in order to any thing future; then it makes vain all conclusions and
   conduct of ours, in order to our future ease. The measure of our ease,
   with the time, manner, and every circumstance of it, is already fixed,
   by all-determining necessity, as much as any thing else. If he says
   within himself, "What future happiness or misery I shall have, is
   already, in effect, determined by the necessary course and connexion of
   things; therefore, I will save myself the trouble of labour and
   diligence, which cannot add to my determined degree of happiness, or
   diminish my misery; but will take my ease, and will enjoy the comfort
   of sloth and negligence." Such a man contradicts himself: he says, the
   measure of his future happiness and misery is already fixed, and he
   will not try to diminish the one, nor add to the other: but yet, in his
   very conclusion, he contradicts this; for, he takes up this conclusion,
   to add to his future happiness, by the ease and comfort of his
   negligence; and to diminish his future trouble and misery, by saving
   himself the trouble of using Means and taking Pains.

   Therefore persons cannot reasonably make this improvement of the
   doctrine of necessity, that they will go into a voluntary negligence of
   Means for their own happiness. For the principles they must go upon, in
   order to this, are inconsistent with their making any improvement at
   all of the doctrine: for to make some improvement of it, is to be
   influenced by it, to come to some voluntary conclusion, in regard to
   their own conduct, with some view or aim: but this, as has been shown,
   is inconsistent with the principles they pretend to act upon. In short,
   the principles are such as cannot he acted upon at all, or, in any
   respect, consistently. And, therefore, in every pretence of acting upon
   them, or making any improvement at all of them, there is a
   self-contradiction.

   As to that objection against the doctrine, which I have endeavoured to
   prove, that it makes men no more than mere machines; I would say, that
   notwithstanding this doctrine, man is entirely, perfectly, and
   unspeakably different from a mere machine, in that he has reason and
   understanding, with a faculty of Will, and so is capable of volition
   and choice; in that his Will is guided by the dictates or views of his
   understanding; and in that his external actions and behaviour, and in
   many respects also his thoughts, and the exercises of his mind, are
   subject to his Will; so that he has liberty to act according to his
   choice, and do what he pleases; and by means of these things, is
   capable of moral habits and moral acts, such inclinations and actions
   as, according to the common sense of mankind, are worthy of praise,
   esteem, love, and reward; or, on the contrary, of disesteem,
   detestation, indignation, and punishment.

   In these things is all the difference from mere machines, as to liberty
   and agency, that would be any perfection, dignity, or privilege, in any
   respect: all the difference that can be desired, and all that can be
   conceived of; and indeed all that the pretensions of the Arminians
   themselves come to, as they are forced often to explain themselves;
   though their explications overthrow and abolish the things asserted,
   and pretended to be explained. For they are forced to explain a
   self-determining power of Will, by a power in the soul, to determine as
   it chooses or wills; which comes to no more than this, that a man has a
   power of choosing, and, in many instances, can do as he chooses. Which
   is quite a different thing from that contradiction, his having power of
   choosing his first act of choice in the case.

   Or, if their scheme make any other difference than this, between men
   and machines, it is for the worse: it is so far from supposing men to
   have a dignity and privilege above machines, that it makes the manner
   of their being determined still more unhappy. Whereas, machines are
   guided by an intelligent cause, by the skilful hand of the workman or
   owner; the will of man is left to the guidance of nothing, but absolute
   blind contingence!
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Concerning that objection against the doctrine which has been
   maintained, that it agrees with the Stoical doctrine of Fate, and the
   opinions of Mr. Hobbes.

   When Calvinists oppose the Arminian notion of the freedom of Will, and
   contingence of volition, and insist that there are no acts of the Will,
   nor any other events whatsoever, but what are attended with some kind
   of necessity; their opposers exclaim against them, as agreeing with the
   ancient Stoics in their doctrine of Fate, and with Mr. Hobbes in his
   opinion of Necessity.

   It would not be worth while to take notice of so impertinent an
   objection, had it not been urged by some of the chief Arminian
   writers.--There were many important truths maintained by the ancient
   Greek and Roman philosophers, and especially the Stoics, that are never
   the worse for being held by them. The Stoic philosophers, by the
   general agreement of Christian divines, and even Arminian divines, were
   the greatest, wisest, and most virtuous of all the heathen
   philosophers; and, in their doctrine and practice, came the nearest to
   Christianity of any of their sects. How frequently are the sayings of
   these philosophers, in many of the writings and sermons, even of
   Arminian divines, produced, not as arguments for the falseness of the
   doctrines which they delivered, but as a confirmation of some of the
   greatest truths of the christian religion, relating to the unity and
   perfections of the Godhead, a future state, the duty and happiness of
   mankind, &c. and how the light of nature and reason, in the wisest and
   best of the heathen, harmonized with and confirms the gospel of Jesus
   Christ.

   And it is very remarkable, concerning Dr. Whitby, that although he
   alleges the agreement of the Stoics with us, wherein he supposes they
   maintained the like doctrine, as an argument against the truth of ours;
   yet, this very Dr. Whitby alleges the agreement of the Stoics with the
   Arminian, wherein he supposes they taught the same doctrine with them,
   as an argument for the truth of their doctrine. [141] So that, when the
   Stoics agree with them, it is a confirmation of their doctrine, and a
   confutation of ours, as showing that our opinions are contrary to the
   natural sense and common reason of mankind: nevertheless, when the
   Stoics agree with us, it argues no such thing in our favour; but, on
   the contrary, is a great argument against us, and shows our doctrine to
   be heathenish!

   It is observed by some Calvinistic writers, that the Arminians
   symbolize with the Stoics, in some of those doctrines wherein they are
   opposed by the Calvinists; particularly in their denying an original,
   innate, total corruption and depravity of heart; and in what the; held
   of man's ability to make himself truly virtuous and conformed to God,
   and in some other doctrines.

   It may be further observed, that certainly it is no better objection
   against our doctrine, that it agrees, in some respects, with the
   doctrine of the ancient Stoic philosophers; than it is against theirs,
   wherein they differ from us, that it agrees, in some respects, with the
   opinion of the very worst of the heathen philosophers, the followers of
   Epicurus, the father of atheism and licentiousness, and with the
   doctrine of the Sadducces and Jesuits.

   I am not much concerned to know precisely, what the ancient Stoic
   philosophers held concerning Fate, in order to determine what is truth;
   as though it were a sure way to be in the right, to take good heed to
   differ from them. It seems, that they differed among themselves; and
   probably the doctrine of Fate, as maintained by most of them, was, in
   some respects, erroneous. But whatever their doctrine was, if any of
   them held such a Fate, as is repugnant to any liberty, consisting in
   our doing as we please, I utterly deny such a Fate. If they held any
   such Fate, as is not consistent with the common and universal notions
   that mankind have of liberty, activity, moral agency, virtue and vice;
   I disclaim any such thing, and think I have demonstrated, that the
   scheme I maintain is no such scheme. If the Stoics, by Fate, meant any
   thing of such a nature, as can be supposed to stand in the way of
   advantage and benefit of in use of means and endeavours, or would make
   it less worth while for men to desire and seek after any thing wherein
   their virtue and happiness consists; I hold no doctrine that is clogged
   with any such inconvenience, any more than any other scheme whatsoever;
   and by no means so much as the Arminian scheme of contingence; as has
   been shown. If they held any such doctrine of universal fatality, as is
   inconsistent with any kind of liberty, that is or can be any
   perfection, dignity, privilege, or benefit, or any thing desirable, in
   any respect, for any intelligent creature, or indeed with any liberty
   that is possible or conceivable; I embrace no such doctrine. If they
   held any such doctrine of Fate, as is inconsistent with the world being
   in all things subject to the disposal of an intelligent, wise agent,
   that presides--not as the soul of the world, but--as the Sovereign Lord
   of the Universe, governing all things by proper will, choice, and
   design, in the exercise of the most perfect liberty conceivable,
   without subjection to any constraint, or being properly under the power
   or influence of any thing before, above, or without himself; I wholly
   renounce any such doctrine.

   As to Mr. Hobbes maintaining the same doctrine concerning necessity; I
   confess, it happens I never read Mr. Hobbes. Let his opinion be what it
   will, we need not reject all truth which is demonstrated by clear
   evidence, merely because it was once held by some bad man. This great
   truth, "that Jesus is the Son of God," was not spoiled because it was
   once and again proclaimed with a loud voice by the devil. If truth is
   so defiled, because it is spoken by the mouth, or written by the pen,
   of some ill minded, mischievous man, that it must never be received, we
   shall never know, when we hold any of the most precious and evident
   truths by a sure tenure. And if Mr. Hobbes has made a bad use of this
   truth, that is to be lamented; but the truth is not to be thought
   worthy of rejection on that account. It is common for the corrupt
   hearts of evil men to abuse the best things to vile purposes.

   I might also take notice of its having been observed, that the
   Arminians agree with Mr. Hobbes [142] in many more things than the
   Calvinists. As, in what he is said to hold concerning original sin, in
   denying the necessity of supernatural illumination, in denying infused
   grace, in denying the doctrine of justification by faith alone; and
   other things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [141] Whitby on the five Points. Edit.3. p. 325, 326, 327.

   [142] Dr. Gill, in his Answers to Dr. Whitby. Vol. III. p. 183, &c.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Concerning the Necessity of the Divine Will.

   Some may, possibly, object against what has been supposed of the
   absurdity and inconsistency of a self-determining power in the Will,
   and the impossibility of its being otherwise, than that the Will should
   be determined in every case by some motive, and by a motive which (as
   it stands in the view of the understanding) is of superior strength to
   any appearing on the other side; that if these things are true, it will
   follow, that not only the Will of created minds, but the Will of God
   himself, is necessary in all its determinations. Concerning which the
   author of the Essay on the Freedom of Will in God and in the Creature,
   (page. 85, 86.) says: "What strange doctrine is this, contrary to all
   our ideas of the dominion of God? does it not destroy the glory of his
   liberty of choice, and take away from the Creator and Governor and
   Benefactor of the world, that most free and Sovereign Agent, all the
   glory of this sort of freedom? does it not seem to make him a kind of
   mechanical medium of fate, and introduce Mr. Hobbes's doctrine of
   fatality and Necessity, into all things that God hath to do with! Does
   it not seem to represent the blessed God, as a Being of vast
   understanding, as well as power, and efficiency, but still to leave him
   without a Will to choose among all the objects within his view? In
   short, it seems to make the blessed God a sort of Almighty Minister of
   Fate, under its universal and supreme influence; as it was the
   professed sentiment of some of the ancients, that Fate was above the
   gods.

   This is declaiming, rather than arguing; and an application to men's
   imaginations and prejudices, rather than to mere reason. I would now
   calmly endeavour to consider, whether there be any reason in this
   frightful representation. But, before I enter upon a particular
   consideration of the matter, I would observe; that it is reasonable to
   suppose, it should be much more difficult to express or conceive things
   according to exact metaphysical truth, relating to the nature and
   manner of the existence of things in the Divine Understanding and Will,
   and the operation of these faculties (if I may so call them) of the
   Divine Mind, than in the human mind; which is infinitely more within
   our view, more proportionate to the measure of our comprehension, and
   more commensurate to the use and import of human speech. Language is
   indeed very deficient, in regard of terms to express precise truth
   concerning our own minds, and their faculties and operations. Words
   were first formed to express external things; and those that are
   applied to express things internal and spiritual, are almost all
   borrowed, and used in a sort of figurative sense. Whence they are, most
   of them, attended with a great deal of ambiguity and unfixedness in
   their signification, occasioning innumerable doubts, difficulties, and
   confusions, in inquiries and controversies about things of this nature.
   But language is much less adapted to express things existing in the
   mind of the incomprehensible Deity, precisely as they are.

   We find a great deal of difficulty in conceiving exactly of the nature
   of our own souls. And notwithstanding all the progress which has been
   made, in past ages, and the present, in this kind of knowledge, whereby
   our metaphysics, as it relates to these things, is brought to greater
   perfection than once it was; yet, here is still work enough left for
   future inquiries and researches, and room for progress still to be
   made, for many ages and generations. But we had need to be infinitely
   able metaphysicians, to conceive with clearness, according to strict,
   proper, and perfect truth, concerning the nature of the Divine Essence,
   and the modes of action and operation in the powers of the Divine Mind

   And it may be noted particularly, that though we are obliged to
   conceive of some things in God as consequent and dependent on others,
   and of some things pertaining to the Divine Nature and Will as the
   foundation of others, and so before others in the order of nature: as,
   we must conceive of the knowledge and holiness of God as prior, in the
   order of nature, to his happiness; the perfection of his understanding,
   as the foundation of his wise purposes and decrees; the holiness of his
   nature, as the cause and reason of his holy determinations. And yet,
   when we speak of cause and effect, antecedent and consequent,
   fundamental and dependent, determining and determined, in the first
   Being, who is self-existent, independent, of perfect and absolute
   simplicity and immutability, and the first cause of all things:
   doubtless there must be less propriety in such representations, than
   when we speak of derived dependent beings, who are compounded, and
   liable to perpetual mutation and succession.

   Having premised this, I proceed to observe concerning the forementioned
   author's exclamation, about the necessary determination of God's Will,
   in all things, by what he sees to be fittest and best;

   That all the seeming force of such objections and exclamations must
   arise from an imagination, that there is some sort of privilege or
   dignity in being without such a moral Necessity, as will make it
   impossible to do any other, than always choose what is wisest and best;
   as though there were some disadvantage, meanness, and subjection, in
   such a Necessity; a thing by which the Will was confined, kept under,
   and held in servitude by something, which, as it were, maintained a
   strong and invincible power and dominion over it, by bonds that held
   him fast, and from which he could, by no means, deliver himself.
   Whereas, this must be all mere imagination and delusion. It is no
   disadvantage or dishonour to a being, necessarily to act in the most
   excellent and happy manner, from the necessary perfection of his own
   nature. This argues no imperfection, inferiority, or dependence, nor
   any want of dignity, privilege, or ascendency. [143] It is not
   inconsistent with the absolute and most perfect sovereignty of God. The
   sovereignty of God is his ability and authority to do whatever pleases
   him; whereby "he doth according to his will in the armies of heaven,
   and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand,
   or say unto him, what dost thou?--The following things belong to the
   sovereignty of God; viz. (1.) Supreme, universal, and infinite Power;
   whereby he is able to do what he pleases, without control, without any
   confinement of that power, without any subjection, in the least
   measure, to any other power; and so without any hinderance or
   restraint, that it should be either impossible, or at all difficult,
   for him to accomplish his Will; and without any dependence of his power
   on any other power, from whence it should be derived, or of which it
   should stand in any need: so far from this, that all other power is
   derived from him, and is absolutely dependent on him. (2.) That he has
   supreme authority; absolute and most perfect right to do what he wills,
   without subjection to any superior authority, or any derivation of
   authority from any other, or limitation by any distinct independent
   authority, either superior, equal, or inferior; he being the head of
   all dominion, and fountain of all authority; and also without restraint
   by any obligation, implying either subjection, derivation, or
   dependence, or proper limitation. (3.) That his Will is supreme,
   underived, and independent on any thing without himself; being in every
   thing determined by his own counsel, having no other rule but his own
   wisdom; his Will not being subject to or restrained by the Will of any
   other, and other Wills being perfectly subject to his. (4.) That his
   Wisdom, which determines his Will, is supreme, perfect, underived,
   self-sufficient, and independent; so that it may be said, as in Isa.
   xl. 14. "With whom took he counsel? And who instructed him and taught
   him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed him
   the way of understanding?" There is no other Divine Sovereignty but
   this; and this is properly absolute sovereignty: no other is desirable;
   nor would any other be honourable, or happy: and indeed, there is no
   other conceivable or possible. It is the glory and greatness of the
   Divine Sovereign, that his Will is determined by his own infinite,
   all-sufficient wisdom in every thing; and is in nothing at all directed
   either by inferior wisdom, or by no wisdom; whereby it would become
   senseless arbitrariness, determining and acting without reason, design,
   or end.

   If God's Will is steadily and surely determined in every thing by
   supreme wisdom, then it is in every thing necessarily determined to
   that which is most wise. And, certainly, it would be a disadvantage and
   indignity, to be otherwise. For if the Divine Will was not necessarily
   determined to what in every case is wisest and best, it must be subject
   to some degree of undesigning contingence; and so in the same degree
   liable to evil. To suppose the Divine Will liable to be carried hither
   and thither at random, by the uncertain wind of blind contingence,
   which is guided by no wisdom, no motive, no intelligent dictate
   whatsoever, (if any such thing were possible,) would certainly argue a
   great degree of imperfection and meanness, infinitely unworthy of the
   Deity. If it be a disadvantage, for the Divine Will to be attended with
   this moral Necessity, then the more free from it, and the more left at
   random, the greater dignity and advantage. And, consequently, to be
   perfectly free from the direction of understanding, and universally and
   entirely left to senseless unmeaning continence, to act absolutely at
   random, would be the supreme glory!

   It no more argues any dependence of God's Will, that his supremely wise
   volition is necessary, than it argues a dependence of his being, that
   his existence is necessary. If it be something too low, for the Supreme
   Being to have his Will determined by moral Necessity, so as
   necessarily, in every case, to Will in the highest degree holily and
   happily; then why is it not also something top low, for him to have his
   existence, and the infinite perfection of his nature, and his infinite
   happiness, determined by Necessity? It is no more to God's dishonour,
   to be necessarily wise, than to be necessarily holy. And, if neither of
   them be is the beauty of this Necessity, that it is strong as faith
   itself, with all the advantage of reason and goodness.--It is strange,
   to see men contend, that the Deity is not free, because he is
   necessarily rational, immutably good to his dishonour, then it is not
   to his dishonour necessarily to act holily and wisely. And if it be not
   dishonourable to be necessarily holy and wise, in the highest possible
   degree, no more is it mean and dishonourable, necessarily to act holily
   and wisely in the highest possible degree; or which is the same thing,
   to do that, in every case, which, above all other things, is wisest and
   best.

   The reason why it is not dishonourable to be necessarily most holy is,
   because holiness in itself is an excellent and honourable thing. For
   the same reason, it is no dishonour to be necessarily most wise, and,
   in every case, to act most wisely, or do the thing which is the wisest
   of all; for wisdom is also in itself excellent and honourable.

   The forementioned author of the Essay on the Freedom of Will, &c. as
   has been observed, represents that doctrine of the Divine Will being in
   every thing necessarily determined by superior fitness, as making the
   blessed God a kind of Almighty Minister and mechanical medium of fate:
   he insists, (p. 93, 94.) that this moral Necessity and impossibility
   is, in effect, the same thing with physical and natural Necessity, and
   impossibility: and says, (p. 54, 55.) "The scheme which determines the
   Will always and certainly by the understanding, and the understanding
   by the appearance of things, seems to take away the true nature of vice
   and virtue. For the sublimest of virtues, and the vilest of vices, seem
   rather to be matters of fate and Necessity, flowing naturally and
   necessarily from the existence, the circumstances, and present
   situation of persons and things; for this existence and situation
   necessarily makes such an appearance to the mind; from this appearance
   flows a necessary perception and judgment, concerning these things;
   this judgment necessarily determines the Will; and thus, by this chain
   of necessary causes, virtue and vice would lose their nature, and
   become natural ideas, and necessary things, instead of moral and free
   actions."

   And yet this same author allows, (p. 30, 31.) That a perfectly wise
   being will constantly and certainly choose what is most fit; and says,
   (p. 102, 103.) "I grant, and always have granted, that wheresoever
   there is such antecedent superior fitness of things, God acts according
   to it, so as never to contradict it; and, particularly, in all his
   judicial proceedings as a Governor and Distributer of rewards and
   punishments." Yea, he says expressly, (p. 42.) "That it is not possible
   for God to act otherwise, than according to this fitness and goodness
   in things."

   So that, according to this author, putting these several passages of
   his Essay together, there is no virtue, nor any thing of a moral
   nature, in the most sublime and glorious acts and exercises of God's
   holiness, justice, and faithfulness; and he never does any thing which
   is in itself supremely worthy, and, above all other things, fit and
   excellent, but only as a kind of mechanical medium of fate; and in what
   he does as the Judge, and moral Governor of the world, he exercises no
   moral excellency; exercising no freedom in these things, because he
   acts by moral Necessity, which is, in effect, the same with physical or
   natural Necessity; and therefore, he only acts by an Hobbistical
   fatality; "as a Being indeed of vast understanding, as well as power
   and efficiency, (as he said before,) but without a will to choose,
   being a kind of Almighty Minister of fate, acting under its supreme
   influence. "For he allows, that in all these things, God's Will is
   determined constantly and certainly by a superior fitness, and that it
   is not possible for him to act otherwise. And if these things are so,
   what glory or praise belongs to God for doing holily and justly, or
   taking the most fit, holy, wise, and excellent course, in any one
   instance? Whereas, according to the Scriptures, and also the common
   sense of mankind, it does not, in the least, derogate from the honour
   of any being, that through the moral perfection of his nature, he
   necessarily acts with supreme wisdom and holiness; but on the contrary,
   his praise is the greater: herein consists the height of his glory.

   The same author (p. 56.) supposes, that herein appears the excellent
   "character of a wise and good man, that though he can choose contrary
   to the fitness of things, yet he does not; but suffers himself to be
   directed by fitness;" and that, in this conduct, "he imitates the
   blessed God." And yet, he supposes it is contrary wise with the blessed
   God; not that he suffers himself to be directed by fitness, when "he
   can choose, contrary to the .fitness of things;" but that "he cannot
   choose contrary to the fitness of things;" as he says, p. 42. "That it
   is not possible for God to act otherwise than according to this
   fitness, where there is any fitness or goodness in things:" Yea, he
   supposes, (p. 31.) That if a man "were perfectly wise and good, he
   could not do otherwise than be constantly and certainly determined by
   the fitness of things."

   One thing more I would observe, before I conclude this section; and
   that is, that if it derogate nothing from the glory of God, to be
   necessarily determined by superior fitness in some things, then neither
   does it to he thus determined in all things; from any thing in the
   nature of such Necessity, as at all detracting from (God's freedom,
   independence, absolute supremacy, or any dignity or glory of his
   nature, state, or manner of acting; or as implying any infirmity,
   restraint, or subjection. And it the thing be such as well consists
   with God's glory, and has nothing tending at all to detract from it;
   then we need not be afraid of ascribing it to God in too many things,
   lest thereby we should detract from God's glory too much.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [143] "It might have been objected, with more plausibleness, that the
   Supreme Cause cannot be free, because he must needs do always what is
   best in the whole. But this would not at all serve Spinoza's purpose;
   for this is a necessity, not of nature and of fate, but of fitness and
   wisdom: a necessity consistent with the greatest freedom, and most
   perfect choice. For the only foundation of this necessity is such an
   unalterable rectitude of will, and perfection of wisdom, as makes it
   impossible for a wise being to act foolishly." dark's Demonstration of
   the Being and Attributes of God. Edit. 6. p. 64. "Though God is a most
   perfect free Agent, yet he cannot but do always what is best and wisest
   in the whole. The reason is evident; because perfect wisdom and
   goodness are as steady and certain principles of action, as necessity
   itself; and an infinitely wise and good Being, indued with the most
   perfect liberty, can no more choose to act in contradiction to wisdom
   and goodness, than a necessary agent can act contrary to the necessity
   by which it is acted; It being as great an absurdity and impossibility
   in choice, for Infinite Wisdom to choose to act unwisely, or Infinite
   Goodness to choose what is not good, as it would be in nature, for
   absolute necessity to fail of producing its necessary effect. There
   was, indeed, no necessity in nature, that God should at first create
   such beings as he has created, or indeed any being at all; because he
   is. in himself, infinitely happy and all-sufficient. There was, also,
   no necessity in nature, that he should preserve and continue things in
   being, after they were created; because he would be self-sufficient
   without their continuance, as he was before their creation. But it was
   fit and wise and good, that Infinite Wisdom should manifest, and
   Infinite Goodness communicate itself: and therefore it was necessary,
   in the sense of necessity I am now speaking of, that things should be
   made at such a time, and continued to long, and indeed with various
   perfections in such degrees, as Infinite Wisdom and Goodness saw it
   wisest and best that they should." Ibid. p. 112, 113. "It is not a
   fault, but a perfection of our nature, to desire, will, and act,
   according to the last result of a fair examination.--This is so far
   from being a restraint or diminution of freedom, that it is the very
   improvement and benefit of it: it is not an abridgment, it is the end
   and use of our liberty; and the further we are removed from such a
   determination, the nearer we are to misery and slavery. A perfect
   indifference in the mind, not determinable by its last judgment, of the
   good or evil that is thought to attend its choice, would be so far from
   being an advantage and excellency of any intellectual nature, that it
   would be as great an imperfection, as the want of indifferency to act,
   or not to act, till determined by the will, would be an imperfection on
   the other side.--It is as much a perfection, that desire or the power
   of preferring should be determined by good, as that the power of acting
   should be determined by the will: and the certainer such determination
   is, the greater the perfection. Nay, were we determined by any thing
   but the last result of our own minds, judging of the good or evil of
   any action, we were not free. This very end of our freedom being, that
   we might attain the good we choose; and, therefore, every man is
   brought under a necessity by his constitution, as an intelligent being,
   to be determined in willing by his own thought and judgment, what is
   best for him to do; else he would be under the determination of some
   other than himself, which is want of liberty. And to deny that a man's
   will, in every determination, follows his own judgment, is to say, that
   a man wills and acts for an end that he would not have, at the same
   time that he wills and acts for it. For if he prefers it in his present
   thoughts, before any other, it is plain he then thinks better of it,
   and would have it before any other; unless he can have and not have it,
   will and not will it, at the same time; a contradiction too manifest to
   be admitted.--If we look upon those superior beings above us, who enjoy
   perfect happiness, we shall have reason to judge, that they are more
   steadily determined in their choice of good than we; and yet we have no
   reason to think they are less happy, or less free, than we are. And if
   it were fit for such poor finite creatures as we are, to pronounce what
   Infinite Wisdom and Goodness could do, I think we might say, that God
   himself cannot choose what is not good. The freedom of the Almighty
   hinders not his being determined by what is best.--But to give a right
   view of this mistaken part of liberty, let me ask. Would any one be a
   changeling, because he is less determined by wise determination, than a
   wise man? Is it worth the name of freedom, to be at liberty to play the
   fool, and draw shame and misery upon a man's self? If to break loose
   from the conduct of reason, and to want that restraint of examination
   and judgment, that keeps us from doing or choosing the worse, be
   liberty, true liberty, mad men and fools are the only free men. Yet, I
   think, nobody would choose to be mad, for the sake of such liberty, but
   he that is mad already." Locke Hum. Und. Vol. I. Edit 7. p. 215. 216.
   "This Being, having all things always necessarily in view, must always
   and eternally will, according to his infinite comprehension of things;
   that is. must will all things that are wisest and best to be done.
   There is no getting free of this consequence. If it can will at all, it
   must will this way. To be capable of knowing, and not capable of
   willing, is not to be understood. And to be capable of willing
   otherwise than what is wisest and best, contradicts that knowledge
   which is infinite. Infinite Knowledge must direct the will without
   error. Here, then, is the origin of moral Necessity; and that is,
   really, of freedom.--Perhaps it may be said, when the Divine Will is
   determined, from the consideration of the eternal aptitudes of things,
   it is as necessarily determined, as if it were physically impelled, if
   that were possible. But it is unskilfulness, to suppose this an
   objection. The great principle is once established, viz. That the
   Divine Will is determined by the eternal reason and aptitudes of
   things, instead of being physically impelled; and after that, the more
   strong and necessary this determination is, the more perfect the Deity
   must be allowed to be: it is this that makes him an amiable and
   adorable Being, whose will and power are constantly, immutably
   determined, by the consideration of what is wisest and best; instead of
   a surd Being, with power, but without discerning and reason. It is the
   beauty of this Necessity, that it is strong as fate itself, with all
   the advantage of reason and goodness.--It is strange, to see men
   contend, that the Deity is not free, because he is necessarily
   rational, immutably good and wise; when a man is allowed still the
   perfecter being, the more fixedly and constantly his Will is determined
   by reason and truth." Inquiry into the Nature of the Hum. Soul Edit. 3.
   Vol. II. p. 408, 404.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   Some further objections against the moral Necessity of God's Volitions
   considered.

   The author last cited, as has been observed, owns that God, being
   perfectly wise, will constantly and certainly choose what appears most
   fit, where there is a superior fitness and goodness in things; and that
   it is not possible for him to do otherwise. So that it is in effect
   confessed, that in those things where there is any real preferableness,
   it is no dishonour, nothing in any respect unworthy of God, for him to
   act from Necessity; notwithstanding all that can be objected from the
   agreement of such a Necessity with the fate of the Stoics, and the
   Necessity maintained by Mr. Hobbes. From which it will follow, that if
   in all the different things, among which God chooses, there were
   evermore a superior fitness or preferableness on one side, then it
   would be no dishonour, or any thing unbecoming, for God's Will to be
   necessarily determined in every thing. And if this be allowed, it is
   giving up entirely the argument, from the unsuitableness of such a
   Necessity to the liberty, supremacy, independence, and glory of the
   Divine Being; and resting the whole weight of the affair on the
   decision of another point wholly diverse; viz. Whether it be so indeed,
   that in all the various possible things, which are in God's view, and
   may he considered as capable objects of his choice, there is not
   evermore a preferableness in one thing above another. This is denied by
   this author; who supposes, that in many instances, between two or more
   possible things, which come within the view of the Divine Mind, there
   is a perfect indifference and inequality, as to fitness or tendency, to
   attain any good end which God can have in view, or to answer any of his
   designs. Now, therefore, I would consider whether this be evident.

   The arguments brought to prove this, are of two kinds. (1.) It is
   urged, that, in many instances, we must suppose there is absolutely no
   difference between various possible objects of choice, which God has in
   view: and, (2.) that the difference between many things is so
   inconsiderable, or of such a nature, that it would be unreasonable to
   suppose it to be of any consequence; or to suppose that any of God's
   wise designs would not be answered in any one way as well as the other.

   Therefore,

   1. The first thing to be considered is, whether there are any instances
   wherein there is a perfect likeness, and absolutely no difference,
   between different objects of choice, that are proposed to the Divine
   Understanding?

   And here, in the first place, it may be worthy to be considered,
   whether the contradiction there is in the terms of the question
   proposed, does not give reason to suspect, that there is an
   inconsistence in the thing supposed. It is inquired whether different
   objects of choice may not be absolutely without difference? If they are
   absolutely without difference, then how are they different objects of
   choice! If there be absolutely no difference, in any respect, then
   there is no variety or distinction: for distinction is only by some
   difference. And if there be no variety among proposed objects of
   choice, then there is no opportunity for variety of choice, or
   difference of determination. For that determination of a thing, which
   is not different in any respect, is not a different determination, hut
   the same. That this is no quibble, may appear more fully in a short
   time.

   The arguments, to prove that the Most High, in some instances, chooses
   to do one thing rather than another, where the things themselves are
   perfectly without difference, are two.

   1. That the various parts of infinite time and space, absolutely
   considered, are perfectly alike, and do not differ at all one from
   another: and that therefore, when God determined to create the world in
   such a part of infinite duration and space, rather than others, he
   determined and preferred, among various objects, between which there
   was no preferableness, and absolutely no difference.

   Answ. This objection supposes an infinite length of time before the
   world was created, distinguished by successive parts, properly and
   truly so; or a succession of limited and unmeasurable periods of time,
   following one another, in an infinitely long series: which must needs
   be a groundless imagination. The eternal duration which was before the
   world, being only the eternity of God's existence; which is nothing
   else but his immediate, perfect, and invariable possession of the whole
   of his unlimited life, together and at once; Vitae interminabilis, totu
   simul et perfecta possessio. Which is so generally allowed, that I need
   not stand to demonstrate it. [144]

   So this objection supposes an extent of space beyond the limits of the
   creation, of an infinite length, breadth, and depth, truly and properly
   distinguished into different measurable parts, limited at certain
   stages, one beyond another, in an infinite series. Which notion of
   absolute and infinite space is doubtless as unreasonable, as that now
   mentioned, of absolute and infinite duration. It is as improper, to
   imagine that the immensity and omnipresence of God is distinguished by
   a series of miles and leagues, one beyond another; as that the infinite
   duration of God is distinguished by months and years, one after
   another. A diversity and order of distinct parts, limited by certain
   periods, is as conceivable, and does as naturally obtrude itself on our
   imagination, in one case as the other; and there is equal reason in
   each case, to suppose that our imagination deceives us. It is equally
   improper to talk of months and years of the Divine Existence, as of
   square miles of Deity: and we equally deceive ourselves, when we talk
   of the world being differently fixed, with respect to either of these
   sorts of measures. I think, we know not what we mean, if we say, the
   world might have been differently placed from what it is, in the broad
   expanse of infinity; or, that it might have been differently fixed in
   the long line of eternity: and all arguments and objections, which are
   built on the imaginations we are apt to have of infinite extension or
   duration, are buildings founded on shadows, or castles in the air.

   2. The second argument, to prove that the Most High wills one thine
   rather than another, without any superior fitness or preferableness in
   the thing preferred, is God's actually placing in different parts of
   the world, panicles, or atoms of matter, that are perfectly equal and
   alike. The forementioned author says, (p. 78, &c.) "If one would
   descend to the minute specific particles, of which different bodies are
   composed, we should see abundant reason to believe, that there are
   thousands of such little particles, or atoms of matter, which are
   perfectly equal and alike, and could give no distinct determination to
   the Will of God, where to place them." He there instances in particles
   of water, of which there are such immense numbers, which compose the
   rivers and oceans of this world; and the infinite myriads of the
   luminous and fiery particles, which compose the body of the sun; so
   many, that it would be very unreasonable to suppose no two of them
   should be exactly equal and alike.

   Answ. (1.) To this I answer: that as we must suppose matter to be
   infinitely divisible, it is very unlikely, that any two of all these
   particles are exactly equal and alike; so unlikely, that it is a
   thousand to one, yea, an infinite number to one, but it is otherwise:
   and that although we should allow a great similarity between the
   different particles of water and fire, as to their general nature and
   figure; and however small we suppose those particles to be, it is
   infinitely unlikely, that any two of them should be exactly equal in
   dimensions and quantity of matter.--If we should suppose a great many
   globes of the same nature with the globe of the earth, it would be very
   strange, if there were any two of them that had exactly the same number
   of particles of dust and water in them. But infinitely less strange,
   than that two particles of light should have just the same quantity of
   matter. For a particle of light, according to the doctrine of the
   infinite divisibility of matter, is composed of infinitely more
   assignable parts, than there are particles of dust and water in the
   globe of the earth. And as it is infinitely unlikely, that any two of
   these particles should be equal; so it is, that they should be alike in
   other respects: to instance in the configuration of their surfaces. If
   there were very many globes, of the nature of the earth, it would be
   very unlikely that any two should have exactly the same number of
   particles of dust, water, and stone, in their surfaces, and all posited
   exactly alike, one with respect to another, without any difference, in
   any part discernible either by the naked eye or microscope; but
   infinitely less strange, than that two particles of light should be
   perfectly of the same figure. For there are infinitely more assignable
   real parts on the surface of a particle of light, than there are
   particles of dust, water, and stone, on the surface of the terrestrial
   globe.

   Answ. (2.) But then, supposing that there are two particles, or atoms
   of matter, perfectly equal and alike, which God has placed in different
   parts of the creation; as I will not deny it to be possible for God to
   make two bodies perfectly alike, and put them in different places; yet
   it will not follow, that two different or distinct acts or effects of
   the Divine Power have exactly the same fitness for the same ends. For
   these two different bodies are not different or distinct, in any other
   respects than those wherein they differ: they are two in no other
   respects than those wherein there is a difference. If they are
   perfectly equal and alike in themselves, then they can be
   distinguished, or be distinct, only in those things which are called
   circumstances; as place, time, rest, motion, or some other present or
   past circumstances or relations. For it is difference only that
   constitutes distinction. If God makes two bodies, in themselves every
   way equal and alike, and agreeing perfectly in all other circumstances
   and relations, but only their place; then in this only is there any
   distinction or duplicity. The figure is the same, the measure is the
   same, the solidity and resistance are the same, and every thing the
   same but only the place. Therefore what the Will of God determines is
   this, that there should be the same figure, the same extension, the
   same resistance, &c. in two different places. And for this
   determination he has some reason. There is some end, for which such a
   determination and act has a peculiar fitness, above all other acts.
   Here is no one thing determined without an end, and no one thing
   without a fitness for that end, superior to any thing else. If it be
   the pleasure of God to cause the same resistance, and the same figure,
   to be in two different places and situations, we can no more justly
   argue from it, that here must be some determination or act of God's
   Will that is wholly without motive or end, than we can argue, that
   whenever, in any case, it is a man's Will to speak the same words, or
   make the same sounds, at two different times, there must be some
   determination or act of his Will, without any motive or end. The
   difference of place, in the former case, proves no more than the
   difference of time does in the other. If any one should say, with
   regard to the former case, that there must be something determined
   without an end; viz. that of those two similar bodies, this in
   particular should be made in this place, and the other in the other,
   and should inquire, why the Creator did not make them in a
   transposition, when both are alike, and each would equally have suited
   either place? The inquiry supposes something that is not true; namely,
   that the two bodies differ and are distinct in other respects besides
   their place. So that with this distinction inherent in them, they
   might, in their first creation, have been transposed, and each might
   have begun its existence in the place of the other.

   Let us, for clearness sake, suppose, that God had, at the beginning,
   made two globes, each of an inch diameter, both perfect spheres, and
   perfectly solid, without pores, and perfectly alike in every respect,
   and placed them near one to another, one towards the right hand, and
   the other towards the left, without any difference as to time, motion,
   or rest, past or present, or any circumstance, but only their place;
   and the question should be asked, why God in their creation placed them
   so? why that which is made on the right hand, was not made on the left,
   and vice versa? Let it be well considered, whether there be any sense
   in such a question; and whether the inquiry does not suppose something
   false and absurd. Let it be considered, what the Creator must have done
   otherwise than he did, what different act of Will or power he must have
   exerted, in order to the thing proposed. All that could have been done,
   would have been to have made two spheres, perfectly alike, in the same
   places where he has made them, without any difference of the things
   made, either in themselves or in any circumstance; so that the whole
   effect would have been without any difference, and, therefore, just the
   same. By the supposition, the two spheres are different in no other
   respect but their place; and therefore in other respects they are the
   same. Each has the same roundness; it is not a distinct rotundity, in
   any other respect but its situation. There are, also, the same
   dimensions, differing in nothing but their place. And so of their
   resistance, and every thing else that belongs to them.

   Here, if any chooses to say, "that there is a difference in another
   respect, viz. that they are not numerically the same: that it is thus
   with all the qualities that belong to them: that it is confessed, they
   are, in some respects, the same; that is, they are both exactly alike;
   but yet numerically they differ. Thus the roundness of one is not the
   same numerical, individual roundness with that of the other." Let this
   be supposed; then the question about the determination of the Divine
   Will in the affair, is, why did God will, that this individual
   roundness should be at the right hand, and the other individual
   roundness at the left? why did not he make them in a contrary position?
   Let any rational person consider, whether such questions be not words
   without a meaning; as much as if God should see fit for some ends, to
   cause the same sounds to be repeated, or made at two different times;
   the sounds being perfectly the same in every other respect, but only
   one was a minute after the other; and it should be asked, upon it, why
   God caused these sounds, numerically different, to succeed one the
   other in such a manner? why he did not make that individual sound,
   which was in the first minute, to be in the second, and the individual
   sound of the last minute to be in the first? which inquiries would be
   even ridiculous; as, I think, every person must see at once, in the
   case propose of two sounds, being only the same repeated, absolutely
   without any difference, but that one circumstance of time. If the Most
   High sees it will answer some good end, that the same sound be made
   thunder at two distinct times, and therefore wills that it should be
   so, must it needs therefore be, that herein there is some act of God's
   Will without any motive or end? God saw fit often, at distinct times,
   and on different occasions, to say the very same words to Moses;
   namely, those, I am Jehovah. And would it not be unreasonable to infer,
   as a certain consequence, from this, that here must be some act or acts
   of the Divine Will, in determining and disposing the words exactly
   alike, at different times, wholly without aim or inducement? But it
   would be no more unreasonable than to say, that there must be an act of
   God without any inducement, if he sees it best, and, for some reasons,
   determines that there shall be the same resistance, the same
   dimensions, and the same figure, in several distinct places.

   If, in the instance of the two spheres, perfectly alike, it be supposed
   possible that God might have made them in a contrary position; that
   which is made at the right hand, being made at the left; then I ask,
   Whether it is not evidently equally possible, if God had made but one
   of them, and that in the place of the right hand globe, that he might
   have made that numerically different from what it is, and numerically
   different from what he did make it; though perfectly alike, and in the
   same place; and at the same time, and in every respect, in the same
   circumstances and relations? Namely, Whether he might not have made it
   numerically the same with that which he has now made at the left hand;
   and so have left that which is now created at the right hand, in a
   state of non-existence? And, if so, whether it would not have been
   possible to have made one in that place, perfectly like these, and yet
   numerically differing from both? And let it be considered, whether,
   from this notion of a numerical difference in bodies, perfectly equal
   and alike, which numerical difference is something inherent in the
   bodies themselves, and diverse from the difference of place or time, or
   any circumstance whatsoever; it will not follow, that there is an
   infinite number of numerically different possible bodies, perfectly
   alike, among which God chooses, by a self-determining power, when he
   goes about to create bodies.

   Therefore let us put the case thus: Supposing that God, in the
   beginning, had created but one perfectly solid sphere, in a certain
   place: and it should be inquired, Why God created that individual
   sphere, in that place, at that time? and why he did not create another
   sphere perfectly like it, but numerically different, in the same place,
   at the same time? Or why he. chose to bring into being there, that very
   body, rather than any of the infinite number of other bodies, perfectly
   like it; either of which he could have made there as well, and would
   have answered his end as well. Why he caused to exist, at that place
   and time, that individual roundness, rather than any other of the in
   finite number of individual rotundities, just like it? Why that
   individual resistance, rather than any other of the infinite number of
   possible resistances, just like it? And it might as reasonably be
   asked, Why, when God first caused it to thunder, he caused that
   individual sound then to be made, and not another just like it? Why did
   he make choice of this very sound, and reject all the infinite number
   of other possible sounds just like it, but numerically differing from
   it, and all differing one from another? I think, every body must be
   sensible of the absurdity and nonsense of what is supposed in such
   inquiries. And, if we calmly attend to the matter, we shall be
   convinced, that all such kind of objections as I am answering, are
   founded on nothing but the imperfection of our manner of conceiving
   things, and the obscureness of language, and great want of clearness
   and precision in the signification of terms.

   If any should find fault with this reasoning, that it is going a great
   length into metaphysical niceties and subtilties; I answer, the
   objection to which they are a reply, is a metaphysical subtilty, and
   must be treated according to the nature of it. [145]

   II. Another thing alleged is, that innumerable things which are
   determined by the Divine Will, and chosen and done by God rather than
   others, differ from those that are not chosen in so inconsiderable a
   manner, that it would be unreasonable to suppose the difference to be
   of any consequence, or that there is any superior fitness or goodness,
   mat God can have respect to in the determination.

   To which I answer; it is impossible for us to determine, with any
   certainty or evidence, that because the difference is very small, and
   appears to us of no consideration, therefore there is absolutely no
   superior goodness, and no valuable end, which can be proposed by the
   Creator and Governor of the world, in ordering such a difference. The
   forementioned author mentions many instances. One is, there being one
   atom in the whole universe more, or less. But, I think, it would be
   unreasonable to suppose, that God made one atom in vain, or without any
   end or motive. He made not one atom, but what was a work of his
   Almighty Power, as much as the whole globe of the earth, and requires
   as much of a constant exertion of Almighty Power to uphold it; and was
   made and is upheld with understanding and design, as much as if no
   other had been made but that. And it would be as unreasonable to
   suppose, that he made it without any thing really aimed at in so doing,
   as much as to suppose, that he made the planet Jupiter without aim or
   design.

   It is possible, that the most minute effects of the Creator's power,
   the smallest assignable difference between the things which God has
   made, may be attended, in the whole series of events, and the whole
   compass and extent of their influence, with very great and important
   consequences. If the laws of motion, and gravitation, laid down by Sir
   Isaac Newton, hold universally, there is not one atom, nor the least
   assignable part of an atom, but what has influence, every moment,
   throughout the whole material universe, to cause every part to be
   otherwise than it would be, if it were not for that particular
   corporeal existence. And however the effect is insensible for the
   present, yet it may, in length of time, become great and important.

   To illustrate this, let us suppose two bodies moving the same way, in
   straight lines, perfectly parallel one to another; but to be diverted
   from this parallel course, and drawn one from another, as much as might
   be, by the attraction of an atom, at the distance of one of the
   furthest of the fixed stars from the earth; these bodies being turned
   out of the lines of their parallel motion, will, by degrees, get
   further and further distant, one from the other; and though the
   distance may be imperceptible for a long time, yet at length it may
   become very great. So the revolution of a planet round the sun being
   retarded or accelerated, and the orbit of its revolution made greater
   or less, and more or less elliptical, and so its periodical time longer
   or shorter, no more than may be by the influence of the least atom,
   might, in length of time, perform a whole revolution sooner or later
   than otherwise it would have done; which might make a vast alteration
   with regard to millions of important events. So the influence of the
   least particle may, for ought we know, have such effect on something in
   the constitution of some human body, as to cause another thought to
   arise in the mind at a certain time, than otherwise would have been;
   which, in length of time, (yea, and that not very great,) might
   occasion a vast alteration through the whole world of mankind. And so
   innumerable other ways might be mentioned, wherein the least assignable
   alteration may possibly be attended with great consequences.

   Another argument, which the fore-mentioned author brings against a
   necessary determination of the Divine Will, by a superior fitness, is,
   that such doctrine derogates from the freeness of God's grace and
   goodness, in choosing the objects of his favour and bounty, and from
   the obligation upon men to thankfulness for special benefits, (p. 89,
   &c.) In answer to this objection, I would observe,

   1. That it derogates no more from the goodness of God, to suppose the
   exercise of the benevolence of his nature to be determined by wisdom,
   than to suppose it determined by chance, and that his favours are
   bestowed altogether at random, his Will being determined by nothing but
   perfect accident, without any end or design whatsoever; which must be
   the case, as has been demonstrated, if Volition be not determined by a
   prevailing motive. That which is owing to perfect contingence, wherein
   neither previous inducement nor antecedent choice has any hand, is not
   owing more to goodness or benevolence, than that which is owing to the
   influence of a wise end.

   2. It is acknowledged, that if the motive that deter mines the Will of
   God, in the choice of the objects of his favours, be any moral quality
   in the object, recommending that object to his benevolence above
   others, his choosing that object is not so great a manifestation of the
   freeness and sovereignty of his grace, as if it were otherwise. But
   there is no necessity for supposing this, in order to our supposing
   that he has some wise end in view, in determining to bestow his favours
   on one person rather than another. We are to distinguish between the
   merit of the object of God's favour, or a moral qualification of the
   object attracting that favour and recommending to it, and the natural
   fitness of such a determination of the act of God's goodness, to answer
   some wise design of his own, some end in the view of God's
   omniscience.--It is God's own act, that is the proper and immediate
   object of his Volition.

   3. I suppose that none will deny, but that, in some instances, God acts
   from wise design in determining the particular subjects of his favours:
   none will say, I presume, that when God distinguishes, by his bounty,
   particular societies or persons, he never, in any instance, exercises
   any wisdom in so doing, aiming at some happy consequence. And, if it be
   not denied to be so in some instances, then I would inquire, whether in
   these instances God's goodness is less manifested, than in those
   wherein God has no aim or end at all? And whether the subjects have
   less cause of thankfulness? And if so, who shalt be thankful for the
   bestowment of distinguishing mercy, with that enhancing circumstance of
   the distinction being made without an end? How shall it be known when
   God is influenced by some wise aim, and when not? It is very manifest,
   with respect to the apostle Paul, that God had wise ends in choosing
   him to be a Christian and an apostle, who had been a persecutor, &c.
   The apostle himself mentions one end. (1 Tim. i. 15, 16.) "Christ Jesus
   came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Howbeit, for
   this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show
   forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them who should hereafter
   believe on him to life everlasting." But yet the apostle never looked
   on it as a diminution of the freedom and riches or divine grace in his
   election, which he so often and so greatly magnifies. This brings me to
   observe,

   4. Our supposing such a moral Necessity in the acts of God's Will, as
   has been spoken of, is so far from necessarily derogating from the
   riches of God's grace to such as are the chosen objects of his favour,
   that, in many instances, this moral necessity may arise from goodness,
   and from the great degree of it. God may choose this object rather than
   another, as having a superior fitness to answer the ends, designs, and
   inclinations of his goodness; being more sinful, and so more miserable
   and necessitous than others, the inclinations of infinite mercy and
   benevolence may be more gratified, and the gracious design of God in
   sending his Son into the world, may be more abundantly answered, in the
   exercises of mercy towards such an object, rather than another.

   One thing more I would observe, before I finish what I have to say on
   the head of the Necessity of the acts of God's Will; and that is, that
   something much more like a servile subjection of the Divine Being to
   fatal Necessity, will follow from Arminian principles, than from the
   doctrines which they oppose. For they (at least most of them) suppose,
   with respect to all events that happen in the moral world, depending on
   the Volitions of moral agents, which are the most important events of
   the universe, to which all others are subordinate; I say, they suppose,
   with respect to these, that God has a certain foreknowledge of them,
   antecedent to any purposes or decrees of his about them. And if so,
   they have a fixed certain futurity, prior to any designs or Volitions
   of his, and independent on them, and to which his Volitions must be
   subject, as he would wisely accommodate his affairs to this fixed
   futurity of the state of things in the moral world. So that here,
   instead of a moral Necessity of God's Will, arising from, or consisting
   in, the infinite perfection and blessedness of the Divine Being, we
   have a fixed unalterable state of things, properly distinct from the
   perfect nature of the Divine Mind, and the state of the Divine Will and
   Design, and entirely independent on these things, and which they have
   no hand in, because they are prior to them; and to which God's Will is
   truly subject, being obliged to conform or accommodate himself to it,
   in all his purposes and decrees, and in every thing he does in his
   disposals and government of the world; the moral world being the end of
   the natural; so that all is in vain, that is not accommodated to that
   state of the moral world, which consists in, or depends upon, the acts
   and state of the Wills of moral agents, which had a fixed futurition
   from eternity. Such a subjection to Necessity as this, would truly
   argue an inferiority and servitude, that would be unworthy of the
   Supreme Being; and is much more agreeable to the notion which many of
   the heathen had of fate, as above the gods, than that moral Necessity
   of fitness and wisdom which has been spoken of; and is truly repugnant
   to the absolute sovereignty of God, and inconsistent with the supremacy
   of his Will; and really subjects the Will of the Most High to the Will
   of his creatures, and brings him into dependence upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [144] "If all created beings were taken away, all possibility of any
   mutation or succession of one thing to another, would appear to be also
   removed. Abstract succession in eternity is scarce to be understood.
   What is it that succeeds? One minute to another, perhaps, velut unda
   supervenit undam. But when we imagine this, we fancy that the minutes
   are things separately existing. This is the common notion; and yet it
   is a manifest prejudice. Time is nothing but the existence of created
   successive beings, and eternity the necessary existence of the
   Deity--Therefore, if this necessary Being hath no change or succession
   in his nature, his existence must of course be unsuccessive. We seem to
   commit a double oversight in this case; first, we find succession in
   the necessary nature and existence of the Deity himself: which is
   wrong, if the reasoning above be conclusive. And then we ascribe this
   succession to eternity, considered abstractedly from the eternal Being;
   and suppose it, one known not what, a thing subsisting by itself, and
   flowing, one minute after another. This is the work of pure
   imagination, and contrary to the reality of things. Hence the common
   metaphorical expressions. Time runs apace, let us lay hold on the
   present minute, and the like. The philosophers themselves mislead us by
   their illustration. They compare eternity to the motion of a point
   running on for ever, and making a trace less infinite line. Here the
   point is supposed a thing actually subsisting, representing the present
   minute; and then they ascribe motion or succession to it: that is, they
   ascribe motion to a mere nonentity. to illustrate to us a successive
   eternity, made up of finite successive parts. If once we allow an
   all-perfect mind, which hath an eternal, immutable, and infinite
   comprehension of all things, always (and allow it we must) the
   distinction of past and future vanishes with respect to such a
   mind.--In a wont, if we proceed step by step, as above, the eternity or
   existence of the Deity will appear to be Vitae interminabilis, tota,
   simill et perfecta possessio; how much soever this may have been a
   paradox hitherto." Inquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul. Vol. ii
   409, 410, 411. Edit. 3.

   [145] "For men to have recourse to subtilties in raising difficulties,
   and then complain, that they should be taken off by minutely examining
   these subtilties, is a strange kind of procedure.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   Concerning that objection against the doctrine which has been
   maintained, that it makes God the Author of Sin.

   It is urged by Arminians, that the doctrine of the Necessity of men's
   Volitions, or their necessary connexion with antecedent events and
   circumstances, makes the First Cause, and Supreme Orderer of all
   things, the Author of Sin; in that he has so constituted the state and
   course of things, that sinful Volitions become necessary, in
   consequence of his disposal. Dr. Whitby, in his Discourse on the
   Freedom of the Will, [146] cites one of the ancients, as on his side,
   declaring that this opinion of the Necessity of the Will "absolves
   sinners, as doing nothing of their own accord which was evil, and would
   cast all the blame of all the wickedness committed in the world, upon
   God, and upon his providence, if that were admitted by the assertors of
   this fate; whether he himself did necessitate them to do these things,
   or ordered matters so, that they should be constrained to do them by
   some other cause." And the Doctor says, in another place, [147] "In the
   nature of the thing, and in the opinion of philosophers, causa
   deficiens, in rebus necrssariis, ad causam per se efficientem reducenda
   est. In things necessary, the deficient cause must be reduced to the
   efficient. And in this case the reason is evident; because the not
   doing what is required, or not avoiding what is forbidden, being a
   defect, must follow from the position of the necessary cause of that
   deficiency."--Concerning this, I would observe the following things.

   I. If there be any difficulty in this matter, it is nothing peculiar to
   this scheme; it is no difficulty or disadvantage wherein it is
   distinguished from the scheme of Arminians; and, therefore, not
   reasonably objected by them.

   Dr. Whitby supposes that if sin necessarily follows from God
   withholding assistance, or if that assistance be not given, which is
   absolutely necessary to the avoiding of evil; then, in the nature of
   the thing, God must be as properly the author of that evil, as if he
   were the efficient cause of it. From whence, according to what he
   himself says of the devils and damned spirits, God must be the proper
   author of their perfect unrestrained wickedness: he must be the
   efficient cause of the great pride of the devils, and of their perfect
   malignity against God, Christ, his saints, and all that is good, and of
   the insatiable cruelty of their disposition. For he allows, that God
   has so forsaken them, and does so withhold his assistance from them,
   that they are incapacitated from doing good, and determined only to
   evil. [148] Our doctrine, in its consequence, makes God the author of
   men's sin in this world, no more, and in no other sense, than his
   doctrine, in its consequence, makes God the author of the hellish pride
   and malice of the devils. And doubtless the latter is as odious an
   effect as the former.

   Again, if it will follow at alt, that God is the Author of Sin, from
   what has been supposed of a sure and infallible connexion between
   antecedents and consequents, it will follow because of this, viz. that
   for God to be the author or orderer of those things which, he knows
   beforehand, will infallibly be attended with such a consequence, is the
   same thing, in effect, as for him to be the author of that consequence.
   But, if this be so, this is a difficulty which equally attends the
   doctrine of Arminians themselves; at least, of those of them who allow
   God's certain foreknowledge of all events. For, on the supposition of
   such a foreknowledge, this is the case with respect to every sin that
   is committed: God knew, that if he ordered and brought to pass such and
   such events, such sins would infallibly follow. As for instance, God
   certainly foreknew, long before Judas was born, that if he ordered
   things so, that there should be such a man born, at such a time, and at
   such a place, and that his life should he preserved, and that he
   should, in Divine Providence, be led into acquaintance with Jesus; and
   that his heart should be so influenced by God's Spirit or providence,
   as to be inclined to be a follower of Christ; and that he should be one
   of those twelve, which should be chosen constantly to attend him as his
   family; and that his health should be preserved, so that he should go
   up to Jerusalem, at the last passover in Christ's life; and it should
   be so ordered, that Judas should see Christ's kind treatment of the
   woman which anointed him at Bethany, and have that reproof from Christ
   which he had at that time, and see and near other things which excited
   his enmity against his Master, and other circumstances should be
   ordered, as they were ordered; it would most certainly and infallibly
   follow, that Judas would betray his Lord, and would soon after hang
   himself, and die impenitent, and be sent to hell, for his horrid
   wickedness.

   Therefore, this supposed difficulty ought not to be brought as an
   objection against the scheme which has been maintained, as disagreeing
   with the Arminian scheme, seeing it is no difficulty owing to such a
   disagreement, but a difficulty wherein the Arminians share with us.
   That must be unreasonably made an objection against our differing from
   them, which we should not escape or avoid at all by agreeing with
   them.--And therefore I would observe,

   II. They who object, that this doctrine makes God the Author of Sin,
   ought distinctly to explain what they mean by that phrase, The Author
   of Sin. I know the phrase, as it is commonly used, signifies something
   very ill. If by the Author of Sin, be meant the Sinner, the Agent, or
   Actor of Sin, or the Doer of a wicked thing; so it would be a reproach
   and blasphemy, to suppose God to be the Author of Sin. In this sense, I
   utterly deny God to be the Author of Sin; rejecting such an imputation
   on the Most High, as what is infinitely to be abhorred; and deny any
   such thing to be the consequence of what I have laid down. But if, by
   the Author of Sin, is meant the permitter, or not a hinderer of Sin;
   and, at the same lime, a disposer of the state of events, in such a
   manner, for wise, holy, and most excellent ends and purposes, that Sin,
   if it be permitted or not hindered, will most certainly and infallibly
   follow: I say, if this be all that is meant, by being the Author of
   Sin, I do not deny that God is the Author of Sin, (though I dislike and
   reject the phrase, as that which by use and custom is apt to carry
   another sense,) it is no reproach for the Most High to be thus the
   Author of Sin. This is not to be the Actor of Sin, but, on the
   contrary, of holiness. What God doth herein, is holy; and a glorious
   exercise of the infinite excellency of his nature. And, I do not deny,
   that God being thus the Author of Sin, follows from what I have laid
   down; and, I assert, that it equally follows from the doctrine which is
   maintained by most of the Arminian divines.

   That it is most certainly so, that God is in such a manner the Disposer
   and Orderer of Sin, is evident, if any credit is to be given to the
   Scripture; as well as because it is impossible, in the nature of
   things, to be otherwise. In such a manner God ordered the obstinacy of
   Pharaoh, in his refusing to obey God's commands, to let the people go.
   Exod. iv. 21.) "I will harden his heart, and he shall not let the
   people go." ( Chap. vii. 2-5.) "Aaron thy brother shall speak unto
   Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land. And I
   will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in
   the land of Egypt. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that I may
   lay mine hand upon Egypt, by great judgments," &c. ( Chap. ix. 12.)
   "And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto
   them, as the Lord had spoken unto Moses." ( Chap. x. 1, 2.) "And the
   Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh; for I have hardened his
   heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might show these my signs
   before him, and that thou mayest tell it in the ears of thy son, and
   thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which
   I have done amongst them, that ye may know that 1 am the Lord." ( Chap.
   xiv. 4.) "And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after
   them: and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host." (
   Ver. 8.) "And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and
   he pursued after the children of Israel." And it is certain, that in
   such a manner God, for wise and good ends, ordered that event, Joseph
   being sold into Egypt by his brethren. ( Gen. xlv. 5.) "Now, therefore,
   be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither; for
   God did send me before you to preserve life." ( Ver. 7, 8.) "God did
   send me before you to preserve a posterity in the earth, and to save
   your lives by a great deliverance: so that now it was not you that sent
   me hither, but God." (Psal. cvii. 17.) "He sent a man before them, even
   Joseph, who was sold for a servant." It is certain, that thus God
   ordered the Sin and folly of Sihon king of the Amorites, in refusing to
   let the people of Israel pass by him peaceably. (Deut. ii. 30.) "But
   Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him; for the Lord thy
   God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might
   deliver him into thine hand." It is certain, that God thus ordered the
   Sin and folly of the kings of Canaan, that they attempted not to make
   peace with Israel, but, with a stupid boldness and obstinacy, set
   themselves violently to oppose them and their God. (Josh. xi. 20.) "For
   it was or the Lord, to harden their hearts, that they should come
   against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that
   they might have no favour; but that he might destroy them, as the Lord
   commanded Moses." It is evident, that thus God ordered the treacherous
   rebellion of Zedekiah against the king of Babylon. (Jer. lii. 3.) "For
   through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem, and Judah,
   until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled
   against the king of Babylon." (So 2 Kings xxiv. 20.) And it is
   exceeding manifest, that God thus ordered the rapine and unrighteous
   ravages of Nebuchadnezzar, in spoiling and ruining the nations round
   about. (Jer. xxv. 9.) "Behold, I will send and take all the families of
   the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar my servant, and will
   bring them against this land, and against all the nations round about;
   and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an
   hissing, and perpetual desolations." ( Chap. xliii. 10, 11.) "I will
   send and take Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant: and I
   will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid, and he shall
   spread his royal pavilion over them. And when he cometh, he shall smite
   the land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death, and such
   as are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the
   sword." Thus God represents himself as sending for Nebuchadnezzar, and
   taking him and his armies, and bringing him against the nations, which
   were to be destroyed by him, to that very end, that he might utterly
   destroy them, and make them desolate; and as appointing the work that
   he should do so particularly, that the very persons were designed that
   he should kill with the sword, and those that should be killed with
   famine and pestilence, and those that should be carried into captivity;
   and that in doing all these things, he should act as his servant; by
   which, less cannot be intended, than that he should serve his purposes
   and designs. And in Jer. xxvii. 4-6. God declares, how he would cause
   him thus to serve his designs, viz. by bringing this to pass in his
   sovereign disposals, as the great Possessor and Governor of the
   universe, that disposes all things just as pleases him. Jer. xxvii.
   4-6. "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; I have made the
   earth, the man and the beast that arc upon the ground, by my great
   power, and my stretched out arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed
   meet unto me; and now I have given all these lands into the hands of
   Nebuchadnezzar my servant, and the beasts of the field have I given
   also to serve him." And Nebuchadnezzar is spoken of as doing these
   things, by having his arms strengthened by God, and having God's sword
   put into his hands, for this end. (Ezek. xxx. 24, 25, 26.) Yea, God
   speaks of his terribly ravaging and wasting the nations, and cruelly
   destroying all sorts, without distinction of sex or age, as the weapon
   in God's hand, and the instrument of his indignation, which God makes
   use of to fulfil his own purposes, and execute his own vengeance. (Jer.
   li. 20, &c.) "Thou art my battle-axe, and weapons of war. For with thee
   will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee I will destroy
   kingdoms, and with thee I will break in pieces the horse and his rider,
   and with thee I will break in pieces the chariot and his rider; with
   thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee I will
   break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in pieces the
   young man and the maid," &c. It is represented, that the designs of
   Nebuchadnezzar and those that destroyed Jerusalem, never could have
   been accomplished, had not God determined them. (Lam. iii. 37.) "Who is
   he that saith, and it cometh to pass, and the Lord commandeth it not?"
   And yet the king of Babylon thus destroying the nations, and especially
   the Jews, is spoken of as his great wickedness, for which God finally
   destroyed him. (Isa. xiv. 4-6,12. Hab. ii. 5-12. and Jer. chap. i. and
   li.) It is most manifest, that God, to serve his own designs,
   providentially ordered Shimei's cursing of David. (2 Sam. xvi. 10, 11.)
   "The Lord hath said unto him. Curse David.--Let him curse, for the Lord
   hath bidden him."

   It is certain, that God thus, far excellent, holy, gracious ends,
   ordered the fact which they committed, who were concerned in Christ's
   death; and that therein they did but fulfil God's designs. As, I trust,
   no Christian will deny it was the design of God, that Christ should be
   crucified, and that for this end he came into the world. It is very
   manifest by many scriptures, that the whole affair of Christ's
   crucifixion, with its circumstances, and the treachery of Judas, that
   made way for it, was ordered in God's providence, in pursuance of his
   purpose; notwithstanding the violence that is used with those plain
   scriptures, to obscure and pervert the sense of them. (Acts ii. 23.)"
   Him being delivered, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
   God [149] ye have taken, and with wicked hands have crucified and
   slain." Luke xxii. 21, 22. [150] "But behold the hand of him that
   betrayeth me, is with me on the table: and truly the Son of man goeth,
   as it was determined." (Acts iv. 27, 28.) "For of a truth, against the
   holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius
   Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered
   together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
   before to be done." (Acts iii. 17, 18.) "And now, brethren, I wot that
   through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers; but these things,
   which God before had showed by the mouth of all his prophets, that
   Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled." So that what these
   murderers of Christ did, is spoken of as what God brought to pass or
   ordered, and that by which he fulfilled his own word.

   In Rev. xvii. 17. "The agreeing of the kings of the earth to give their
   kingdom to the beast;" though it was a very wicked thing in them, is
   spoken of as "fulfilling God's will," and what "God had put into their
   hearts to do" It is manifest, that God sometimes permits sin to be
   committed, and at the same time orders things so, that if he permits
   the fact, it will come to pass, because on some accounts, he sees it
   needful and of importance, that it should come to pass. (Matt. xviii.
   7.) "It must needs be, that offences come; but woe to that man by whom
   the offence cometh." With (1 Cor. xi. 19.) "For there must also be
   heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest
   among you."

   Thus it is certain and demonstrable, from the holy Scriptures, as well
   as the nature of things, and the principles of Arminians, that God
   permits sin; and at the same time, so orders things, in his providence,
   that it certainly and infallibly will come to pass, in consequence of
   his permission. I proceed to observe in the next place,

   III. That there is a great difference between God being; concerned
   thus, by his permission, in an event and act, which, in the inherent
   subject and agent of it, is sin, (though the event will certainly
   follow on his permission,) and his being concerned in it by producing
   it and exerting the act of sin; or between his being the orderer of its
   certain existence, by not hindering it, under certain circumstances,
   and his being the proper actor or author of it, by a positive agency or
   efficiency. And this, notwithstanding what Dr. Whitby offers about a
   saying of philosophers, that causa defitiens, in rebus necessariis, ad
   causam per se efficientem reducenda est. As there is a vast difference
   between the sun being the cause of the lightsomeness and warmth of the
   atmosphere, and the brightness of gold and diamonds, by its presence
   and positive influence; and its being the occasion of darkness and
   frost, in the night, by its motion, whereby it descends below the
   horizon. The motion of the sun is the occasion of the latter kind of
   events; but it is not the proper cause, efficient, or producer of them;
   though they are necessarily consequent on that motion, under such
   circumstances: no more is any action of the Divine Being the cause of
   the evil of men's Wills. If the sun were the proper cause of cold and
   darkness, it would be the fountain of these things, as it is the
   fountain of light and heat: and then something might be argued from the
   nature of cold and darkness, to a likeness of nature in the sun; and it
   might be justly inferred, that the sun itself is dark and cold, and
   that his beams are black and frosty. But from its being the cause no
   otherwise than by its departure, no such thing can be inferred, but the
   contrary; it may justly be argued, that the sun is a bright and hot
   body, if cold and darkness are found to be the consequence of its
   withdrawment; and the more constantly and necessarily these effects are
   connected with and confined to its absence, the more strongly does it
   argue the sun to be the fountain of light and neat. So, inasmuch as sin
   is not the fruit of any positive agency or influence of the Most High,
   but, on the contrary, arises from the withholding of his action and
   energy, and, under certain circumstances, necessarily follows on the
   want of his influence; this is no argument that he is sinful, or his
   operation evil, or has any thing of the nature of evil; but, on the
   contrary, that he, and his agency, are altogether good and holy, and
   that he is the fountain of all holiness. It would be strange arguing,
   indeed, because men never commit sin, but only when God leaves them to
   themselves, and necessarily sin when he dues so, that therefore their
   sin is not from themselves, but from God; and so, that God must be a
   sinful being: as strange as it would be to argue, because it is always
   dark when the sun is gone, and never dark when the sun is present, that
   therefore all darkness is from the sun, and that his disk and beams
   must needs be black.

   IV. It properly belongs to the supreme and absolute Governor of the
   universe, to order all important events within his dominion, by his
   wisdom: but the events in the moral world are of the most important
   kind; such as the moral actions of intelligent creatures, and their
   consequences.

   These events will be ordered by something. They will either be disposed
   by wisdom, or they will be disposed by chance; that is, they will be
   disposed by blind and undesigning causes, if that were possible, and
   could be called a disposal. Is it not better, that the good and evil
   which happen in God's world, should be ordered, regulated, bounded, and
   determined by the good pleasure of an infinitely wise Being, who
   perfectly comprehends within his understanding and constant view, the
   universality of things, in all their extent and duration, and sees all
   the influence of every event, with respect to every individual thing
   and circumstance, throughout the grand system, and the whole of the
   eternal series of consequences; than to leave these things to fell out
   by chance, and to be determined by those causes which have no
   understanding or aim? Doubtless, in these important events, there is a
   better and a worse, as to the time, subject, place, manner, and
   circumstances of their coming to pass, with regard to their influence
   on the state and course of things. And if there be, it is certainly
   best that they should be determined to that time, place, &c. which is
   best. And therefore it is in its own nature fit, that wisdom, and not
   chance, should order these things. So that it belongs to the Being, who
   is the possessor of infinite wisdom, and is the creator and owner of
   the whole system of created existences, and has the care of all; I say,
   it belongs to him, to take care of this matter; and he would not do
   what is proper for him, if he should neglect it. And it is so far from
   being unholy in him, to undertake this affair, that it would rather
   have been unholy to neglect it; as it would have been a neglecting what
   fitly appertains to him; and so it would have been a very unfit and
   unsuitable neglect.

   Therefore the sovereignty of God doubtless extends to this matter:
   especially considering, that if God should leave men's volitions, and
   all moral events, to the determination and disposition of blind
   unmeaning causes, or they should be left to happen perfectly without a
   cause; this would be no more consistent with liberty, in any notion of
   it, and particularly not in the Arminian notion of it, than if these
   events were subject to the disposal of Divine Providence, and the Will
   of man were determined by circumstances which are ordered and disposed
   by Divine Wisdom; as appears by what has been already observed. But it
   is evident, that such a providential disposing, and determining of
   men's moral actions, though it infers a moral necessity of those
   actions, yet it does not in the least infringe the real liberty of
   mankind; the only liberty that common sense teaches to be necessary to
   moral agency, which, as has been demonstrated, is not inconsistent with
   such necessity.

   On the whole, it is manifest, that God may be, in the manner which has
   been described, the Orderer and Disposer of that event, which, in the
   inherent subject and agent, is moral Evil; and yet his so doing may be
   no moral Evil. He may will the disposal of such an event, and its
   coming to pass for good ends, and his Will not be an immoral or sinful
   Will, but a perfect, holy Will. And he may actually, in his providence,
   so dispose and permit things, that the event may be certainly and
   infallibly connected with such disposal and permission, and his act
   therein not be an immoral or unholy, but a perfectly holy act. Sin may
   be an evil thing, and yet that there should be such a disposal and
   permission, as that it should come to pass, may be a good thing. This
   is no contradiction, or inconsistence. Joseph's brethren selling him
   into Egypt, consider it only as it were acted by them, and with respect
   to their views and aims, which were evil, was a very bad thing; but it
   was a good thing, as it was an event of God's ordering, and considered
   with respect to his views and aims, which were good. (Gen. I. 20.) "As
   for you, ye thought Evil against me; but God meant it unto Good." So
   the crucifixion of Christ, if we consider only those things which
   belong to the event as it proceeded from his murderers, and are
   comprehended within the compass of the affair considered as their act,
   their principles, dispositions, views, and aims; so it was one of the
   most heinous things that ever was done; in many respects the most
   horrid of all acts; but consider it as it was willed and ordered of
   God, in the extent of his designs and views, it was the most admirable
   and glorious of all events; and God willing the event was the most holy
   volition of God, that ever was made known to men; and God's act in
   ordering it, was a divine act, which, above all others, manifests the
   moral excellency of the Divine Being.

   The consideration of these things may help us to a sufficient answer to
   the cavils of Arminians, concerning what has been supposed by many
   Calvinists, of a distinction between a secret and revealed Will of God,
   and their diversity one from the other; supposing that the Calvinists
   herein ascribe inconsistent Wills to the Most High: which is without
   any foundation. God's secret and revealed Will, or, in other words, his
   disposing and preceptive Will, may be diverse, and exercised in
   dissimilar acts, the one in disapproving and opposing, the other in
   willing and determining, without any inconsistence. Because, although
   these dissimilar exercises of the Divine Will may, in some respects,
   relate to the same things, yet, in strictness, they have different and
   contrary objects, the one evil and the other good. Thus, for instance,
   the crucifixion of Christ was a thing contrary to the revealed or
   preceptive Will of God; because, as it was viewed and done by his
   malignant murderers, it was a thing infinitely contrary to the holy
   nature of God, and so necessarily contrary to the holy inclination of
   his heart revealed in his law. Yet this does not at all hinder but that
   the crucifixion of Christ, considered with all those glorious
   consequences, which were within the view of the Divine Omniscience,
   might be indeed, and therefore might appear to God to be, a glorious
   event; and consequently be agreeable to his Will, though this Will may
   be secret, i. e. not revealed in God's law. And thus considered, the
   crucifixion of Christ was not evil, but good. If the secret exercises
   of God's Will were of a kind that is dissimilar, and contrary to his
   revealed Will, respecting the same, or like objects; if the objects of
   both were good, or both evil; then, indeed, to ascribe contrary kinds
   of volition or inclination to God, respecting these objects, would be
   to ascribe an inconsistent Will to God: but to ascribe to Him different
   and opposite exercises of heart, respecting different objects, and
   objects contrary one to another, is so far from supposing God's Will to
   be inconsistent with itself, that it cannot be supposed consistent with
   itself any other way. For any being to have a Will of choice respecting
   good, and, at the same time, a Will of rejection and refusal respecting
   evil, is to be very consistent: but the contrary, viz. to have the same
   Will towards these contrary objects, and to choose and love both good
   and evil, at the same time, is to be very inconsistent.

   There is no inconsistence in supposing, that God may hate a thing as it
   is in itself, and considered simply as evil, and yet that it may be his
   Will it should come to pass, considering all consequences. I believe,
   there is no person of good understanding, who will venture to say, he
   is certain that it is impossible it should be best, taking in the whole
   compass and extent of existence, and all consequences in the endless
   series of events, that there should be such a thing as moral evil in
   the world. [151] And, if so, it will certainly follow, that an
   infinitely wise Being, who always chooses what is best, must choose
   that there should be such a thing. And, if so, then such a choice is
   not evil, out a wise and holy choice. And if so, then that Providence
   which is agreeable to such a choice, is a wise and holy Providence. Men
   do will sin as sin, and so are the authors and actors of it: they love
   it as sin, and for evil ends and purposes. God does not will sin as
   sin, or for the sake of any thing evil; though it be his pleasure so to
   order things, that, he permitting, sin will come to pass, for the sake
   of the great good that by his disposal shall be the consequence. His
   willing to order things so that evil should come to pass, for the sake
   of the contrary good, is no argument that he does not hate evil, as
   evil: and if so, then it is no reason why he may not reasonably forbid
   evil as evil, and punish it as such.

   The Arminians themselves must be obliged, whether they will or no, to
   allow a distinction of God's Will, amounting to just the same thing
   that Calvinists intend by their distinction of a secret and revealed
   Will. They must allow a distinction of those things which God thinks
   best should be, considering all circumstances and consequences, and so
   are agreeable to his disposing Will, and those things which he loves,
   and are agreeable to his nature, in themselves considered. Who is there
   that will dare to say, that the hellish pride, malice, and cruelty of
   devils, are agreeable to God, and what he likes and approves? And yet,
   I trust, there is no christian divine but will allow, that it is
   agreeable to God's Will so to order and dispose things concerning them,
   so to leave them to themselves, and give them up to their own
   wickedness, that this perfect wickedness should be a necessary
   consequence. Dr. Whitby's words plainly suppose and allow it. [152]
   These following things may be laid down as maxims of plain truth, and
   indisputable evidence.

   1. That God is a perfectly happy Being, in the most absolute and
   highest sense possible.

   2. That it will follow from hence, that God is free from every thing
   that is contrary to happiness; and so, that in strict propriety of
   speech, there is no such thing as any pain, grief, or trouble, in God.

   3. When any intelligent being is really crossed and disappointed, and
   things are contrary to what he truly desires, he is the less pleased,
   or has less pleasure, his pleasure and happiness is diminished, and he
   suffers what is disagreeable to him, or is the subject of something
   that is of a nature contrary to joy and happiness, even pain and grief.
   [153]

   From this last axiom it follows, that if no distinction is to be
   admitted between God's hatred of sin, and his Will with respect to the
   event and the existence of sin, as the all-wise Determiner of all
   events, under the view of all consequences through the whole compass
   and series of things; I say, then it certainly follows, that the coming
   to pass of every individual act of sin is truly, all things considered,
   contrary to his Will, and that his Will is really crossed in it; and
   this in proportion as he hates it. And as God's hatred of sin is
   infinite, by reason of the infinite contrariety of his Holy Nature to
   sin; so his Will is infinitely crossed, in every act of sin that
   happens. Which is as much as to say, he endures that which is
   infinitely disagreeable to him, by means of every act of sin that he
   sees committed. And, therefore, as appears by the preceding positions,
   he endures truly and really, infinite grief or pain from every sin. And
   so he must be infinitely crossed, and suffer infinite pain, every day,
   in millions of millions of instances: he must continually be the
   subject of an immense number of real, and truly infinitely great
   crosses and vexations. Which would be to make him infinitely the most
   miserable of all Beings.

   If any objector should say; all that these things amount to, is, that
   God may do evil that good may come; which is justly esteemed immoral
   and sinful in men; and therefore may be justly esteemed inconsistent
   with the moral perfections of God. I answer, that for God to dispose
   and permit evil, in the manner that has been spoken of, is not to do
   evil that good may come; for it is not to do evil at all.--In order to
   a thing being morally evil, there must be one of these things belonging
   to it, either it must be a thing unfit and unsuitable in its own
   nature; or it must have a bud tendency; or it must proceed from an evil
   disposition, and be done for an evil end. But neither of these things
   can be attributed to God's ordering and permitting such events, as the
   immoral acts of creatures, for good ends. (1.) It is not unfit in its
   own nature, that he should do so. For it is in its own nature fit, that
   infinite wisdom, and not blind chance, should dispose moral good and
   evil in the world. And it is fit, that the Being who has infinite
   wisdom, and is the Maker, Owner, and Supreme Governor of the world,
   should take care of that matter. And, therefore, there is no unfitness
   or unsuitableness in his doing it. It may be unfit, and so immoral, for
   any other beings to go about to order this affair; because they are not
   possessed of a wisdom that in any manner fits them for it; and, in
   other respects, they are not fit to be trusted with this affair; nor
   does it belong to them, they not being the owners and lords of the
   universe.

   We need not be afraid to affirm, that if a wise and good man knew with
   absolute certainty it would be best, all things considered, that there
   should be such a thing as moral evil in the world, it would not be
   contrary to his wisdom and goodness, for him to choose that it should
   be so. It is no evil desire, to desire good, and to desire that which,
   all things considered, is best. And it is no unwise choice, to choose
   that that should be, which it is best should be; and to choose the
   existence of that thing concerning which this is known, viz. that it is
   best it should be, and so is known in the whole to be most worthy to be
   chosen. On the contrary, it would be a plain defect in wisdom and
   goodness, for him not to choose it. And the reason why he might not
   order it, if he were able, would not be because he might not desire it,
   but only the ordering of that matter does not belong to him. But it is
   no harm for him who is, by right, and in the greatest propriety, the
   Supreme Orderer of all things, to order every thing in such a manner,
   as it would be a point of wisdom in him to choose that they should be
   ordered. If it would be a plain defect of wisdom and goodness in a
   being, not to choose that that should be, which he certainly knows it
   would, all things considered, be best should be, (as was but now
   observed,) then it must be impossible for a Being who has no defect of
   wisdom and goodness, to do otherwise than choose it should be; and
   that, for this very reason, because he is perfectly wise and good. And
   if it be agreeable to perfect wisdom and goodness for him to choose
   that it should be, and the ordering of all things supremely and
   perfectly belongs to him, it must be agreeable to infinite wisdom and
   goodness, to order that it should be. If the choice is good, the
   ordering and disposing things according to that choice must also be
   good. It can be no harm in one to whom it belongs "to do his Will in
   the armies of heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth," to
   execute a good volition. If this Will be good, and the object of his
   Will be, all things considered, good and best, then the choosing or
   willing it is not willing evil that good may come. And if so, then his
   ordering, according to that Will, is not doing evil that good may come.

   2. It is not of a bad tendency, for the Supreme Being thus to order and
   permit that moral evil to be, which it is best should come to pass. For
   that it is of good tendency, is the very thing supposed in the point
   now in question.--Christ's crucifixion, though a most horrid fact in
   them that perpetrated it, was of a most glorious tendency as permitted
   and ordered of God.

   3. Nor is there any need of supposing, it proceeds from any evil
   disposition or aim; for by the supposition, what is aimed at is good,
   and good is the actual issue, in the final result of things [154]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [146] On the five Points, p. 361.

   [147] Ibid. p. 486.

   [148] On the five Points, p. 302, 305.

   [149] Grotius, as well as Beza. observes, NOT ENGLISH must here signify
   decree; and Elsner has shown that it has that signification in approved
   NOT ENGLISH writers. And it is certain NOT ENGLISH signifies one given
   up into the hands of an enemy:"-- Dodd. in Loc.

   [150] "As this passage is not liable to the ambiguities which some have
   apprehended in Acts ii. 23. and iv. 28. (which yet seem on the whole to
   be parallel to it, in their most natural construction,) I look upon it
   as an evident proof, that these things are, in the language of
   Scripture, said to be determined or decreed (or exactly bounded and
   marked out by God, as the word (NOT ENGLISH ) most naturally signifies)
   which he sees in fact will happen, in consequences of his volitions,
   without any necessitating agency; as well as those events, of which he
   is properly the author." Dodd, in Loc.

   [151] Here are worthy to be observed some passages of a late noted
   writer, of our nation, that nobody who is acquainted with him, will
   suspect to be very favourable to Calvinism. "It is difficult, says he,
   to handle the necessity of evil in such a manner, as not to stumble
   such as are not above being alarmed at propositions which have an
   uncommon sound. But if philosophers will but reflect calmly on the
   matter, they will find, that consistently with the unlimited power of
   the supreme cause, it may be said, that in the best ordered system,
   evils must have place."--Turnbull's Principles of Moral Philosophy, p.
   327, 328. He is there speaking of moral evils, as may be seen. Again
   the same author, in his second vol. entitled, Christian Philosophy, (p.
   35.) has these words: "If the Author and Governor of all things be
   infinitely perfect, then whatever is, is right; of all possible systems
   he hath chosen the best: and. consequently, there a no absolute evil in
   the universe.--This being the case, all the seeming imperfections or
   evils in it are such only in a partial view; and. with respect to the
   whole system, they are goods. Ibid. 37. "Whence then comes evil, is the
   question that hath, in all ages, been reckoned the Gordian knot in
   philosophy. And, indeed, if we own the existence of evil in the world
   in an absolute sense, we diametrically contradict what hath been just
   now proved of God. For if there be any evil in the system, that it not
   good with respect to the whole, then is the whole not good, but evil:
   or, at best, very imperfect: and an author must be as his workmanship
   is; as is the effect, such is the cause. But the solution of this
   difficulty is at hand; That there is no evil in the universe. What! Are
   there no pains, no imperfections? Is there no misery, no vice in the
   world? or are not these evils? Evils indeed they are; that is, those of
   one sort are hurtful, and those of the other sort are equally hurtful,
   and abominable: but they are not evil or mischievous with respect to
   the whole?" Ibid. p. 42. 'But he is. at the same time, said to create
   evil, darkness. confusion; and yet to do no evil, but to be the author
   of good only. He is called the "Father of lights," the Author of "every
   perfect and good gift, with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
   turning." who "tempteth no man," but "giveth to all men liberally, and
   upbraideth not" And yet. by the prophet (Isa. xlv. 7.) he is introduced
   saying of himself, "I form light and create darkness; I make peace, and
   create evil: I the Lord, do all these things." What Is the meaning, the
   plain language of all this, but that the Lord delighteth in goodness,
   and (as the scripture speaks) evil is "his strange work?" He intends
   and pursues the universal good of his creation: and the evil which
   happens, is not permitted for its own sake, or through any pleasure in
   evil, but because it is requisite to the greater good pursued.

   [152] Whitby on the five Points, Edit. 2. 300, 305, 309.

   [153] Certainly it is not less absurd and unreasonable, to talk of
   God's Will and Desires being truly and properly crossed, without his
   suffering any uneasiness, or any thing grievous or disagreeable, than
   it is to talk of something that may be called a revealed Will, which
   may, in some respect, be different from a secret purpose, which purpose
   may be fulfilled, when the other is opposed.

   [154] From the whole strain of our author's defence of his principles,
   in reference to the existence of sin in the universe, though there are
   many excellent remarks interspersed, and sound reasoning as far as his
   data would admit, yet he is evidently embarrassed; makes concessions
   which his general principles of moral necessity did not require, and
   shelters himself under covers that afford him in reality no effectual
   protection. To say, that the existence of sin is only a common
   difficulty, which belongs to every hypothesis--that though God is the
   author of sin, in some sense, yet he is not the agent, therefore the
   phrase should be disliked and rejected that though God wills the event
   of sin, yet he wills it not as an evil, but for excellent ends--that
   the events of moral evils are disposed by wisdom--that God may be the
   orderer and disposer of moral evil, which in the agent is infinitely
   evil, but in the orderer of it no evil at all--that in order to a thing
   being morally evil it must be unfit and unsuitable, or of a bad
   tendency, or from an evil disposition; but that in willing the event of
   sin neither can be attributed to God--that if a wise and good man knew,
   with absolute certainty, that it would be best, all things considered,
   there should be moral evil, he might choose that it should be so--that
   the reason why he might not order it, if he were able, would not be
   because he might not desire, but only the ordering of that matter does
   not belong to him--and that, in the language of Turnbull, "there is no
   Eric in the universe,--no absolute evil; sins are evils only in a
   partial view, but with respect to the whole system they are not evil or
   mischievous, but goods," &c. to say these things, and more of a similar
   cast, is not calculated to satisfy a mind that wants the best evidence
   which the nature of the case will admit; and we strongly suspect, from
   his manner of writing, that our author's own mind was not satisfied
   with the solution which he has attempted. In former notes we have had
   occasion only to explain principles adopted; or to point out others
   either more evident, or more radical, on which those of the author were
   founded, or with which they stood inseparably connected. But at the
   close of the present section we feel ourselves obliged to attempt, at
   least, the rectification of his principles; or perhaps more properly,
   to point out other principles, which, we conceive, are attended with no
   such embarrassment, are exposed to no self-contradiction, and which
   represent the Great Supreme in a much more amiable light The task is
   indeed arduous; but let it not be thought impossible; nor let the
   imperfection of language be confounded with the inadequacy of
   principles. And while we solicit the candour of the reader--whereby he
   will be prepared to make such allowances as the nature of the subject
   requires, be prevented from drawing hasty conclusions of the
   impracticability of bringing the subject of inquiry to a satisfactory
   issue, or of presumption in attempting it--we no less demand a
   strictness of examination. The real inquirer after truth, the christian
   divine, and the moral philosophers, should be solicitous, not to have
   the "last word," in controversy, but to make all possible advances in
   ascertaining the genuine grounds of acknowledged truths, in discovering
   radical principles, and in ascertaining their just bearings and
   tendencies. 1. The true point of inquiry is--not whether there be moral
   evil, or whether God be just? but--how the actual existence of sin, or
   moral evil, in the universe, is to be reconciled with the moral
   perfections and character of God? Therefore, the thing wanted is a
   middle term, or argumentative medium, whereby it may be shown that this
   proposition is true, viz. There is no real inconsistency between the
   existence of sin and the moral perfections of God. 2. We may therefore
   consider the following propositions as first principles: axioms. There
   does exist in the universe moral evil. II. God is infinitely free from
   injustice, unholiness, and all imperfections. Hence. corollary. There
   is no real inconsistent between the existence of moral evil and the
   moral perfections of God. 3. Now the question returns. What is the best
   evidence that there is no such inconsistency? Those who are satisfied
   with these plain propositions the axioms, and corollary, may have the
   evidence of faith, than there is no inconsistence between the subject
   and predicate of the last proposition. They may know so much of God as
   to be assured, that the existence of sin in the world is no impeachment
   of the moral character of the Most High. For such evidence it behoves
   us to be thankful. Millions are now in heaven, who enjoyed no other
   evidence while on earth than that of faith. But this is no sufficient
   reason why those who have opportunity should make no further inquiries
   into the subject. Some, indeed, suppose, that no rational evidence is
   in the present state attainable by man. But why any should so conclude
   it is difficult to say, except it be, that they wish to make their own
   minds the standard of all others, or their own attainments the ne plus
   ultra of moral philosophy. Such persons are not likely to acknowledge
   or perceive the real evidence, on supposition that it is laid before
   them, as their minds will be strongly prejudiced against all reasoning
   on the subject 4. One thing, however, is incontrovertible, as
   necessarily connected with the axioms, that the existence of moral
   evil, and the spotless and infinitely excellent moral character of God.
   are perfectly consistent; and therefore there must be somewhere good
   evidence of it And another thing is equally plain, that the brighter
   the evidence we have of the truth of the proposition which asserts the
   consistency of the two axioms, the more will be our acquaintance with
   God's real character, and the real nature of sin, which all must allow
   to be advantageous. To which we may add; that increased evidence of
   such a proposition is far from being injurious, may be further inferred
   from this consideration, that the higher any beings rise in holiness
   and happiness, the more clear will be that evidence to their view. 5.
   The terms of the question are so plain, and so generally understood,
   that it is scarcely necessary to notice them; we may, however, briefly
   observe, that moral evil is what stands in direct opposition to the
   moral character of God; and that this latter includes universal
   rectitude, or holiness, and perfect benevolence. Therefore, postulate.
   Whatever is perfectly consistent with universal rectitude, and perfect
   benevolence, is consistent with the moral perfections of God. The
   reader will observe, that what is asserted of rectitude and
   benevolence, is different; the one is said to be universal and the
   other perfect only. Every attribute of Jehovah is in ITSELF both
   perfect and universal; but not relatively so. Thus his rectitude is
   both perfect in itself, and universal with respect to its object: but
   his benevolence, however infinitely perfect, is restricted as to its
   objects, both in extent and in degree. And this restriction is
   necessary two ways: 6. First, the objects of benevolence, at least in
   this world, compose a system; and every system, whether natural or
   moral, implies a subordination and comparative superiority of parts;
   therefore the very idea of a systematic whole implies a restriction of
   benevolence as to extent and degree. 7. Secondly, the exercise of
   benevolence is an exercise of will; and the exercise of will implies
   diversity of objects, and a preference of some, rather than others, to
   occupy the more excellent parts of the whole system; so that perfect
   universality, or a strict equality of benevolence, without a
   distinguishing preference, is necessarily excluded by the very nature
   of benevolence in exercise. 8. Divine benevolence, therefore, admits of
   gradations, from the smallest degree conceivable to the utmost extent
   of the system; while rectitude admits of no such degree. Were we to
   attempt an illustration of so abstracted a subject by mental images, we
   might say. that rectitude in its exercise towards the creatures, may be
   compared to a plain surface as widely extended as the universe, of
   infinitely perfect polish, and without a flaw in any part. Hence, in
   its exercise. It is universal as its objects; and can no more admit of
   degrees, than a perfect polish can admit of flaws. On the contrary,
   benevolence may be compared to a cone, in an inverted form, the vertex
   of which is in contact with a point of that plane, and which, from the
   least possible degree, is capable of rising at sovereign pleasure, in
   its exercise towards the universe, to such a height, as that the base
   of it may be, or may not be, of equal extent with the plane below. 9.
   From just views of benevolence we may infer, that its exercise is
   purely free, and undeserved by the creature; being the fruit of will,
   choice, and sovereign pleasure. The absence of it, with respect to
   creatures, implies no flaw in perfect rectitude. Every degree of
   benevolence, from the least to the greatest, must be altogether
   optional. Perfect rectitude, with respect to created beings, and each
   individual creature, may subsist, without any more benevolence than
   what is necessarily included in mere existence. 10. This being the
   case, the state of the universe, in reference to perfect rectitude, and
   irrespective of benevolence, may be further compared to a balance in
   perfect equilibrium. The least weight of benevolence makes it
   preponderate, proportionally, in favour of virtue and happiness; but
   without which weight neither could take place. 11. But, according to
   what has been said in a former note, every created being is the subject
   of passive power; which, with respect to its influence on the creature,
   is, in some respect, the opposite of benevolence. In some, not in all
   respects. Benevolence is an exercise of will, and implies an agent; but
   passive power is a quality or principle inseparable from every
   creature, and from the universe at large. In reference to a former
   illustration, this may be compared to another cone exactly opposite,
   the vertex of which, from below, meets that of the other in the same
   plane. The intermediate point, and Indeed every point in the same
   plane, may represent the perfect rectitude of God towards every
   individual; the inverted cone above, divine benevolence; the cone
   below, passive power, with its base necessarily equal to the whole
   plane, as it respects the created universe. 12. Hence we may say that
   the neutral state of any being is placed in the plane; his degree of
   influence from passive power, the predisposing cause of vice, is
   represented by a corresponding given part of the cone below; and his
   degree of predisposition to virtue from divine benevolence, is
   represented by a corresponding given part of the cone above. Or, to
   change the comparison, if a perfectly poised balance be made to
   represent perfect rectitude, then we may suppose weights at each end in
   all possible proportions, from the smallest to the greatest. Passive
   power not being the effect of will, but of the relative nature of
   things, and inseparably connected with one end of the balance, it is
   evident, that it can be counteracted in its tendency only by the weight
   of benevolence, or sovereign pleasure. Therefore, whoever on earth or
   in heaven, rises to, and is confirmed in virtue, his attainment must be
   the effect of mere benevolence. And whoever on earth, or in hell, falls
   into, and is confirmed in vice, bis deterioration must be the effect of
   passive power, as the predisposing cause of vice, which nothing in the
   universe can counteract but sovereign, free, unmerited benevolence. 13.
   Consequently, all the good and happiness in the universe is the effect
   of benevolence, or sovereign pleasure, and exists above the plane of
   perfect rectitude; but all the evil and misery in the world is the
   effect of passive power, in union with free agency, and exists below
   the plane of rectitude. The one generates virtue, and raises to
   happiness and heaven; the other generates vice, and sinks to misery and
   hell. 14. Every thing in the universe planned, decreed, and effected by
   Jehovah, is a structure of benevolence. All he effects is good, and
   only good. The evil that exists is not his work. Benevolence has
   decreed an endless chain of antecedents, including the natural and
   moral worlds; and the consequents peculiar to them result therefrom
   with infallible certainty. But other antecedents, in this world, and in
   hell, are constantly interposed by free agents under the influence of
   passive power, whose consequences also follow with equal Infallible
   certainty. To the eye of created intelligence these counter positions,
   and opposite consequents, appear blended in an inextricable manner,
   like the different rays of light in the same pencil, different gasses
   in a given space, and different subtle fluids in the same body. But to
   the eye of Omniscience they appear perfectly distinct, in their proper
   nature, in all their directions and bearings, in all their tendencies
   and effects. 15. Instead, therefore, of saying, "There is no evil in
   the universe," we should say, "There is much evil in the universe;
   there is much on earth, and more in hell; but none of God's
   appointment." It is demonstrable, that passive power can no more be an
   object of appointment, than the most direct contradictions; and yet it
   is equally demonstrable that such a principle is the inseparable
   concomitant of every creature. It is of prior consideration to moral
   agency; for whatever is a property of a created nature as such, is of
   prior consideration to the agency of that creature. Consequently it is
   a property neither divinely appointed, nor yet a moral evil. 16.
   Liberty, in one sense, bears the same relation to good and evil, as
   rectitude does to benevolence and passive power. Liberty in itself is
   equally a medium between good and evil, as rectitude is between
   benevolence and passive power; and the medium is of a nature perfectly
   distinct from both extremes. To which we may add, that liberty united
   to or under the influence of, sovereign benevolence, generates virtue;
   but liberty united to, or under the influence of, passive power,
   generates vice. 17. From the premises it may be seen, that the
   existence of all evil, and especially moral evil, in the universe, is
   not inconsistent with the moral perfections of God. It is evident also
   that in no sense whatever except by a total misapplication of terms,
   can God be said to be "the author of sin." Nor can it be said that God
   "wills the event of sin;" but the contrary is plain, that he does not
   will it either in a decretive, a legislative, or any other sense. 18.
   The great source of confusion into which many authors have plunged
   themselves, is, that they draw too hasty an inference in attempting to
   make not hindering an event to be ultimately the same as willing it.
   Upon their data, indeed, it may be true, while they regard every event
   alike to be the effect of divine energy, and even the worst, in order
   to answer a good end. And this will always be the case, for
   self-consistency requires it, until we see and acknowledge a
   metaphysical negative cause of moral evil, and an eternal nature of
   things antecedent to all will, with their infallible effects, when not
   counteracted by sovereign benevolence. 19. Let us now view the subject
   in the light of terms a little different. Much error often arises
   through the defect of language; and where there is danger of
   misapprehension, it may be of use to change expressions. Hereby a
   difficult subject may be taken by different handles, or a reader may
   apprehend it by one handle, which he could not by another. Let us then
   substitute the word equity Instead of rectitude. and undeserved favour
   instead of benevolence. postulate. Whatever is perfectly consistent
   with equity is also perfectly consistent with the moral character of
   God. 20. Whatever to the pure effect at equity and the nature of
   things, or essential truth, united, cannot be inconsistent with the
   moral perfections of God; the existence of morel evil in the universe
   is the pure effect of these; therefore the existence of moral evil in
   the universe cannot be inconsistent with the moral perfections of God.
   21. The only ground of hesitation here is, now moral evil is the effect
   of equity and the nature of things? Liberty itself is a natural good,
   and therefore is the fruit of divine favour; and toe mere exercise of
   liberty must be ascribed to the same cause. But he who is
   hypothetically free to good, must be in like manner free to evil. For
   this hypothetical freedom either to good or to evil is what constitutes
   the morality of his acts of choice. Take away this hypothetical
   freedom, and you take away the essence of moral agency. It is plain,
   then, that to possess this freedom and consequent moral agency, is not
   inconsistent with the equity, rectitude, or moral perfections of God.
   Yet it is demonstrable that freedom cannot be influenced in its choice,
   so as to constitute it virtuous or vicious, holy or sinful, morally
   right or wrong, good or evil, but from two causes radically; divine
   favour and passive power. If the agent be under the influence of divine
   favour, a happy result, in the same proportion, is secured by the same
   essential truth as renders the choice of the great I AM, Infallibly
   good; which no one will say is inconsistent with the divine
   perfections. For though favour raises the agent above what rigid or
   pure equity can do, there is no incontinence between them; any more
   than between paying a just debt, and bestowing also a free gift in
   addition. But if the agent be not under the influence of undeserved
   favour, the only alternative is, that be must necessarily be under the
   influence of passive power. And as nothing can possibly secure a happy
   result but undeserved favour, or benevolent influence, a negative cause
   becomes an infallible ground of certainty of an opposite result Again.
   22. When God gives to creatures what is their due, he deals with them
   in equity, but when God gives them less grace than is actually
   sufficient to secure from sin, or will in fact do so, he gives them
   their due. Were it otherwise, it would be impossible for any to sin. If
   to give them so much favour, or benevolent influence, as would actually
   preserve them from sin, were their due, it is plain that the God of
   equity would give them their due. and preserve them from sin
   accordingly. But the fact is widely otherwise. They are not all
   preserved from sin, though all might be. through the interposition of
   sovereign favour; therefore it is not their due, or equity does not
   require it 23. If it be said, it is owing to their own fault; it is
   very true; but how came any creature to be faulty? God made angels and
   men upright. And he has always dealt with every creature, however
   debased by sin, in equity. He has also given to every creature capable
   of sinning. liberty unconstrained. He often influences the disposition
   by benevolence; and the goodness of God, by providential and gracious
   dispensations, leadeth to repentance. But never has he dealt with any
   unjustly, or given them less than their due. Not a fallen spirit,
   however deeply sunk, can verify such a charge. Assuredly, they have
   destroyed themselves, but in God is the only help. A principle, of
   which God is not the author, as before explained in union with the
   abuse of their liberty, satisfactorily accounts for the fact. Our evil
   is of ourselves; but all our good is from God. 24. From what has been
   said, we may safely draw this inference, that tile existence of moral
   evil in the universe, is not inconsistent with the moral perfections of
   God. And the proposition would be equally true, had the proportion of
   moral evil been greater than it is. But some will continue to cavil, it
   is probable, because every objection is not professedly answered, and
   some difficulties, or divine arcana, will always remain. They will
   still be asking, why benevolence is not more universal, and thereby
   moral evil altogether prevented? Why the cone (to which benevolence has
   been compared) is not a cylinder, whose base is commensurate with the
   plane of creatural existence, and whose top rises ad infinitum? They
   might as well inquire. Why is not every atom a sun? Why not every drop
   an ocean? Why not every moment an age? Why not every worm an angel? Why
   not the solar system as large as all material systems united? Why the
   number of angels and men not a thousand times greater? And, to complete
   the absurdity of demanding evidence for every thing, as an objection
   against demonstrable truth. Why is not any given part on the surface of
   a cone, a cylinder, or a globe, not in the centre? To all such
   inquiries -and if advanced as objections impertinent inquiries--it is
   sufficient to reply, Infinite Wisdom has planned an universe, in which
   divine benevolence appears wonderfully conspicuous; and even the evils,
   whether natural or moral, which are intermixed, and which in their
   origin are equally remote from divine causation and from chance, are
   overruled to answer purposes the most benevolent, and the most
   wonderfully sublime. corollaries. 1. The only possible way of avoiding
   the most ruinous consequences--moral evil and misery--is to direct the
   will, through the instrumentality of its freedom, to a state of union
   to God, submission to his will, and an imitation of his moral
   perfections, according to his most merciful appointment 2. To creatures
   fallen below the line of rectitude, and yet the subjects of hope,
   prayer to God for grace, undeserved favour, or benevolent influence, is
   an exercise the most becoming, a duty to be most necessary and
   important, and a privilege of the first magnitude.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. X.

   Concerning sins first Entrance into the world.

   The things which have already been offered, may serve to obviate or
   clear many of the objections which might be raised concerning sin's
   first coming into the world; as though it would follow from the
   doctrine maintained, that God must be the author of the first sin,
   through his so disposing things, that it should necessarily follow from
   his permission, that the sinful act should be committed, &c. I need
   not, therefore, stand to repeat what has been said already, about such
   a necessity not proving God to be the author of sin, in any ill sense,
   or in any such sense as to infringe any liberty of man, concerned in
   his moral agency, or capacity of blame, guilt, and punishment.

   But, should it nevertheless be said, that if God, when he had made
   roan, might so order his circumstances, that from these, together with
   his withholding further assistance and divine influence, his sin would
   infallibly follow, why might not God as well have first made man with a
   fixed prevailing principle of sin in his heart?

   I answer, 1. It was meet, if sin did come into existence, and appear in
   the world, it should arise from the imperfection which properly belongs
   to a creature, as such, and should appear so to do, that it might
   appear not to be from God as the efficient or fountain. But this could
   not have been, if man had been made at first with sin in his heart; nor
   unless the abiding principle and habit of sin were first introduced by
   an evil act of the creature. If sin had not arisen from the
   imperfection of the creature, it would not have been so visible, that
   it did not arise from God, as the positive cause, and real source of
   it.--But it would require room that cannot be here allowed, fully to
   consider all the difficulties which have been started, concerning the
   first Entrance of sin into the world.--And therefore,

   2. I would observe, that objections against the doctrine that has been
   laid down, in opposition to the Arminian notion of liberty, from these
   difficulties, are altogether impertinent; because no additional
   difficulty is incurred, by adhering to a scheme in this manner
   differing from theirs, and none would be removed or avoided, by
   agreeing with, and maintaining theirs. Nothing that the Arminians say,
   about the contingency or self-determining power of man's Will, can
   serve to explain, with less difficulty, how the first sinful volition
   of mankind could take place, and man he justly charged with the blame
   of it. To say, the Will was self-determined, or determined by free
   choice, in that sinful volition--which is to say, that the first sinful
   volition was determined by a foregoing sinful volition--is no solution
   of the difficulty. It is an odd way of solving difficulties, to advance
   greater, in order to it. To say, two and two make nine, or, that a
   child begat his rather, solves no difficulty: no more does it, to say,
   the first sinful act of choice was before the first sinful act of
   choice, and chose and determined it, and brought it to pass. Nor is it
   any better solution, to say, the first sinful volition chose,
   determined, and produced itself; which is to say, it was before it was.
   Nor will it go any further towards helping us over the difficulty, to
   say, the first sinful volition arose accidentally, without any cause at
   all; any more than it will solve that difficult question, How the world
   could be made out of nothing? to say, it came into being out of
   nothing, without any cause; as has been already observed. And if we
   should allow, that the first evil volition should arise by perfect
   accident, without any cause; it would relieve no difficulty, about God
   laving the blame of it to man. For how was man to blame for perfect
   accident, which had no cause, and which, therefore, he was not the
   cause of, any more than if it came by some external cause?--Such kind
   of solutions are no better, than if some person, going about to solve
   some of the strange mathematical paradoxes, about infinitely great and
   small quantities--as, that some infinitely great quantities are
   infinitely greater than some other infinitely great quantities; and
   also that some infinitely small quantities, are infinitely less than
   others, which yet are infinitely little--should say, that mankind have
   been under a mistake, in supposing a greater quantity to exceed a
   smaller; and that a hundred, multiplied by ten, makes but a single
   unit. [155]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [155] * On the subject of the origin of moral evil, our author is more
   concise than usual. His design in this very short section, is merely to
   show, that the difficulties which have been started, concerning tbe
   first entrance of sin into the world, are such as cannot be discussed
   in a small compass; and, that the Arminian cause gains nothing by
   urging them. That cause has been sufficiently examined in several parts
   of this Inquiry; but the true and precise origin of moral evil,
   requires further notice. It is indeed of infinitely greater Importance
   to be acquainted with that celestial art, and that sacred influence,
   whereby we may emerge from the gulf of sin to holiness and heaven, than
   to be accurately versed in the science of its origination. And so it is
   far more important to see objects, and improve sight, than to be able
   to demonstrate the theory of vision: to recover health, and to use it
   aright, than to have skill to ascertain the cause and the symptom of
   disease; to contribute vigorously in extinguishing a fire that
   threatens to destroy our dwellings and ourselves, than to know the
   author of the calamity; to participate the effects of varied seasons,
   than to understand, astronomically, the precise reason of those
   variations. The mariner may navigate without knowing why his needle
   points to the north; and the celestial bodies in the solar system were
   as equally regular in their motions before Sir Isaac Newton had
   existence, as they have been since he has ascertained those laws and
   proportions according to which they move And yet the science of optics
   is not useless, the healing art is not to be despised, to discover an
   incendiary is desirable, and never is that philosopher who attempts to
   ascertain the cause of natural phenomena, held up as blameworthy. In
   like manner, though millions are delivered from the influence of sin,
   and raised to the most exalted eminence of happiness, who never knew,
   or even sought to know, scientifically, the origination of sin; this is
   no good reason that such knowledge is useless, or even unimportant. As
   we do not wish to swell these notes unnecessarily, we beg leave to
   refer to what we have said elsewhere on the subject, particularly in
   notes on the former part of this Treatise, on Dr. Doddridge's Lectures,
   and on a Sermon, concerning "Predestination to Life," second edition,
   in connexion with what we now add. (See Doddr. Works, vol. iv. p. 363,
   &c. vol v. p. 208. c. Notes.)--As the basis of our present
   demonstration, we begin with proposing a few axioms. axioms. 1. No
   effect can exist without an adequate cause. On this truth are founded
   all reasonings and all metaphysical evidence. 2. Sin is an effect, and
   has a cause. On this truth are founded all moral means and all
   religious principles. 3. The origin of moral evil cannot be moral evil;
   or, the cause of sin cannot be sin itself. Except we admit this, the
   same thing may be and not be, at the same time, and in the same
   respect--the same thing may be sin and no sin--cause and no cause--or,
   contrary to the first axiom, a contingent event may be the cause of
   itself, or may exist without an adequate cause. 4. There is no positive
   cause but what is ultimately from God. If otherwise, something positive
   may begin to be without a positive cause; or, something may exist
   without an adequate cause; which is the same as an effect to exist
   without a cause, contrary to the first axiom. 5. There may be a
   negative, metaphysical cause, where there is no decretive divine
   operation to effect it were there no negative metaphysical causes, such
   ideas as absence, ignorance, folly, weakness, and the like, could have
   no metaphysical effects; contrary to universal experience. And we must
   renounce all ideas of congruity to suppose that such things are the
   mere effects of divine decree and operation. Having premised these
   positions as axioms not to be disputed, we proceed to make a few
   observations, which, though equally true, may not be equally obvious.
   6. The origin of moral evil cannot be one principle. For were it one,
   it must be either a positive or negative cause. If positive, it would
   be ultimately from God; but this would exclude a moral alternative, the
   very essence of moral agency, and consequently be incompatible with the
   existence of moral evil. But if a negative cause, it must ultimately be
   referred to the prime negative cause, which can be no other than
   passive power, as before explained; which is nothing independent of
   positive existence; and consequently can have no effect but in union
   with positive existence. 7. It remains, then, that the origin of moral
   evil is a compound of two causes at least. Yet not more than two;
   because, as we shall see, these are sufficient, and more would be
   superfluous, in order to produce the effect. 8. Now the question
   remains, What are these compound principles? Are they two positive
   causes, two negative causes, or one of each? They cannot be two
   positive causes; for then they might be ultimately reduced to one, the
   first cause; as before proved, gr. 4, 6. Nor can they be two negative
   ones; for ultimately there is but one cause properly negative.
   Consequently, 9. The first entrance of sin into the world, or the true
   and precise origin of moral evil, may be found in two causes united;
   the one positive and the other negative. But neither of which is
   morally good or morally evil; if the cause were morally good, the
   effect could not be morally bad; and if morally evil, it would be
   contrary to the third axiom, and to common sense. These two causes are,
   first, liberty, a cause naturally good; secondly, passive power, a
   cause naturally evil. And these two causes are as necessary for the
   production of moral evil, as two parents for the production of a human
   being according to the taws of nature, 9. Dr. Clarke, whose brief
   account has been more implicitly admitted than any other, says, that
   moral evil "arises wholly from the abuse of liberty; which God gave to
   his creatures for other purposes, and which it was reasonable and fit
   to give them for the perfection and order of the whole creation: only
   they, contrary to God's intention and command, have abused what was
   necessary for the perfection of the whole, to the corruption and
   depravation of themselves." This extract from Dr. Clarke (in his
   Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God. p. 113. 5th edit) has
   been advanced by celebrated writers, as "containing all that can be
   advanced with certainty " on the subject. But surety those minds must
   be easily satisfied, who can be satisfied with such evidence. Dr.
   Clarke allows and proves, that liberty is a perfection, rather than an
   evil. How came it then to product evil? He answers, "This arises wholly
   from the abuse of liberty. But what is the cause of this effect called
   "the abuse of liberty?" This in fact is the whole of the difficulty,
   and yet he leaves it untouched. The free agent fails in the exercise of
   liberty; this failure is an effect; but there is no effect without a
   cause; therefore this failure must have a cause; and this cause (not
   the abuse of liberty) must bring us to the origin of moral evil. 10.
   What Dr. Clarke has left untouched may yet be ascertained. We think it
   has been fairly excluded, by what has been already advanced, from every
   thing except liberty and passive power. Therefore, the abuse of liberty
   can arise only from its associate. But how can this operate as a cause
   of the abuse of liberty? In order to answer this question, we must
   recollect what liberty itself is, viz. a natural power, or instrument
   of the mind, capable of producing moral effects. Not a self-determining
   power, which would be contrary to the first axiom; and which our author
   has abundantly demonstrated to be full of contradictions, and an utter
   impossibility. It must, then, be determined by motives. But motives, as
   before shown, (in a former note,) are the objects of choice in union
   with the state of the mind, as a compound effect. Now the cause why the
   real good, suppose the chief good, which is absolutely unchangeable, is
   not chosen, and an inferior good appears at the instant of choice
   preferable, and is in fact preferred, must arise from that part of the
   motive which is the state of the mind. 11. Now there an only two states
   of the mind conceivable whereby liberty can be influenced; the one, a
   state naturally evil; the other, a state morally good. Were we to say,
   that the state was morally evil, at the first entrance of sin, we
   should contradict the third axiom. And were we to say, that the cause
   was only naturally good, we should contradict the first axiom.
   Therefore the cause of the abuse of liberty, is a state naturally evil.
   No other cause can possibly be assigned, without involving a
   contradiction. Bat what is a state naturally evil, and without any
   mixture of moral evil? It can be no other but a state under the
   influence of what we call passive power. 12. Let us view the subject in
   another light. Perfect liberty, in reference to virtue and vice, the
   scale of merit and demerit, and its attendant degrees of happiness or
   misery, is a medium, standing between all extremes--between virtue and
   vice, merit and demerit, happiness and misery. If we regard divine
   rectitude or equity, according to a former simile, in reference to the
   moral system, as an universal plane, liberty may be said to coincide
   with it. And being a natural perfection, or. when exerted, a good which
   has a positive cause, it is the effect of benevolent energy. If the
   mind be under unmerited, sovereign, benevolent influence, its liberty
   attaches itself to real good; then the agent rises on the scale of
   excellence, and therefore of happiness. But if the mind be under
   passive influence, or the influence of passive power, (a depraved
   nature and confirmed vicious habits being now out of the question,) its
   liberty attaches itself to apparent good, in opposition to real; then
   vice is generated, the agent sinks on the scale of deterioration, and
   consequently of misery. 13. It appears, then, that the will, in the
   exercise of its freedom, when producing moral effects, is the
   instrument of the disposition; and that the character of the effect
   bears an infallible and exact proportion to that of the predisposing
   cause. Yet the will in the exercise of choice is so free, that all
   constraint, coaction, and impulse, are entirely excluded from that
   which constitutes the morality of the act. Here lies the essence of
   moral agency, and the ground of accountableness. The agent has a moral
   alternative; IF he be different minded may choose otherwise than he
   actually does if under benevolent influence, he will, in proportion,
   infallibly choose aright; if under equitable, passive influence, the
   apparent good will not be the real one, and consequently the choice
   will be morally bad. Means, objects perfectly suitable and sufficient,
   are exhibited to view; but these of themselves would never determine
   the will, otherwise the same effect would always follow the same means.
   Temptations also are presented; these in like manner of themselves
   never determine the will, otherwise temptation and sin would be
   infallibly connected. Then the holy Jesus could not have withstood the
   numerous and powerful solicitations of the tempter. But why did he
   withstand all? Because objects of temptation did not constitute the
   whole of motives; because objects operate according to the state of the
   mind; and because in him benevolent influence counteracted passive
   power. Hence, when the prince of this world came, he found nothing in
   him; and hence he rose to the greatest height of glory, having "a name
   above every name." 14. There is no end of objections and cavils,
   however demonstrative the proof; for such there have been against all
   the first principles of religion--the being of God--a revelation of his
   will to that human race--the doctrine of a future state, &c. &c. Some
   may say, Why should sin be made to originate in these two things,
   liberty and passive power? We answer, it has been demonstrated, that
   all metaphysical, positive and negative, causation, in reference to
   moral evil, is reducible to these two; and therefore they might as well
   ask. Why one and one make two, rather than any other number? 15. Others
   may say, Why not proceed from God alone? They might as well ask, Why is
   not the sun the cause of darkness? Love, the cause of enmity? Wisdom,
   the cause of folly? Happiness, the cause of misery? Order, the cause of
   confusion? But the effect, it may be said, is the same. We reply, the
   assignation of a cause, whether true or false, does not alter the
   nature of phenomena. It would be, indeed, a strange phenomenon,
   hitherto unknown, and unknowable, for an hypothesis, however
   demonstrable, to alter the nature of the things in question. The effect
   are the same. Very true. But the question is not about the effects; the
   inquiry is about the true cause of those effects, in opposition to
   false philosophy. The effect of moral evil is misery, or deserved
   suffering. Now does it make no difference, in justifying the ways of
   God to men, whether a rational, immortal being suffer deservedly or
   undeservedly? To suffer for moral evil, is to suffer deservedly; but
   were sin and suffering from God alone, or the effect of constituted
   laws, this could not be the case. To say. that this partial suffering
   may be ultimately counterbalanced by a restoration, is begging the
   question, that there will be a restoration And if there were, what is
   it better than an apology for past injustice? To suffer undeservedly,
   is to suffer unjustly; and to punish at all is an act of injustice, if
   undeserved, as well as to punish for ever. 16. It may be again asked,
   What advantage is there in fixing on this origin of moral evil, rather
   than another? We reply by putting another question. Why should we put
   up with a false cause assigned for any thing? Surely, phenomena more
   interesting, more alarming in their nature, and more awful in their
   consequences, than moral evils, cannot arrest human observation. And it
   would be passing strange to suppose, that the ascertaining of their
   true cause and origin is not an important part of philosophy, and
   deserving of the closest investigation. What can be more dishonourable
   to the moral character of Deity, than to make sin originate in his will
   alone? Or, if this be its origin, how preposterous to call it moral
   evil, as distinguished from natural. How cruel and unjust, beyond
   precedent, to punish it; and how absurd the idea of threatening
   punishment for what was irreversibly appointed! 17. Some may say, Why
   may we not be satisfied with the idea of permission? If properly
   understood, we acknowledge that this goes a considerable way. But we
   suspect, few seem acquainted with the full implication of the term. God
   permits. True; if by it we mean he does not hinder. The free agent acts
   amiss when he it not hindered. This only shows, that God might hinder
   if he pleased; but it assigns no cause why the agent acts amiss.
   Permitting or not hindering, IMPLIES a cause distinct from divine
   causation. And the question returns, what is the cause of sin taking
   place when not hindered? In vain do we fix on chance, or a
   self-determining power; these explain nothing, and in fact are nothing,
   as our author has demonstrated various ways. In vain do we say. sin
   arises from the abuse of liberty. For the question recurs. What is the
   cause of that abuse? If this be not explained, nothing is effected. In
   vain shall we say, it proceeds from the cause of causes. For that cause
   is good only. From such a cause only good can proceed; and to ascribe
   sin to this cause is as proper as to say that moral evil is a good
   thing, and ought to be rewarded rather than punished. If this be not a
   reprovable mode of calling "evil good, and good evil," (Isa. v. 90.) we
   know not what is. corollaries. 18. Those who renounce the idea of
   passive power, as before explained. and its influence on the mind of a
   free agent, as a negative metaphysical cause; can never find the true,
   philosophical cause of vice and sin, and consequently of deserved
   suffering. As soon might they ascertain the laws of the planetary
   motions, while rejecting the principle of gravitation If it be asked,
   What is the link of connexion between this principle and the event? We
   reply, Essential truth, the same truth as connects 2+2=4 or 2-1=1. 19.
   Those who renounce a sovereign, benevolent, physical, holy influence on
   the mind can never And the true, philosophical origin of virtue and
   holiness, and consequently happiness. 20. From the premises we infer,
   that the highest wisdom, the best interest, and the greatest honour of
   a rational and accountable being, is to employ his liberty, and all his
   powers, in the way of absolute submission to the divine will; in
   supreme affection, fear and love, to the infinite majesty and
   self-existent excellence of God; and in the way or humble and diligent
   obedience, according to the manifestation which God has made for
   himself.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XI.

   Of a supposed Inconsistence between these principles and God's moral
   character.

   The things which have been already observed, may be sufficient to
   answer most of the objections, and silence the great exclamations of
   Arminians against the Calvinists, from the supposed inconsistence of
   Calvinistic principles with the moral perfections of God, as exercised
   in his government of mankind. The consistence of such a doctrine of
   necessity as has been maintained, with the fitness and reasonableness
   of God's commands, promises and threatenings, rewards and punishments,
   has been particularly considered. The cavils of our opponents, as
   though our doctrine of necessity made God the author of sin, have been
   answered; and also their objections against these principles, as
   inconsistent with God's sincerity, in his counsels, invitations and
   persuasions, has been already obviated, in what has been observed
   respecting the consistence of what Calvinists suppose, concerning the
   secret and revealed Will of God. By that it appears, there is no
   repugnance in supposing it may be the secret Wilt of God, that his
   ordination and permission of events should be such, that it shall be a
   certain consequence, that a thing never will come to pass; which yet it
   is man's duty to do, and so God's preceptive Will, that he should do;
   and this is the same thing as to say, God may sincerely command and
   require him to do it. And if he may be sincere in commanding him, he
   may, for the same reason, be sincere in counselling, inviting, and
   using persuasions with him to do it. Counsels and invitations are
   manifestations of God's preceptive Will, or of what God loves, and what
   is in itself, and as man's act, agreeable to his heart; and not of his
   disposing Will, and what he chooses as a part of his own infinite
   scheme of things. It has been particularly shewn, Part III. Sect. IV.
   that such a necessity as has been maintained, is not inconsistent with
   the propriety and fitness of divine commands; and for the same reason,
   not inconsistent with the sincerity of invitations and counsels, in the
   Corollary at the end of that section. Yea, it hath been shown, Part
   III. Sect. VII. Corol. 1. that this objection of Arminians, concerning
   the sincerity and use of divine exhortations, invitations, and
   counsels, is demonstrably against themselves.

   Notwithstanding, I would further observe, that the difficulty of
   reconciling the sincerity of counsels, invitations, and persuasions
   with such an antecedent known fixedness of all events, as has been
   supposed, is not peculiar to this scheme, as distinguished from that of
   the generality of Arminians, which acknowledge the absolute
   foreknowledge of God: and therefore, it would be unreasonably brought
   as an objection against my differing from them. The main seeming
   difficulty in the case is this: that God, in counselling, inviting, and
   persuading, makes a show of aiming at, seeking, and using endeavours
   for the thing exhorted and persuaded to; whereas, it is impossible for
   any intelligent being truly to seek, or use endeavours for a thing,
   which he at the same time knows, most perfectly, will not come to pass;
   and that it is absurd to suppose, he makes the obtaining of a thing his
   end, in his calls and counsels, which he, at the same time, infallibly
   knows will not be obtained by these means. Now, if God knows this, in
   the utmost certainty and perfection, the way by which he comes by this
   knowledge makes no difference. If he knows it is by the necessity which
   he sees in things, or by some other means; it alters not the case. But
   it is in effect allowed by Arminians themselves, that God's inviting
   and persuading men to do things, which he, at the same time, certainly
   knows will not be done, is no evidence of insincerity; because they
   allow, that God has a certain foreknowledge of all sinful actions and
   omissions. And as this is implicitly allowed by most Arminians, so all
   that pretend to own the Scriptures to be the word of God, must be
   constrained to allow it.--God commanded and counselled Pharaoh to let
   his people go, and used arguments and persuasions to induce him to it;
   he laid before him arguments taken from his infinite greatness and
   almighty power, (Exod. vii. 16) and forewarned him of the fatal
   consequences of his refusal, from time to time; ( chap. viii. 1, 2, 20,
   21. Exod. viii. 1, 2, 20, 21., Exod. ix. 1-5, 13-17.Exod. x. 3, 6. and
   x. 3, 6.) He commanded Moses, and the elders of Israel, to go and
   beseech Pharaoh to let the people go; and at the same time told them,
   he knew surely that he would not comply with it. (Exod. iii. 18, 19.)
   "And thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of
   Egypt, and you shall say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath met
   with us; and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into
   the wilderness, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God:" and, "I
   am sure, that the king of Egypt will not let you go." So our blessed
   Saviour, the evening wherein he was betrayed, knew that Peter would
   shamefully deny him, before the morning; for he declares it to him with
   asseverations, to show the certainty of it; and tells the disciples,
   that all of them should be offended because of him that night; (Matt.
   xxvi. 31-35. John xiii. 38. Luke xxii. 31-34. John xvi. 32.) And yet it
   was their duty to avoid these things; they were very sinful things,
   which God had forbidden, and which it was their duty to watch and pray
   against; and they were obliged to do so from the counsels and
   persuasions Christ used with them, at that very time, so to do; (Matt.
   xxvi. 41.) "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." So that
   whatever difficulty there can be in this matter, it can be no objection
   against any principles which have been maintained in opposition to the
   principles of Arminians; nor does it any more concern me to remove the
   difficulty, than it does them, or indeed all, that call themselves
   Christians, and acknowledge the divine authority of the
   Scriptures.--Nevertheless, this matter may possibly (God allowing) be
   more particularly and largely considered, in some future discourse on
   the doctrine of predestination. [156]

   But I would here observe, that however the defenders of that notion of
   liberty which I have opposed, exclaim against the doctrine of
   Calvinists, as lending to bring men into doubts concerning the moral
   perfections of God; it is their scheme, and not the scheme of
   Calvinists, that indeed is justly chargeable with this. For it is one
   of their most fundamental points, that a freedom of Will consisting in
   self-determination, without all necessity, is essential to moral
   agency. This is the same thing as to say, that such a determination of
   the Will, without all necessity, must be in all intelligent beings, in
   those things wherein they are moral agents, or in their moral acts: and
   from this it will follow, that God's Will is not necessarily
   determined, in any thing he does, as a moral agent, or in any of his
   acts that are of a moral nature: So that in all things, wherein he acts
   holily, justly, and truly, he does not act necessarily; or his Will is
   not necessarily determined to act holily and justly; because, if it
   were necessarily determined, he would not be a moral agent in thus
   acting: his Will would be attended with necessity; which, they say, is
   inconsistent with moral agency: "He can act no otherwise; he is at no
   liberty in the affair; he is determined by unavoidable, invincible
   necessity: therefore such agency is no moral agency; yea, no agency at
   all, properly speaking: a necessary agent is no agent: he being
   passive, and subject to necessity, what he does is no act of his, but
   an effect of a necessity prior to any act of his." This is agreeable to
   their manner of arguing. Now then, what is become of all our proof of
   the moral perfections of God? How can we prove, that God certainly
   will, in any one instance, do that which is just and holy; seeing his
   "Will is determined in the matter by no necessity We have no other way
   of proving that any thing certainly will be, but only by the necessity
   of the event. Where we can see no necessity, but that the thing may be,
   or may not be, there we are unavoidably left at a loss. We have no
   other way properly and truly to demonstrate the moral perfections of
   God, but the way that Mr. Chubb proves them, (p. 252, 261-263. of his
   Tracts,) viz. that God must, necessarily, perfectly know what is most
   worthy and valuable in itself, which, in the nature of things, is best
   and fittest to be done. And, as this is most eligible in itself, he,
   being omniscient, must see it to be so; and being both omniscient and
   self-sufficient, cannot have any temptation to reject it; and so must
   necessarily will that which is best. And thus, by this necessity of the
   determination of God's Will to what is good and best, we demonstrably
   establish God's moral character.

   Corol. From what has been observed, it appears, that most of the
   arguments from Scripture which Arminians make use of to support their
   scheme, are no other than begging the question. For in these they
   determine in the first place, that without such a freedom of Will as
   they hold, men cannot be proper moral agents, nor the subjects of
   command, counsel, persuasion, invitation, promises, threatening,
   expostulations, rewards, and punishments; and that without such freedom
   it is to no purpose for men to take any care, or use any diligence,
   endeavours, or means, in order to their avoiding sin, or becoming holy,
   escaping punishment, or obtaining happiness: and having supposed these
   things, which are grand things in question in the debate, then they
   heap up scriptures, containing commands, counsels, calls, warnings,
   persuasions, expostulations, promises, and threatenings; (as doubtless
   they may find enough such; the Bible being confessedly full of them,
   from the beginning to the end;) and then they glory, how full the
   Scripture is on their side, how many more texts there are that
   evidently favour their scheme, than such as seem to favour the
   contrary. But let them first make manifest the things in question,
   which they suppose and take for granted, and show them to be consistent
   with themselves; and produce clear evidence of their truth; and they
   have gained their point, as all will confess, without bringing one
   scripture. For none denies, that there are commands, counsels,
   promises, threatenings, &c. in the Bible. But unless they do these
   things, their multiplying such texts of Scripture is insignificant and
   vain.

   It may further be observed, that such scriptures as they bring, are
   really against them, and not for them. As it has been demonstrated,
   that it is their scheme, and not ours, is inconsistent with the use of
   motives and persuasives, or any moral means whatsoever, to induce men
   to the practice of virtue, or abstaining from wickedness. Their
   principles, and not ours, are repugnant to moral agency, and
   inconsistent with moral government, with law or precept, with the
   nature of virtue or vice, reward or punishment, and with every thing
   whatsoever of a moral nature, either on the part of the moral governor,
   or in the state, actions, or conduct of the subject.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [156] It does not appear that the author did any thing more, towards
   accomplishing this design, than to pen some thoughts, probably with a
   view to an elaborate treatise, which are included in his Miscellaneous
   Remarks and Observations.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XII.

   Of a supposed tendency of these principles to Atheism and
   Licentiousness.

   If any object against what has been maintained, that it tends to
   Atheism; I know not on what grounds such an objection can be raised,
   unless it be, that some Atheists have held a doctrine of necessity
   which they suppose to be like this. But if it be so, I am persuaded the
   Arminians would not look upon it just, that their notion of freedom and
   contingence should be charged with a tendency to all the errors that
   ever any embraced, who have held such opinions. The Stoic philosophers,
   whom the Calvinists are charged with agreeing with, were no Atheists,
   but the greatest Theists, and nearest akin to Christians in their
   opinions concerning the unity and the perfections of the Godhead, of
   all the heathen philosophers. And Epicurus, that chief father of
   Atheism, maintained no such doctrine of necessity, but was the greatest
   maintainer of contingence.

   The doctrine of necessity, which supposes a necessary connexion of all
   events, on some antecedent ground and reason of their existence, is the
   only medium we have to prove the being of God. And the contrary
   doctrine of contingence, even as maintained by Arminians, (which
   certainly implies, or infers, that events may come into existence, or
   begin to be, without dependence on any thing foregoing, as their cause,
   ground, or reason,) takes away all proof of the being of God; which
   proof is summarily expressed by the apostle, in Rom. i. 20. And this is
   a tendency to Atheism with a witness. So that, indeed, it is the
   doctrine of Arminians, and not of the Calvinists, that is justly
   charged with a tendency to Atheism; it being built on a foundation that
   is the utter subversion of every demonstrative argument for the proof
   of a Deity; as has been shown, Part II. Sect. III.

   And whereas it has often been said, that the Calvinistic doctrine of
   necessity saps the foundations of all religion and virtue, and tends to
   the greatest licentiousness of practice: this objection is built on the
   pretence, that our doctrine renders vain all means and endeavours, in
   order to be virtuous and religious. Which pretence has been already
   particularly considered in the 6th section of this Part; where it has
   been demonstrated, that this doctrine has no such tendency; but that
   such a tendency is truly to be charged on the contrary doctrine:
   inasmuch as the notion of contingence, which their doctrine implies, in
   its certain consequences, overthrows all connexion in every degree,
   between endeavour and event, means and end.

   And besides, if many other things, which have been observed to belong
   to the Arminian doctrine, or to be plain consequences of it, be
   considered, there will appear just reason to suppose, that it is that
   which must rather tend to licentiousness. Their doctrine excuses all
   evil inclinations, which men find to be natural; because, in such
   inclinations, they are not self-determined, as such inclinations are
   not owing to any choice or determination of their own Wills. Which
   leads men wholly to justify themselves in all their wicked actions, so
   far as natural inclination has had a hand in determining their Wills to
   the commission of them. Yea, these notions, which suppose moral
   necessity and inability to be inconsistent with blame or moral
   obligation, will directly lead men to justify the vilest acts and
   practices, from the strength of their wicked inclinations of all sorts;
   strong inclinations inducing a moral necessity; yea, to excuse every
   degree of evil inclination, so far as this has evidently prevailed, and
   been the thing which has determined their Wills: because, so far as
   antecedent inclination determined the Will, so far the Will was without
   liberty of indifference and self-determination. Which, at last, will
   come to this, that men will justify themselves in all the wickedness
   they commit. It has been observed already, that this scheme of things
   exceedingly diminishes the guilt of sin, and the difference between the
   greatest and smallest offences; [157] and if it be pursued in its real
   consequences, it leaves room for no such thing, as either virtue or
   vice, blame or praise in the world. [158] And again, how naturally does
   this notion of the sovereign self-determining power of the Will, in all
   things virtuous or vicious, and whatsoever deserves either reward or
   punishment, tend to encourage men to put off the work of religion and
   virtue, and turning from sin to God; since they have a sovereign power
   to determine themselves, just when they please; or if not, they are
   wholly excusable in going on in sin, because of their inability to do
   any other.

   If it should be said, that the tendency of this doctrine of necessity
   to licentiousness, appears by the improvement many at this day actually
   make of it, to justify themselves in their dissolute courses; I will
   not deny that some men do unreasonably abuse this doctrine, as they do
   many other things, which are true and excellent in their own nature:
   but I deny, that this proves the doctrine itself has any tendency to
   licentiousness. I think, the tendency of doctrines, by what now appears
   in the world, and in our nation in particular, may much more justly be
   argued, from the general effect which has been seen to attend the
   prevailing of the principles of Arminians, and the contrary principles;
   as both have had their turn of general prevalence in our nation. If it
   be indeed, as is pretended, that Calvinistic doctrines undermine the
   very foundation of all religion and morality, and enervate and disannul
   all rational motives to holy and virtuous practice; and that the
   contrary doctrines give the inducements to virtue and goodness their
   proper force, and exhibit religion in a rational light, tending to
   recommend it to the reason of mankind, and enforce it in a manner that
   is agreeable to their natural notions of things: I say, if it be thus,
   it is remarkable, that virtue and religious practice should prevail
   most, when the former doctrines, so inconsistent with it, prevailed
   almost universally: and that ever since the latter doctrines, so
   happily agreeing with it, and of so proper and excellent a tendency to
   promote it, have been gradually prevailing, vice, profaneness, luxury,
   and wickedness of all sorts, and contempt of all religion, and of every
   kind of seriousness and strictness of conversation, should
   proportionably prevail; and that these things should thus accompany one
   another, and rise and prevail one with another, now for a whole age
   together! It is remarkable, that this happy remedy (discovered by the
   free inquiries and superior sense and wisdom of this age) against the
   pernicious effects of Calvinism, so inconsistent with religion, and
   tending so much to banish all virtue from the earth, should, on so long
   a trial, be attended with no good effect; but that the consequence
   should be the reverse of amendment; that in proportion as the remedy
   takes place, and is thoroughly applied, so the disease should prevail;
   and the very same dismal effect take place, to the highest degree,
   which Calvinistic doctrines are supposed to have so great a tendency
   to; even the banishing of religion and virtue, and the prevailing of
   unbounded licentiousness of manners! If these things are truly so, they
   are very remarkable, and matter of very curious speculation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [157] Part III Sect VI.

   [158] Part III Sect VI. Ibid Sect VII. Part IV. Sect. I. Part. III.
   Sect. III. Corol 1. after the first head
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIII.

   Concerning that objection against the reasoning, by which the
   Calvinistic doctrine is supposed, that it is metaphysical and abstruse.

   It has often been objected against the defenders of Calvinistic
   principles, that in their reasonings, they run into nice scholastic
   distinctions, and abstruse metaphysical subtilties, and set these in
   opposition to common sense. And it is possible, that, after the former
   manner, it may be alleged against the reasoning by which I have
   endeavoured to confute the Arminian scheme of liberty and moral agency,
   that it is very abstracted and metaphysical. Concerning this, I would
   observe the following things:

   I. If that be made an objection against the foregoing reasoning, that
   it is metaphysical, or may properly be reduced to the science of
   metaphysics, it is a very impertinent objection; whether it be so or
   no, is not worthy of any dispute or controversy. If the reasoning be
   good, it is as frivolous to inquire what science it is properly reduced
   to, as what language it is delivered in: and for a man to go about to
   confute the arguments of his opponent, by telling him, his arguments
   are metaphysical, would be as weak as to tell him, his arguments could
   not be substantial, because they were written in French or Latin. The
   question is not, whether what is said be metaphysics, physics, logic,
   or mathematics, Latin, French, English, or Mohawk? But whether the
   reasoning be good, and the arguments truly conclusive? The foregoing
   arguments are no more metaphysical, than those which we use against the
   papists, to disprove their doctrine of transubstantiation; alleging it
   is inconsistent with the notion of corporeal identity, that it should
   be in ten thousand places at the same time. It is by metaphysical
   arguments only we are able to prove, that the rational soul is not
   corporeal, that lead or sand cannot think; that thoughts are not square
   or round, or do not weigh a pound. The arguments by which we prove the
   being of God, if handled closely and distinctly, so as to show their
   clear and demonstrative evidence, must be metaphysically treated. It is
   by metaphysics only that we can demonstrate, that God is not limited to
   a place, or is not mutable; that he is not ignorant, or forgetful; that
   it is impossible for him to lie, or be unjust; and that there is one
   God only, and not hundreds or thousands. And, indeed, we have no strict
   demonstration of any thing, excepting mathematical truths, but by
   metaphysics. We can have no proof, that is properly demonstrative, of
   any one proposition, relating to the being and nature of God, his
   creation of the world, the dependence of all things on him, the nature
   of bodies or spirits, the nature of our own souls, or any of the great
   truths of morality and natural religion, but what is metaphysical. I am
   willing my arguments should be brought to the test of the strictest and
   justest reason, and that a clear, distinct, and determinate meaning of
   the terms I use should be insisted on; but let not the whole be
   rejected, as if all were confuted, by fixing on it the epithet,
   metaphysical.

   II. If the reasoning, which has been made use of, be in some sense
   metaphysical, it will not follow, that therefore it must need be
   abstruse, unintelligible, and akin to the jargon of the schools. I
   humbly conceive, the foregoing reasoning at least to those things which
   are most material belonging to it, depends on no abstruse definitions
   or distinctions, or terms without a meaning, or of very ambiguous and
   undetermined signification, or any points of such abstraction and
   subtilty, as tends to involve the attentive understanding in clouds and
   darkness. There is no high degree of refinement and abstruse
   speculation, in determining, that a thing is not before it is, and so
   cannot be the cause of itself; or that the first act of free choice,
   has not another act of free choice going before that, to excite or
   direct it; or in determining, that no choice is made, while the mind
   remains in a state of absolute indifference; that preference and
   equilibrium never coexist; and that therefore no choice is made in a
   state of liberty, consisting in indifference: and that so far as the
   Will is determined by motives, exhibiting and operating previous to the
   act of the Will, so far it is not determined by the act of the Will
   itself; that nothing can begin to be, which before was not, without a
   cause, or some antecedent ground or reason, why it then begins to be;
   that effects depend on their causes, and are connected with them; that
   virtue is not the worse, nor sin the better, for the strength of
   inclination with which it is practised, and the difficulty which thence
   arises of doing otherwise; that when it is already infallibly known
   that the thing will be, it is not contingent whether it will ever be or
   no; or that it can be truly said, notwithstanding, that it is not
   necessary it should be, but it either may be, or may not be. And the
   like might be observed of many other things which belong to the
   foregoing reasoning.

   If any shall still stand to it, that the foregoing reasoning is nothing
   but mere metaphysical sophistry: and that it must be so, that the
   seeming force of the arguments all depends on some fallacy and wile
   that is hid in the obscurity which always attends a great degree of
   metaphysical abstraction and refinement; and shall be ready to say,
   "Here is, indeed, something tends to confound the mind, but not to
   satisfy it: for who can ever be truly satisfied in it, that men are
   fitly blamed or commended, punished or rewarded, for those volitions
   which are not from themselves, and of whose existence they are not the
   causes. Men may refine, as much as they please, and advance the
   abstract notions, and make out a thousand seeming contradictions, to
   puzzle our understandings; yet there can be no satisfaction in such
   doctrine as this: the natural sense of the mind of man will always
   resist it." [159] I humbly conceive, that such an objector, if he has
   capacity, and humility, and calmness of spirit sufficient, impartially
   and thoroughly to examine himself, will find that he knows not really
   what he would be at; and indeed, his difficulty is nothing but a mere
   prejudice, from an inadvertent customary use of words, in a meaning
   that is not clearly understood, nor carefully reflected upon. Let the
   objector reflect again, if he has candour and patience enough, and does
   not scorn to be at the trouble of close attention in the affair.--He
   would have a man's volition be from himself. Let it be from himself,
   most primarily and originally of any way conceivable; that is, from its
   own choice; how will that help the matter, as to his being justly
   blamed or praised, unless that choice itself be blameworthy or
   praiseworthy? And how is the choice itself (an ill choice, for
   instance) blameworthy, according to these principles, unless that be
   from himself too, in the same manner; that is, from his own choice? But
   the original and first determining choice in the affair is not from his
   choice: his choice is not the cause of it. And if it be from himself
   some other way, and not from his choice, surely that will not help the
   matter. If it be not from himself of choice, then it is not from
   himself voluntarily: and if so, he is surely no more to blame, than if
   it were not from himself at all. It is vanity to pretend, it is a
   sufficient answer to this, to say, that it is nothing but metaphysical
   refinement and subtilty, and so attended with obscurity and
   uncertainty.

   If it be the natural sense of our minds, that what is blameworthy in a
   man must be from himself, then it doubtless is also, that it must be
   from something bud in himself, a bad choice, or bad disposition. But
   then our natural sense is, that this bad choice or disposition is evil
   in itself, and the man blameworthy for it, on its own account, without
   taking into our notion of its blameworthiness, another bad choice, or
   disposition going before this, from whence this arises: for that is a
   ridiculous absurdity, running us into an immediate contradiction, which
   our natural sense of blameworthiness has nothing to do with, and never
   comes into the mind, nor is supposed in the judgment we naturally make
   of the affair. As was demonstrated before, natural sense does not place
   the moral evil of volitions and dispositions in the cause of them, but
   the nature of them. An evil thing being from a man, or from something
   antecedent in him, is not essential to the original notion we have of
   blameworthiness: but it is its being the choice of the heart; as
   appears by this, that if a thing be flam us, and not from our choice,
   it has not the nature of blameworthiness or ill desert, according to
   our natural sense. When a thing is from a man, in that sense, that it
   is from his Will or choice, he is to blame for it, because his Will is
   in it: so far as the Will is in it, blame is in it, and no further.
   Neither do we go any further in our notion of blame, to inquire whether
   the bad Will be from a bad Will: there is no consideration of the
   original of that bad Will; because, according to our natural
   apprehension, blame originally consists in it. Therefore a thing being
   from a man, is a secondary consideration, in the notion of blame or ill
   desert. Because those things, in our external actions, are most
   properly said to be from us, which are from our choice; and no other
   external actions, but those that are from us in this sense, have the
   nature of blame; and they indeed, not so properly because they are from
   us, as because we are in them, i. e. our Wills are in them; not so much
   because they are from some property of ours, as because they are our
   properties.

   However, all these external actions being truly from us as their cause;
   and we being so used, in ordinary speech, and in the common affairs of
   life, to speak of men's actions and conduct which we see, and which
   affect human society, as deserving ill or well, as worthy of blame or
   praise; hence it is come to pass, that philosophers have incautiously
   taken all their measures of good and evil, praise and blame, from the
   dictates of common sense, about these overt acts of men; to the running
   of every thing into the most lamentable and dreadful confusion. And,
   therefore, I observe,

   III. It is so far from being true, (whatever may be pretended,) that
   the proof of the doctrine which has been maintained, depends on certain
   abstruse, unintelligible, metaphysical terms and notions; and that the
   Arminian scheme, without needing such clouds and darkness for its
   defence, is supported by the plain dictates of common sense; that the
   very reverse is most certainly true, and that to a great degree. It is
   fact, that they, and not we, have confounded things with metaphysical,
   unintelligible notions and phrases, and have drawn them from the light
   of plain truth, into the gross darkness of abstruse metaphysical
   propositions, and words without a meaning. Their pretended
   demonstrations depend very much on such unintelligible, metaphysical
   phrases, as self-determination, and sovereignty of the Will; and the
   metaphysical sense they put on such terms, as necessity, contingency,
   action, agency, &c. quite diverse from their meaning as used in common
   speech; and which, as they use them, are without any consistent
   meaning, or any manner of distinct consistent ideas; as far from it as
   any of the abstruse terms and perplexed phrases of the peripatetic
   philosophers, or the most unintelligible jargon of the schools, or the
   cant of the wildest fanatics. Yea, we may be bold to say, these
   metaphysical terms, on which they build so much, are what they use
   without knowing what they mean themselves; they are pure metaphysical
   sounds, without any ideas whatsoever in their minds to answer them;
   inasmuch as it has been demonstrated, that there cannot be any notion
   in the mind consistent with these expressions, as they pretend to
   explain them; because their explanations destroy themselves. No such
   notions as imply self-contradiction, and self-abolition, and this a
   great many ways, can subsist in the mind; as there can be no idea of a
   whole which is less than any of its parts, or of solid extension
   without dimensions, or of an effect which is before its
   cause.--Arminians improve these terms, as terms of art, and in their
   metaphysical meaning, to advance and establish those things which are
   contrary to common sense, in a high degree. Thus, instead of the plain
   vulgar notion of liberty, which all mankind, in every part of the face
   of the earth and in all ages, have, consisting in opportunity to do as
   one pleases; they have introduced a new strange liberty, consisting in
   indifference, contingence, and self-determination; by which they
   involve themselves and others in great obscurity, and manifold gross
   inconsistence. So, instead of placing virtue and vice, as common sense
   places them very much, in fixed bias and inclination, and greater
   virtue and vice in stronger and more established inclination; these,
   through their refinings and abstruse notions, suppose a liberty
   consisting in indifference to be essential to all virtue and vice. So
   they have reasoned themselves, not by metaphysical distinctions, but
   metaphysical confusion, into many principles about moral agency, blame,
   praise, reward, and punishment, which are, as has been shown, exceeding
   contrary to the common sense of mankind; and perhaps to their own
   sense, which governs them in common life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [159] A certain noted author of the present age says, the arguments for
   necessity are nothing but quibbling, or logomachy, using words without
   a meaning, or begging the question.--I do not know what kind of
   necessity any authors to whom he may have reference are advocates for;
   or whether they have managed their arguments well or ill. As to the
   arguments I have made use, if they are quibbles they may be shown to be
   so; such knots are capable of being untied, and the trick and cheat may
   be detected and plainly laid open. If this be fairly done, with respect
   to the grounds and reasons I have relied upon. I shall have just
   occasion, for the future, to be silent, if not to be ashamed of my
   argumentations. I am willing my proofs should be thoroughly examined:
   and if there be nothing but begging the question, or mere logomachy, or
   dispute of words, let it be made manifest and shown how the seeming
   strength of the argument depends on my using words without a meaning,
   or arises from the ambiguity of terms, or my making use of words in an
   indeterminate and unsteady manner; and that the weight of my reasons
   rest mainly on such a foundation; and then, I shall either be ready to
   retract what I have urged, and thank the man that has done the kind
   part, or shall be justly exposed for my obstinacy. The same author is
   abundant in appealing, in this affair, from what he calls logomachy and
   sophistry, to experience.--A person can experience only what passes in
   his own mind. But yet. as we may well suppose, that all men have the
   same human faculties; so a man may well argue from his own experience
   to that of others. In things that show the nature of these faculties,
   and the manner of their operation. But then one has as good a right to
   allege his experience as another. As to my own experience, I find, that
   in innumerable things I can do as I will; that the motions of my body,
   in many respects, instantaneously follow the acts of my will concerning
   those motions; and that my will has some command or my thoughts; and
   that the acts of my will are my own. i. e. that they are acts of my
   will, the volitions of my own mind; or, in other words, that what I
   will, I will. Which, I presume, is the sum of what others experience in
   this affair. But as to finding by experience, that my will is
   originally determined by itself: or that, my will first choosing what
   volition there shall be, the chosen volition accordingly follows; and
   that this is the first rise of the determination of my will in any
   affair; or that any volition arises in my mind contingently; I declare,
   I know nothing in myself, by experience, of this nature: and nothing
   that ever I experienced, carries the least appearance or shadow of any
   such thing, or gives me any more reason to suppose or suspect any such
   thing, than to suppose that my volitions existed twenty years before
   they existed. It is true, I find myself possessed of my volitions,
   before I can see the effectual power of any cause to produce them, for
   the power and efficacy of the cause is not seen but by the effect, and
   this, for ought I know, may make some imagine, that volition has no
   cause, or that it produces itself. But I have no more reason from hence
   to determine any such thing, than I have to determine that I gave
   myself my own being, or that I came into being accidentally without a
   cause became I first found myself possessed of being, before I had
   knowledge of a cause of my being.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIV.

   The conclusion.

   Whether the things which have been alleged, are liable to any tolerable
   answer in the way of calm, intelligible, and strict reasoning, 1 must
   leave others to judge: but I am sensible they are liable to one sort of
   answer. It is not unlikely, that some, who value themselves on the
   supposed rational and generous principles of the modern fashionable
   divinity, will have their indignation and disdain raised at the sight
   of this discourse, and on perceiving what things are pretended to be
   proved in it. And if they think it worthy of being read, or of so much
   notice as to say much about it, they may probably renew the usual
   exclamations, with additional vehemence and contempt, about the fate of
   the heathen, Hobbes's Necessity, and making men mere machines;
   accumulating the terrible epithets of fatal, unfrustrable, inevitable,
   irresistible, &c. and it may be, with addition of horrid and
   blasphemous; and perhaps much skill may be used to set forth things,
   which have been said, in colours which shall be shocking to the
   imaginations, and moving to the passions of those, who have either too
   little capacity, or too much confidence of the opinions they have
   imbibed, and contempt of the contrary, to try the matter by any serious
   and circumspect examination. [160] Or difficulties may be stated and
   insisted on, which do not belong to the controversy; because, let them
   be more or less real, and hard to be resolved, they are not what are
   owing to any thing distinguishing of this scheme from that of the
   Arminians, and would not be removed nor diminished by renouncing the
   former, and adhering to the latter. Or some particular things may be
   picked out, which they may think will sound harshest in the ears of the
   generality; and these may be glossed and descanted on, with tart and
   contemptuous words; and from thence, the whole discourse may be treated
   with triumph and insult.

   It is easy to see, how the decision of most of the points in
   controversy between Calvinists and Arminians, depends on the
   determination of this grand article concerning the Freedom of the Will
   requisite to moral agency; and that by clearing and establishing the
   Calvinistic doctrine in this point, the chief arguments are obviated by
   which Arminian doctrines in general are supported, and the contrary
   doctrines demonstratively confirmed. Hereby it becomes manifest, that
   Cod's moral government over mankind, his treating them as moral agents,
   making them the objects of his commands, counsels, calls, warnings,
   expostulations, promises, threatenings, rewards, and punishments, is
   not inconsistent with a determining disposal of all events, of every
   kind, throughout the universe, in his providence; either by positive
   efficiency, or permission. Indeed, such an universal determining
   providence, infers some kind of necessity of all events, such a
   necessity as implies an infallible previous fixedness of the futurity
   of the event: but no other necessity of moral events, or volitions of
   intelligent agents, is needful in order to this, than moral necessity;
   which does as much ascertain the futurity of the event as any other
   necessity. But, as has been demonstrated, such a necessity is not at
   all repugnant to moral agency, and a reasonable use of commands, calls,
   rewards, punishments, &c. Yea, not only are objections of this kind
   against the doctrine of an universal determining providence, removed by
   what has been said; but the truth of such a doctrine is demonstrated.
   As it has been demonstrated, that the futurity of all future events is
   established by previous necessity, either natural or moral; so it is
   manifest, that the sovereign Creator and Disposer of the world has
   ordered this necessity, by ordering his own conduct, either in
   designedly acting, or forbearing to act. For, as the being of the world
   is from God, so the circumstances in which it had its being at first,
   both negative and positive, must be ordered by him, in one of these
   ways; and all the necessary consequences of these circumstances, must
   be ordered by him. And God's active and positive interpositions, after
   the world was created, and the consequences of these interpositions;
   also every instance of his forbearing to interpose, and the sure
   consequences of this forbearance, must all be determined according to
   his pleasure. And therefore every event, which is the consequence of
   any thing whatsoever, or that is connected with any foregoing thing or
   circumstances, either positive or negative, as the ground or reason of
   its existence, must be ordered of God; either by a designing efficiency
   and interposition, or a designed forbearing to operate or interpose.
   But, as has been proved, all events whatsoever are necessarily
   connected with something foregoing, either positive or negative, which
   is the ground of its existence. It follows, therefore, that the whole
   series of events is thus connected with something in the state of
   things either positive or negative, which is original in the series; i.
   e, something which is connected with nothing preceding that, but God's
   own immediate conduct, either his acting or forbearing to act. From
   whence it follows, that as God designedly orders his own conduct, and
   its connected consequences, it must necessarily be, that he designedly
   orders all things.

   The things which have been said, obviate some of the chief objections
   of Arminians against the Calvinistic doctrine of the total depravity
   and corruption of man's nature, whereby his heart is wholly under the
   power of sin, and he is utterly unable, without the interposition of
   sovereign grace, savingly to love God, believe in Christ, or do any
   thing that is truly good and acceptable in God's sight. For the main
   objection against this doctrine, that it is inconsistent with the
   freedom of man's Will, consisting in indifference and self-determining
   power; because it supposes man to be under a necessity of sinning, and
   that God requires things of him, in order to his avoiding eternal
   damnation, which he is unable to do; and that this doctrine is wholly
   inconsistent with the sincerity of counsels, invitations, &c. Now, this
   doctrine supposes no other necessity of sinning, than a moral
   necessity; which, as has been shown, does not at all excuse sin; and
   sup-posses no other inability to obey any command, or perform any duty,
   even the most spiritual and exalted, but a moral inability, which, as
   has been proved, does not excuse persons in the non-performance of any
   good thing, or make them not to be the proper objects of commands,
   counsel, and invitations. And, moreover, it has been shown, that there
   is not, and never can be, either in existence, or so much as in idea,
   any such freedom of Will, consisting in indifference and
   self-determination, for the sake of which, this doctrine of original
   sin is cast out: and that no such freedom is necessary, in order to the
   nature of sin, and a just desert of punishment.

   The things which have been observed, do also take off the main
   objections of Arminians against the doctrine of efficacious grace; and,
   at the same time, prove the grace of God in a sinner's conversion (if
   there be any grace or divine influence in the affair) to be
   efficacious, yea, and irresistible too, if by irresistible is meant,
   that which is attended with a moral necessity, which it is impossible
   should ever be violated by any resistance. The main objection of
   Arminians against this doctrine is, that it is inconsistent with their
   self-determining freedom of Will; and that it is repugnant to the
   nature of virtue, that it should be wrought in the heart by the
   determining efficacy and power of another, instead of its being owing
   to a self-moving power; that, in that case, the good which is wrought,
   would not be our virtue, but rather God's virtue; because not the
   person in whom it is wrought is the determining author of it, but God
   that wrought it in him. But the things which are the foundation of
   these objections, have been considered; and it has been demonstrated,
   that the liberty of moral agents does not consist in self-determining
   power; and that there is no need of any such liberty, in order to the
   nature of virtue; nor does it at all hinder, but that the state or act
   of the Will may be the virtue of the subject, though it be not from
   self-determination, but the determination of an intrinsic cause; even
   so as to cause the event to be morally necessary to the subject of
   it.--And as it has been proved, that nothing in the state or acts of
   the Will of man is contingent; but that, on the contrary, every event
   of this kind is necessary, by a moral necessity; arid has also been now
   demonstrated, that the doctrine of an universal determining Providence,
   follows from that doctrine of necessity, which was proved before: and
   so, that God does decisively, in his providence, order all the
   volitions of moral agents, either by positive influence or permission:
   and it being allowed, on all hands, that what God does in the affair of
   man's virtuous volitions, whether it be more or less, is by some
   positive influence, and not by mere permission, as in the affair of a
   sinful volition: if we put these things together, it will follow, that
   God's assistance or influence must be determining and decisive, or must
   be attended with a moral necessity of the event; and so, that God gives
   virtue, holiness, and conversion to sinners, by an influence which
   determines the effect, in such a manner, that the effect will
   infallibly follow by a moral necessity; which is what Calvinists mean
   by efficacious and irresistible grace.

   The things which have been said, do likewise answer the chief
   objections against the doctrine of God's universal and absolute decree,
   and afford infallible proof of this doctrine; and of the doctrine of
   absolute, eternal, personal election in particular. The main objections
   against these doctrines are, that they infer a necessity of the
   volitions of moral agents, and of the future and moral state and acts
   of men; and so are not consistent with those eternal rewards and
   punishments, which are connected with conversion and impenitence; nor
   can be made to agree with the reasonableness and sincerity of the
   precepts, calls, counsels, warnings, and expostulations of the word of
   God; or with the various methods and means of grace, which God uses
   with sinners to bring them to repentance; and the whole of that moral
   government, which God exercises towards mankind: and that they infer an
   inconsistence between the secret and revealed Will of God; and make God
   the author of sin. But all these things have been obviated in the
   preceding discourse. And the certain truth of these doctrines,
   concerning God's eternal purposes, will follow from what was just now
   observed concerning God's universal providence; how it infallibly
   follows from what has been proved, that God orders all events, and the
   volitions of moral agents amongst others, by such a decisive disposal,
   that the events are infallibly connected with his disposal. For if God
   disposes all events, so that the infallible existence of the events is
   decided by his providence, then, doubtless, he thus orders and decides
   things knowingly, and on design. God does not do what he does, nor
   order what he orders, accidentally and unawares: either without or
   beside his intention. And if there be a foregoing design of doing and
   ordering as he does, this is the same with a purpose or decree. And as
   it has been shown, that nothing is new to God, in any respect, but all
   things are perfectly and equally in his view from eternity; hence it
   will follow, that his designs or purposes are not things formed anew,
   founded on any new views or appearances, but are all eternal purposes.
   And as it has been now shown, how the doctrine of determining
   efficacious grace certainly follows from things proved in the foregoing
   discourse; hence will necessarily follow the doctrine of particular,
   eternal, absolute election. For if men are made true saints, no
   otherwise than as God makes them so, and distinguishes them from
   others, by his efficacious power and influence, that decides and fixes
   the event; and God thus makes some saints, and not others, on design or
   purpose, and (as has been now observed) no designs of God are new; it
   follows, that God thus distinguished from others, all that ever become
   true saints, by his. eternal design or decree. 1 might also show, how
   God's certain foreknowledge must suppose an absolute decree, and how
   such a decree can be proved to a demonstration from it: but that this
   discourse may not be lengthened out too much, that must be omitted for
   the present. [161]

   From these things it will inevitably follow, that however Christ in
   some sense may be said to die for all, and to redeem all visible
   Christians, yea, the whole world, by his death; vet there must be
   something particular in the design of his death, with respect to such
   as he intended should actually be saved thereby. As appears by what has
   been now shown, God has the actual salvation or redemption of a certain
   number in his proper absolute design, and of a certain number only; and
   therefore such a design only can be prosecuted in any thing God does,
   in order to the salvation of men. God pursues a proper design of the
   salvation of the elect in giving Christ to die, and prosecutes such a
   design with respect to no other, most strictly speaking; for it is
   impossible, that God should prosecute any other design than only such
   as he has: he certainly does not, in the highest propriety and
   strictness of speech, pursue a design that he has not. And, indeed,
   such a particularity and limitation of redemption will as infallibly
   follow, from the doctrine of God s foreknowledge, as from that of the
   decree. For it is as impossible, in strictness of speech, that God
   should prosecute a design, or aim at a thing, which he at the same time
   most perfectly knows will not be accomplished, as that he should use
   endeavours for that which is beside his decree. [162]

   By the things which have been proved, are obviated some of the main
   objections against the doctrine of the infallible and necessary
   perseverance of saints, and some of the main foundations of this
   doctrine are established. The main prejudices of Arminians against this
   doctrine seem to be these; they suppose such a necessary, infallible
   perseverance to be repugnant to the freedom of the Will; that it must
   be owing to man's own self-determining power he first becomes virtuous
   and holy; and so, in like manner, it must be left a thing contingent,
   to be determined by the same freedom of Will, whether he Â«ill persevere
   in virtue and holiness; and that otherwise his continuing stedfast in
   faith and obedience would not be his virtue, or at all praiseworthy and
   rewardable; nor could his perseverance be properly the matter of divine
   commands, counsels, and promises, nor his apostasy be properly
   threatened, and men warned against it. Whereas, we find all these
   things in Scripture: there we find stedfastness and perseverance in
   true Christianity, represented as the virtue of the saints, spoken of
   as praiseworthy in them, and glorious rewards promised to it; and also
   find, that God makes it the subject of his commands, counsels, and
   promises; and the contrary, of threatenings and warnings. But the
   foundation of these objections has been removed, by showing that moral
   necessity and infallible certainty of events is not inconsistent with
   these things; and that, as to freedom of Will, lying in the power of
   the Will to determine itself, there neither is any such thing, nor is
   there any need of it, in order to virtue, reward, commands, counsels,
   &c.

   And as the doctrines of efficacious grace and absolute election do
   certainly follow from the things proved in the preceding discourse; so
   some of the main foundations of the doctrine of perseverance, are
   thereby established. If the beginning of true faith and holiness, and a
   man becoming a true saint at first, does not depend on the
   self-determining power of the Will, but on the determining efficacious
   grace of God; it may well be argued, that it is also with respect to
   men being continued saints, or persevering in faith and holiness. The
   conversion of a sinner being not owing to a man's self-determination,
   but to God's determination, and eternal election, which is absolute,
   and depending on the sovereign Will of God, and not on the free Will of
   man; as is evident from what has been said: and it being very evident
   from the Scriptures, that the eternal election of saints to faith and
   holiness, is also an election of them to eternal salvation; hence their
   appointment to salvation must also be absolute, and not depending on
   their contingent, self-determining Will. From all which it follows,
   that it is absolutely fixed in God's decree, that all true saints shall
   persevere to actual eternal salvation.

   But I must leave all these things to the consideration of the impartial
   reader; and when he has maturely weighed them, I would propose it to
   his consideration, whether many of the first reformers, and others that
   succeeded thorn, whom God in their day made the chief pillars of his
   church, and the greatest instruments of their deliverance from error
   and darkness, and of the support of the cause of piety among them, have
   not been injured, in the contempt with which they have been treated by
   many late writers, for their teaching and maintaining such doctrines as
   are commonly called Calvinistic. Indeed, some of these new writers, at
   the same time that they have represented the doctrines of these ancient
   and eminent divines, as in the highest degree ridiculous, and contrary
   to common sense, in an ostentation of a very generous charity, have
   allowed that they were honest well-meaning men: yea, it may be some of
   them, as though it were in great condescension and compassion to them,
   have allowed, that they did pretty well for the day in which they
   lived, and considering the great disadvantages they laboured under:
   when, at the same time, their manner of speaking has naturally and
   plainly suggested to the minds of their readers, that they were
   persons, who--through the lowness of their genius, and the greatness of
   the bigotry with which their minds were shackled, and their thoughts
   confined, living in the gloomy caves of superstition--fondly embraced,
   and demurely and zealously taught, the most '' absurd, silly, and
   monstrous opinions, worthy of the greatest contempt of gentlemen
   possessed of that noble and generous freedom of thought, which happily
   prevails in this age of light and inquiry. When, indeed, such is the
   case that we might, if so disposed, speak as big words as they, and on
   far better grounds. And really all the Arminians on earth might be
   challenged without arrogance or vanity, to make these principles of
   theirs, wherein they mainly differ from their fathers, whom they so
   much I despise, consistent with common sense; yea, and perhaps to
   produce any doctrine ever embraced by the blindest bigot of the church
   of Rome, or the most ignorant Mussulman, or extravagant enthusiast,
   that might be reduced to more demonstrable inconsistencies, and
   repugnancies to common sense, and to themselves; though their
   inconsistencies indeed may not lie so deep, or be so artfully veiled by
   a deceitful ambiguity of words, and an indeterminate signification of
   phrases. I will not deny, that these gentlemen, many of them, are men
   of great abilities, and have been helped to higher attainments in
   philosophy, than those ancient divines, and have done great service to
   the church of God in some respects: but I humbly conceive, that their
   differing from their fathers, with such magisterial assurance, in these
   points in divinity, must be owing to some other cause than superior
   wisdom.

   It may also be worthy of consideration, whether the great alteration
   which has been made in the state of things in our nation, and some
   other parts of the protestant world, in this and the past age, by
   exploding so generally Calvinistic doctrines--an alteration so often
   spoken of as worthy to be greatly rejoiced in by the friends of truth,
   learning, and virtue, as an instance of the great increase of light in
   the Christian church--be indeed a happy change, owing to any such cause
   as an increase of true knowledge and understanding in the things of
   religion; or whether there is not reason to fear, that it may be owing
   to some worse cause.

   And I desire it may be considered, whether the boldness of some writers
   may not deserve to be reflected on, who have not scrupled to say, that
   if these and those things are true, (which vet appear to be the
   demonstrable dictates of reason, as well as the certain dictates of the
   mouth of the Most High,) then God is unjust, and cruel, and guilty of
   manifest deceit and double dealing, and the like. Yea, some have gone
   so far as confidently to assert, that if any book which pretends to be
   Scripture, teaches such doctrines, that alone is sufficient warrant for
   mankind to reject it, as what cannot be the word of God. Some, who have
   not gone so far, have said, that if the Scripture seems to teach any
   such doctrines, so contrary to reason, we are obliged to find out some
   other interpretation of those texts, where such doctrines seem to be
   exhibited. Others express themselves yet more modestly: they express a
   tenderness and religious fear, lest they should receive and teach any
   thing that should seem to reflect on God's moral character, or be a
   disparagement to his methods of administration, in his moral
   government; and therefore express themselves as not daring to embrace
   some doctrines, though they seem to be delivered in Scripture,
   according to the more obvious and natural construction of the words.
   But indeed it would show a truer modesty and humility, if they would
   more entirely rely on God's wisdom and discernment, who knows
   infinitely better than we what is agreeable to his own perfections, and
   never intended to leave these matters to the decision of the wisdom and
   discernment of men; but by his own unerring instruction, to determine
   for us what the truth is; knowing how little our judgment is to be
   depended on, and how extremely prone vain and blind men are to err in
   such matters.

   The truth of the case is, that if the Scripture plainly taught the
   opposite doctrines to those that are so much stumbled at, viz. the
   Arminian doctrine of free Will, and others depending thereon, it would
   be the greatest of all difficulties that attend the Scriptures,
   incomparably greater than its containing any, even the most mysterious,
   of those doctrines of the first reformers, which our late freethinkers
   have so superciliously exploded. Indeed, it is a glorious argument of
   the divinity of the Holy Scriptures, that they teach such doctrines,
   which in one age and another, through the blindness of men's minds, and
   strong prejudices of their hearts, are rejected, as most absurd and
   unreasonable, by the wise and great men of the world; which yet, when
   they are most carefully and strictly examined, appear to be exactly
   agreeable to the most demonstrable, certain, and natural dictates of
   reason. By such things it appears, that "the foolishness of God is
   wiser than men. (1 Cor. i. 19, 20.) "For it is written, I will destroy
   the wisdom of the wise; I will bring to nothing the understanding of
   the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the
   disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this
   world?" And as it was in time past, so probably it will be in time to
   come, as it is also written, ( ver. 27-29.) "But God hath chosen the
   foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God hath chosen
   the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty;
   and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God
   chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that
   are: that no flesh should glory in his presence." Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [160] A writer of the present age, whom I have several times had
   occasion to mention, speaks once and again of those who hold the
   doctrine of Necessity, as scarcely worthy of the name of philosophers.
   I do not know, whether he has respect to any particular notion of
   necessity, that some may have maintained; and, if so, what doctrine of
   necessity it is that he means. Whether I am worthy of the name of a
   philosopher, or not, would be a question little to the present purpose.
   If any, and ever so many, should deny it. I should not think it worth
   the while to enter into a dispute on that question: Though at the same
   time I might expect some better answer should be given to the arguments
   brought for the truth of the doctrine I maintain; and I might further
   reasonably desire, that it might be considered, whether it does not
   become those, who are truly worthy of the name of philosophers, to be
   sensible, that there is a difference between argument and contempt,
   yea, and a difference between the contemptibleness of the person that
   argues, and the inconclusiveness of the arguments he offers.

   [161] Certain foreknowledge does imply some necessity. But our author
   is not sufficiently guarded, or else not sufficiently explicit, when he
   says, that foreknowledge must suppose an absolute decree. For
   certainty, or hypothetical necessity, may arise from the nature of
   things, and from negative causes. as well as from a decree. If. indeed,
   the remark be limited to the subject immediately preceding, it is an
   important truth.--W.

   [162] The terms design and endeavours are not sufficiently
   discriminating. It is here supposed that it is unworthy of God to use
   endeavours which are beside his decree, or to prosecute a design which
   he knows will not be accomplished. Is it not a matter of plain fact
   that he uses endeavours which are beside his decree, and prosecutes a
   design which he knows will not be accomplished, through the whole
   system of legislation and government? Is it not the very design of
   legislation and government to prevent crimes as well as to punish them,
   and to promote obedience and conformity to law? Legislative design,
   therefore, is not accomplished in the commission of crimes, otherwise
   the legislator, as such, could not find fault for breach of law. Our
   Lord used endeavours with the inhabitants of Jerusalem, &c. beside his
   decree, yet with perfect propriety. If we keep in mind that the divine
   Will subsists under two relations, according to the two-fold state of
   man, who is at once a subject of decree and a subject of government, we
   shall see the propriety of calling it decretive and rectoral.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    APPENDIX.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XV.

   Containing Remarks on the Essays on the Principles of Morality and
   Natural Religion, in a Letter to a minister of the Church of Scotland.
   [163]

   Rev. Sir,

   The intimations you have given me of the use which has by some been
   made of what I have written on the Freedom of the Will, &c. to
   vindicate what is said on the subject of liberty and necessity, by the
   author of the Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural
   Religion, has occasioned my reading this author's Essay on that subject
   with particular care and attention. And I think it must be evident to
   every one, that has read both his Essay and my Inquiry, that our
   schemes are exceedingly different from each other. The wide difference
   appears particularly in the following things.

   This author supposes, that such a necessity takes place with respect to
   all men's actions, as is inconsistent with liberty, [164] and plainly
   denies that men have any liberty in acting. Thus, (p. 168.) after he
   had been speaking of the necessity of our determinations, as connected
   with motives, he concludes with saying, "In short, if motives are not
   under our power or direction, which is confessedly the fact, we can at
   bottom have--no liberty." Whereas, I have abundantly expressed it as my
   mind, that man, in his moral actions, has true liberty: and that the
   moral necessity which universally takes place, is not in the least
   inconsistent with any thing that is properly called liberty, and with
   the utmost liberty that can be desired, or that can possibly exist or
   be conceived of.

   I find that some are apt to think, that in that kind of moral necessity
   of men's volitions, which I suppose to be universal, at least some
   degree of liberty denied; that though it be true I allow a sort of
   liberty, yet those who maintain a self-determining power in the Will,
   and a liberty of contingence and indifference, hold a higher sort of
   freedom than I do: but I think this is certainly a great mistake.

   Liberty, as I have explained it, is the power, opportunity, or
   advantage that any one has to do as he pleases, or conducting himself,
   in any respect, according to his pleasure; without considering how his
   pleasure comes to be as it is. It is demonstrable, and, I think, has
   been demonstrated, that no necessity of men's volitions that I
   maintain, is inconsistent with this liberty: and I think it is
   impossible for any one to rise higher in his conceptions of liberty
   than this: If any imagine they desire, and that they conceive of, a
   higher and greater liberty than this, they are deceived, and delude
   themselves with confused ambiguous words, instead of ideas. If any one
   should here say, "Yes, I conceive of a freedom above and beyond the
   liberty a man has of conducting himself in any respect as he pleases,
   viz. a liberty of choosing as he pleases." Such an one, if he
   reflected, would either blush or laugh at his own proposal. For, is not
   choosing as he pleases, conducting himself, in some respect, according
   to his pleasure, and still without determining how he came by that
   pleasure? If he says, "Yes, I came by that pleasure by my own choice."
   If he be a man of common sense, by this time he will see his own
   absurdity: for he must needs see that his notion or conception, even of
   this liberty, does not contain any judgment or conception how he comes
   by that choice, which first determines his pleasure, or which
   originally fixed his own Will respecting the affair. Or if any shall
   say, "That a man exercises liberty in this, even in determining his own
   choice, but not as he pleases, or not in consequence of any choice,
   preference, or inclination of his own, but by a determination arising
   contingently out of a state of absolute indifference;" this is not
   rising higher in his conception of liberty: as such a determination of
   the Will would not be a voluntary determination of it. Surely he that
   places liberty in a power of doing something not according to his own
   choice, or from his choice, has not a higher notion of it, than he that
   places it in doing as he pleases, or acting from his own election. If
   there were a power in the mind to determine itself, but not by its
   choice or according to its pleasure, what advantage would it give? and
   what liberty, worth contending for, would be exercised in it? Therefore
   no Arminian, Pelagian, or Epicurean, can rise higher in his conceptions
   of liberty, than the notion of it which I have explained: which notion
   is perfectly consistent with the whole of that necessity of men's
   actions, which I suppose takes place. And I scruple not to say, it is
   beyond all their wits to invent a higher notion, or form a higher
   imagination of liberty; let them talk of sovereignty of the Will,
   self-determining power, self-motion, self-direction, arbitrary
   decision, liberty ad utrumvis, power of choosing differently in given
   cases, &c. &c. as long as they will. It is apparent that these men, in
   their strenuous dispute about these things, aim at they know not what,
   fighting for something they have no conception of, substituting a
   number of confused unmeaning words, instead of things, and instead of
   thoughts. They may be challenged clearly to explain what they would
   have; but they never can answer the challenge.

   The author of the Essays, through his whole Essay on Liberty and
   Necessity, goes on the supposition, that, in order to the being of real
   liberty, a man must have a freedom that is opposed to moral necessity:
   and yet he supposes, (p. 175.) that "such a liberty must signify a
   power in the mind of acting without and against motives, a power of
   acting without any view, purpose, or design, and even of acting in
   contradiction to our own desires and aversions, and to all our
   principles of action; and is an absurdity altogether inconsistent with
   a rational nature." Now, who ever imagined such a liberty as this, a
   higher sort or degree of freedom, than a liberty of following one's own
   views and purposes, and acting agreeably to his own inclinations and
   passions! Who will ever reasonably suppose, that a liberty which is an
   absurdity altogether inconsistent with a rational nature, is above that
   which is consistent with the nature of a rational, intelligent,
   designing agent.

   The author of the Essays seems to suppose such a necessity to take
   place, as is inconsistent with some supposable power of arbitrary
   choice, [165] or that there is some liberty conceivable, whereby men's
   own actions might be more properly in their power, [166] and by which
   events might be more dependent on ourselves: [167] contrary to what I
   suppose to be evident in my Inquiry. What way can be imagined, of our
   actions being more in our power, from ourselves, or dependent on
   ourselves, than their being from our power to fulfil our own choice, to
   act from our own inclination, pursue our own views, and execute our own
   designs? Certainly, to be able to act thus, is as properly having our
   actions in our power, and dependent on ourselves, as a being liable to
   be the subject of acts and events contingently and fortuitously,
   without desire, view, purpose, or design, or any principle of action
   within ourselves; as we must be, according to this author's own
   declared sense, if our actions are performed with that liberty that is
   opposed, to moral necessity.

   This author seems every where to suppose, that necessity, most properly
   so called, attends all men's actions; and that the terms, necessary,
   unavoidable, impossible, &c. are equally applicable to the case of
   moral and natural necessity. In p. 173. he says, The idea of necessary
   and unavoidable equally agrees, both to moral and physical necessity.
   And in p. 184. All things that fall out in the natural and moral world
   are, alike necessary. P. 174. This inclination and choice is
   unavoidable, caused or occasioned by the prevailing motive. In this
   lies the necessity of our actions, that, in such circumstances, it was
   impossible we could act otherwise. He often expresses himself in like
   manner elsewhere, speaking in strong terms of men's actions as
   unavoidable, what they cannot forbear, having no power over their own
   actions, the order of them being unalterably fixed, and inseparably
   linked together, &c. [168]

   On the contrary, I have largely declared, that the connexion between
   antecedent things and consequent ones, which takes place with regard to
   the acts of men's Wills, which is called moral necessity, is called by
   the name of Necessity improperly; and that all such terms as must,
   cannot, impossible, unable, irresistible, unavoidable, invincible, &c.
   when applied here, are not applied in their proper signification, and
   are either used nonsensically, and with perfect insignificance, or in a
   sense quite diverse from their original and proper meaning, and their
   use in common speech: and, that such a necessity as attends the acts of
   men's Will, is more properly called certainty, than necessity; it being
   no other than the certain connexion between the subject and predicate
   of the proposition which affirms their existence.

   Agreeably to what is observed in my Inquiry, I think it is evidently
   owing to a strong prejudice, arising from an insensible habitual
   perversion and misapplication of such like terms, as necessary,
   impossible, unable, unavoidable, invincible, &c. that they are ready to
   think, that to suppose a certain connexion of men's volitions, without
   any foregoing motives or inclinations, or any preceding moral influence
   whatsoever, is truly and properly to suppose a strong irrefragable
   chain of causes and effects, as stand in the way of, and makes utterly
   vain, opposite desires and endeavours, like immovable and impenetrable
   mountains of brass; and impedes our liberty like walls of adamant,
   pates of brass, and bars of iron: whereas, all such representations
   suggest ideas as far from the truth, as the east is from the west.
   Nothing that I maintain, supposes that men are at all hindered by any
   fatal necessity, from doing, and even willing and choosing, as they
   please, with full freedom; yea, with the highest degree of liberty that
   ever was thought of, or that ever could possibly enter into the heart
   of any man to conceive. I know it is in vain to endeavour to make some
   persons believe this, or at least fully and steadily to believe it: for
   if it be demonstrated to them, still the old prejudice remains, which
   has been long fixed by the use of the terms necessary, must, cannot,
   impossible, &c. the association with these terms of certain ideas,
   inconsistent with liberty, is not broken; and the judgment is
   powerfully warped by it; as a thing that has been long bent and grown
   stiff, if it be straightened, will return to its former cavity again
   and again.

   The author of the Essays most manifestly supposes, that if men had the
   truth concerning the real necessity of all their actions clearly in
   view, they would not appear to themselves, or one another, as at all
   praiseworthy or culpable, or under any moral obligation, or accountable
   for their actions: [169] which supposes, that men are not to be blamed
   or praised for any of their actions, and are not under any obligations,
   nor are truly accountable for any thing they do, by reason of this
   necessity; which is very contrary to what I have endeavoured to prove,
   throughout the third part of my Inquiry. I humbly conceive it is there
   shown, that this is so far from the truth, that the moral necessity of
   men's actions which truly take place, is requisite to the being of
   virtue and vice, or any thing praiseworthy or culpable: that the
   liberty of indifference and contingence, which is advanced in
   opposition to that necessity, is inconsistent with the being of these;
   as it would suppose that men are not determined in what they do, by any
   virtuous or vicious principles, nor act from any motives, intentions,
   or aims whatsoever; or have any end, either good or bad, in acting. And
   is it not remarkable, that this author should suppose, that, in order
   to men's actions truly having any desert, they must be performed
   without any view, purpose, design, or desire, or any principle of
   action, or any thing agreeable to a rational nature? as it will appear
   that he does, if we compare, p. 206, 207, with p. 175.

   The author of the Essays supposes, that God has deeply implanted in
   man's nature a strong and invincible apprehension, or feeling, as he
   calls it, of a liberty, and contingence of his own actions, opposite to
   that necessity which truly attends them; and which in truth does not
   agree with real fact, [170] is not agreeable to strict philosophic
   truth, [171] is contradictory to the truth of things, [172] and which
   truth contradicts, [173] not tallying with the real plan: [174] and
   that therefore such feelings are deceitful, [175] and are in reality of
   the delusive kind, [176] He speaks of them as a wise delusion, [177] as
   nice artificial feelings, merely that conscience may have a commanding
   power: [178] meaning, plainly, that these feelings are a cunning
   artifice of the Author of nature, to make men believe they are free,
   when they are not. [179] He supposes that, by these feelings, the moral
   world has a disguised appearance, [180] &c. He supposes that all
   self-approbation, and all remorse of conscience, all commendation or
   condemnation of ourselves or others, all sense of desert, and all that
   is connected with this way of thinking, all the ideas which at present
   are suggested by the words ought, should, arise from this delusion, and
   would entirely vanish without it. [181]

   All which is very contrary to what I have abundantly insisted on and
   endeavoured to demonstrate in my Inquiry; where I have largely shown,
   that it is agreeable to the natural sense of mankind, that the moral
   necessity or certainty that attends men's actions, is consistent with
   praise and blame, reward and punishment; [182] and that it is agreeable
   to our natural notions, that moral evil, with its desert of dislike and
   abhorrence, and all its other ill-deservings, consists in a certain
   deformity in the nature of the dispositions and acts of the heart, and
   not in the evil of something else, diverse from these supposed to be
   their cause or occasion. [183]

   I might well ask here, whether any one is to be found in the world of
   mankind, who is conscious to a sense or feeling, naturally and deeply
   rooted in his mind, that, in order to a man's performing any action
   that is praiseworthy or blameworthy, he must exercise a liberty that
   implies and signifies a power of acting without any motive, view,
   design, desire, or principle of action? For such a liberty, this author
   supposes, that must be which is opposed to moral necessity, as I have
   already observed.

   Supposing a man should actually do good, independent of desire, aim,
   inducement, principle, or end, is it a dictate of invincible natural
   sense, that his act is more meritorious or praiseworthy, than if he had
   performed it for some good end, and had been governed in it by good
   principles and natives? and so I might ask, on the contrary, with
   respect to evil actions. [184]

   The author of the Essays supposes that the liberty without necessity of
   which we have a natural feeling, implies contingence; and, speaking of
   this contingence, be sometimes calls it by the name of chance. And it
   is evident, that his notion of it, or rather what he says about it,
   implies things happening loosely, fortuitously, by accident, and
   without a cause. [185] Now I conceive the slightest reflection may be
   sufficient to satisfy any one, that such a contingence of men's
   actions, according to our natural sense, is so far from being essential
   to the morality or merit of those actions, that it would destroy it;
   and that, on the contrary, the dependence of our actions on such
   causes, as inward inclinations, incitements, and ends, is essential to
   the being of it. Natural sense teaches men, when they see any thing
   done by others of a good or evil tendency, to inquire what their
   intention was, what principles and views they were moved by, in order
   to judge low far they are to be justified or condemned; and not to
   determine, that, in order to their being approved or blamed at all, the
   action must be performed altogether fortuitously, proceeding from
   nothing, arising from no cause. Concerning this matter, I have fully
   expressed my mind in the Inquiry.

   If the liberty of which we have a natural sense, as necessary to
   desert, consists in the mind's self-determination, without being
   determined by previous inclinations or motive, then indifference is
   essential to it, yea absolute indifference; as is observed in my
   Inquiry. But men naturally have no notion of any such liberty as this,
   as essential to the morality or demerit of their actions; but on the
   contrary, such a liberty, if it were possible, would be inconsistent
   with our natural notions of desert, as is largely shown in the Inquiry.
   [186] If it be agreeable to natural sense, that men must be indifferent
   in determining their own actions; then, according to the same, the more
   they are determined by inclination, either good or bad, the less they
   have of desert: the more good actions are performed from good
   disposition, the less praiseworthy; and the more evil deeds are from
   evil dispositions, the less culpable; and, in general, the more men's
   actions are from their hearts, the less they are to be commended or
   condemned: which all must know is very contrary to natural sense.

   Moral necessity is owing to the power and government of the inclination
   of the heart, either habitual or occasional, excited by motive: but,
   according to natural and common sense, the more a man does any thing
   with full inclination of heart, the more is it to be charged to his
   account for his condemnation, if it be an ill action, and the more to
   be ascribed to him for his praise, if it be good.

   If the mind were determined to evil actions by contingence, from a
   state of indifference, then either there would be no fault in them, or
   else the fault would be in being so perfectly indifferent, that the
   mind was equally liable to a bad or good determination. And if this
   indifference be liberty, then the very essence of the blame or fault
   would lie in the liberty itself, or the wickedness would, primarily and
   summarily, be in being a free agent. If there were no fault in being
   indifferent, then there would be no fault in the determination being
   agreeable to such a state of indifference: that is, there could be no
   fault found, that opposite determinations actually happen to take place
   indifferently, sometimes good and sometimes bad, as contingence governs
   and decides. And if it be a fault to be indifferent to good and evil,
   then such indifference is no indifference to good and evil, but is a
   determination to evil, or to a fault; and such an indifferent
   disposition would be an evil disposition, tendency, or determination of
   mind.

   So inconsistent are these notions of liberty, as essential to praise or
   blame. The author of the Essays supposes men's natural delusive sense
   of a liberty of contingence, to be, in truth, the foundation of all the
   labour, care, and industry of mankind; [187] and that if men's
   "practical ideas had been formed on the plan of universal necessity,
   the ignava ratio, the inactive doctrine of the Stoics, would have
   followed; and that there would have been no room for forethought about
   futurity, or any sort of industry and care:" [188] plainly implying,
   that, in this case, men would see and know that all their industry and
   care signified nothing, was in vain, and to no purpose, or of no
   benefit; events being fixed in an irrefragable chain, and not at all
   depending on their care and endeavour; as he explains himself,
   particularly, in the instance of men's use of means to prolong life:
   [189] not only very contrary to what I largely maintain in my Inquiry,
   [190] but also very inconsistently with his own scheme, in what he
   supposes of the ends for which God has so deeply implanted this
   deceitful feeling in man's nature; in which he manifestly supposes
   men's care and industry not to be in vain and of no benefit, but of
   great use, yea of absolute necessity, in order to their obtaining the
   most important ends and necessary purposes of human life, and to fulfil
   the ends of action to the best advantage; as he largely declares. [191]
   Now, how shall these things be reconciled? That, if men had a clear
   view of real truth, they would see that there was no room for their
   care and industry, because they would see it to be in vain, and of no
   benefit; and yet that God, by having a clear view of real truth, sees
   their being excited to care and industry will be of excellent use to
   mankind, and greatly for the benefit of the world, yea absolutely
   necessary in order to it: and that therefore the great wisdom and
   goodness of God to men appears, in artfully contriving to put them on
   care and industry for their good, which good could not be obtained
   without them; and yet both these things are maintained at once, and in
   the same sentences and words, by this author. The very reason he gives,
   why God has put this deceitful feeling into men, contradicts and
   destroys itself; that God in his great goodness to men gave them such a
   deceitful feeling, because it was very useful and necessary for them,
   and greatly for their benefit, or excites them to care and industry for
   their own good, which care and industry is useful and necessary to that
   end; and yet the very thing for which, as a reason, this great benefit
   of care and industry is given, is God's deceiving men in this very
   point, in making them think their care and industry to be of great
   benefit to them, when indeed it is of none at all; and if they saw the
   real truth, they would see all their endeavours to be wholly useless,
   that there was no room for them, and that the event does not at all
   depend upon them. [192]

   And besides, what this author says plainly implies, (as appears by what
   has been already observed,) that it is necessary men should be
   deceived, by being made to believe that future events are contingent,
   and their own future actions free, with such a freedom, as signifies
   that their actions are not the fruit of their own desires, or designs,
   but altogether contingent, fortuitous, and without a cause. But how
   should a notion of liberty, consisting in accident or loose chance,
   encourage care and industry? I should think it would rather entirely
   discourage every thing of this nature. For surely, if our actions do
   not depend on our desires and designs, then they do not depend on our
   endeavours, flowing from our desires and designs. This author himself
   seems to suppose, that if men had, indeed, such a liberty of
   contingence, it would render all endeavours to determine or move men's
   future volitions, in vain: he says, that, in this case, to exhort, to
   instruct, to promise, or to threaten, would be to no purpose. [193]
   Why? Because (as he himself gives the reason) "then our Will would be
   capricious and arbitrary, and we should be thrown loose altogether, and
   our arbitrary power could do us good or ill only by accident." But if
   such a loose fortuitous state would render vain others' endeavours upon
   us, for the same reason would it make useless our endeavours on
   ourselves: for events that are truly contingent and accidental, and
   altogether loose from, and independent of, all foregoing causes, are
   independent on every foregoing cause within ourselves, as well as in
   others.

   I suppose that it is so far from being true, that our minds are
   naturally possessed with a notion of such liberty as this, so strongly,
   that it is impossible to root it out, that indeed men have no such
   notion of liberty at all, and that it is utterly impossible, by any
   means whatsoever, to implant or introduce such a notion into the mind
   As no such notions as imply self-contradiction and self-abolition can
   subsist in the mind, as I have shown in my Inquiry; I think a mature
   sensible consideration of the matter is sufficient to satisfy any one,
   that even the greatest and most learned advocates themselves for
   liberty of indifference and self-determination, have no such notion;
   and that indeed they mean something wholly inconsistent with, and
   directly subversive of, what they strenuously affirm, and earnestly
   contend for. By a man having a power of determining his own Will, they
   plainly mean a power of determining his Will as he pleases, or as he
   chooses; which supposes that the mind has a choice, prior to its going
   about to confirm any action or determination to it. And if they mean
   that they determine even the original or prime choice, by their own
   pleasure or choice, as the thing that causes and directs it; I scruple
   not most boldly to affirm, that they speak they know not what, and that
   of which they have no manner of idea; because no such contradictory
   notion can come into, or have a moment's subsistence in, the mind of
   any man living, as an original or first choice being caused, or brought
   into being, by choice. After all, they say, they have no higher or
   other conception of liberty, than that vulgar notion of it, which I
   contend for, viz. a man's having power or opportunity to do as he
   chooses: or if they had a notion that every act of choice was
   determined by choice, yet it would destroy their notion of the
   contingence of choice; for then no one act of choice would arise
   contingently, or from a state of indifference, but every individual
   act, in all the series, would arise from foregoing bias or preference,
   and from a cause predetermining and fixing its existence, which
   introduces at once such a chain of causes and effects, each preceding
   link decisively fixing the following, as they would by all means avoid.

   And such kind of delusion and self-contradiction as this, does not
   arise in men's minds by nature: it is not owing to any natural feeling
   which God has strongly fixed in the mind and nature of man; but to
   false philosophy, and strong prejudice, from a deceitful abuse of
   words. It is artificial; not in the sense of the author of the Essays,
   supposing it to be a deceitful artifice of God; but artificial as
   opposed to natural, and as owing to an artificial deceitful management
   of terms, to darken and confound the mind. Men have no such thing when
   they first begin to exercise reason; but must have a great deal of time
   to blind themselves with metaphysical confusion, before they can
   embrace, and rest in, such definitions of liberty as are given, and
   imagine they understand them.

   On the whole, I humbly conceive, that whosoever will give himself the
   trouble of weighing, what I have offered to consideration in my
   Inquiry, must be sensible, that such a moral necessity of men's actions
   as I maintain, is not at all inconsistent with any liberty that any
   creature has, or can have, as a free, accountable, moral agent, and
   subject of moral government; and that this moral necessity is so far
   from being inconsistent with praise and blame, and the benefit and use
   of men's own care and labour, that, on the contrary, it implies the
   very ground and reason, why men's actions are to be ascribed to them as
   their own, in such a manner as to infer desert, praise and blame,
   approbation and remorse of conscience, reward and punishment; and that
   it establishes the moral system of the universe, and God's moral
   government, in every respect, with the proper use of motives,
   exhortations, commands, counsels, promises, and threatenings; and the
   use and benefit of endeavours, care and industry. There is therefore no
   need that the strict philosophic truth should be at all concealed; nor
   is there any danger in contemplation and profound discovery in these
   things. So far from this that the truth in this matter is of vast
   importance, and extremely needful to be known; and the more clearly and
   perfectly the real fact is known, and the more constantly it is in
   view, the better. More particularly, that the clear and full knowledge
   of that, which is the true system of the universe, in these respects,
   would greatly establish the doctrines which teach the true christian
   scheme of divine administration in the city of God, and the gospel of
   Jesus Christ, in its most important articles. Indeed these things never
   can be well established, and the opposite errors--so subversive of the
   whole gospel, which at this day so greatly and generally prevail--be
   well confuted, or the arguments by which they are maintained, answered,
   till these points are settled. While this is not done, it is, to me,
   beyond doubt, that the friends of those great gospel truths, will but
   poorly maintain their controversy with the adversaries of those truths:
   they will be obliged often to shuffle, hide, and turn their backs; and
   the latter will have a strong fort, from whence they never can be
   driven, and weapons to use, from which those whom they oppose will find
   no shield to screen themselves; and they will always puzzle, confound,
   and keep under the friends of sound doctrine; and glory, and vaunt
   themselves in their advantage over them; and carry their affairs with a
   high hand, as they have done already for a long time past.

   I conclude, Sir, with asking your pardon for troubling you with so much
   in vindication of myself from the imputation of advancing a scheme of
   necessity, like that of the author of the Essays on the Principles of
   Morality and Natural Religion. Considering that what I have said is not
   only in vindication of myself, but, as I think, of the most important
   articles of moral philosophy and religion; I trust in what I know of
   your candour, that you will excuse,

   Your obliged friend and brother,

   J. Edwards.

   Stockbridge, July 25th, 1757
     __________________________________________________________________

   [163] The "Essays" to which this Appendix relates, were the production
   of Lord Kaimes.

   [164] P. 160, 161, 164, 165, and many other places.

   [165] P. 169.

   [166] P. 191, 195, 197, 206.

   [167] P. 183.

   [168] P. 180, 188, 193, 194, 195, 197, 198, 199, 205, 206.

   [169] P. 207, 209, and other places.

   [170] P. 200.

   [171] P. 152.

   [172] P. 183.

   [173] P. 186.

   [174] P. 205.

   [175] P.203, 204, 211.

   [176] P. 183.

   [177] P. 209.

   [178] P. 211.

   [179] P. 153.

   [180] P. 214.

   [181] P. 160, 194, 199, 205, 206, 207, 210.

   [182] P. Inquiry Part IV. Sect. 4. throughout.

   [183] Idem. Part IV. Sect. 1. throughout.

   [184] See this matter illustrated in my Inquiry. Part IV. Sect. 4.

   [185] P. 156-159, Sect. 6 and 7.

   [186] Especially in Part III.

   [187] P. 184.

   [188] P. 189.

   [189] P. 184, 185.

   [190] P. Especially Part IV. Sect. 5.

   [191] P. 188-192 and many other places.

   [192] P. 188, 189, &c.

   [193] * P. 178, 213, 214.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

DISSERTATION

        CONCERNING

  THE END FOR WHICH GOD MADE THE WORLD
     __________________________________________________________________

    PREFACE BY THE FIRST EDITOR.

   The Author had designed these Dissertations [194] for the public view;
   and wrote them out as they now appear: though it is probable, that if
   his life had been spared, he would have revised them, and rendered them
   in some respects more complete. Some new sentiments, here and there,
   might probably have been added; and some passages brightened with
   further illustrations. This may be conjectured from some brief hints or
   sentiments minuted down, on loose papers, found in the manuscripts.

   But those sentiments concisely sketched out, which, it is thought, the
   author intended to enlarge, and digest into the body of the work,
   cannot be so amplified by any other hand, as to do justice to the
   author: it is therefore probably best that nothing of this kind should
   be attempted.

   As these Dissertations were more especially designed for the learned
   and inquisitive, it is expected that the judicious and candid will not
   be disposed to object, that the manner in which these subjects are
   treated is something above the level of common readers. For though a
   superficial way of discourse and loose harangues may well enough suit
   some subjects, and answer some valuable purposes; yet other subjects
   demand more closeness and accuracy. And if an author should neglect to
   do justice to a subject, for fear that the simpler sort should not
   fully understand him, he might expect to be deemed a trifler by the
   more intelligent.

   Our author had a rare talent to penetrate deep in search of truth; to
   take an extensive survey of a subject, and look through it into remote
   consequences. Hence many theorems, that appeared hard and barren to
   others, were to him pleasant and fruitful fields, where his mind would
   expatiate with peculiar ease, profit, and entertainment. Those studies,
   which to some are too fatiguing to the mind, and wearying to the
   constitution, were to him but a natural play of genius, and which his
   mind without labour would freely and spontaneously perform. A close and
   conclusive way of reasoning upon a controversial point was easy and
   natural to him.

   This may serve, it is conceived, to account for his usual manner of
   treating abstruse and controverted subjects, which some have thought
   has been too metaphysical. But the truth is, that his critical method
   of looking through the nature of his subject,--his accuracy and
   precision in canvassing truth, comparing ideas, drawing consequences,
   pointing out and exposing absurdities,--naturally led him to reduce the
   evidence in favour of truth into the form of demonstration: which,
   doubtless, where it can be obtained, is the most eligible, and by far
   the most satisfying to great and noble minds. And though some readers
   may find the labour hard to keep pace with the writer, in the advances
   he makes, where the ascent is arduous; yet in general all was easy to
   him: such was his peculiar love and discernment of truth, and natural
   propensity to search after it. His own ideas were clear to him, where
   some readers have thought them obscure. Thus many things in the works
   of Newton and Locke, which appear either quite unintelligible, or very
   obscure to the illiterate, were clear and bright to those illustrious
   authors, and their learned readers.

   The subjects here handled are sublime and important. The end which God
   had in view in creating the world, was doubtless worthy of him; and
   consequently the most excellent and glorious possible. This therefore
   must be worthy to be known by all the intelligent creation, as
   excellent in itself, and worthy of their pursuit. And as true virtue
   distinguishes the inhabitants of heaven, and all the happy candidates
   for that world of glory, from all others; there cannot surely be a more
   interesting subject.

   The notions which some men entertain concerning God's end in creating
   the world, and concerning true virtue, in our late author's opinion,
   have a natural tendency to corrupt Christianity, and to destroy the
   gospel of our divine Redeemer. It was therefore, no doubt, in the
   exercise of a pious concern for the honour and glory of God, and a
   tender respect to the best interests of his fellow-men, that this
   devout and learned writer undertook the following work.--May the Father
   of lights smile upon the pious and benevolent aims and labours of his
   servant, and crown them with his blessing!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [194] This preface was originally prefixed to the following
   Dissertations, "concerning the End for which God created the World, and
   the Nature of True Virtue," in one volume.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

DISSERTATION, &C.

  INTRODUCTION

   CONTAINING EXPLANATIONS OF TERMS AND GENERAL POSITION

   To avoid all confusion in our inquiries concerning the end for which
   God created the world, a distinction should be observed between the
   chief end for which an agent performs any work, and the ultimate end.
   These two phrases are not always precisely of the same signification:
   and though the chief end be always an ultimate end, yet every ultimate
   end is not always a chief end. A chief end is opposite to an inferior
   end: an ultimate end is opposite to a subordinate end.

   A subordinate end is what an agent aims at, not at all upon its own
   account, but wholly on the account of a further end, of which it is
   considered as a means. Thus when a man that goes a journey to obtain a
   medicine to restore his health, the obtaining of that medicine is his
   subordinate end; because it is not an end that he values at all upon
   its own account, but wholly as a means of a further end, viz. his
   health. Separate the medicine from that further end, and it is not at
   all desired.

   An ultimate end is that which the agent seeks, in what he does, for its
   own sake; what he loves, values, and takes pleasure in on its own
   account, and not merely as a means of a further end. As when a man
   loves the taste of some particular sort of fruit, and is at pains and
   cost to obtain it, for the sake of the pleasure of that taste which he
   values upon its own account, as he loves his own pleasure; and not
   merely for the sake of any other good, which he supposes his enjoying
   that pleasure will be the means of.

   Some ends are subordinate, not only as they are subordinated to an
   ultimate end; but also to another end that is itself but subordinate.
   Yea, there may be a succession or chain of many subordinate ends, one
   dependent on another, one sought for another; before you come to any
   thing that the agent aims at, and seeks for its own sake. As when a man
   sells a garment to get money--to buy tools--to till his land--to obtain
   a crop--to supply him with food--to gratify the appetite. And he seeks
   to gratify his appetite, on its own account, as what is grateful in
   itself. Here the end of his selling his garment to get money, is only a
   subordinate end; and it is not only subordinate to the ultimate
   end--gratifying his appetite--but to a nearer end--buying husbandry
   tools; and his obtaining these is only a subordinate end, being only
   for the sake of tilling land. And the tillage of land is an end not
   sought on its own account, but for the sake of the crop to be produced;
   and the crop produced is an end sought only for the sake of making
   bread; and bread is sought for the sake of gratifying the appetite.

   Here gratifying the appetite is called the ultimate end; because it is
   the last in the chain where a man's aim rests, obtaining in that the
   thing finally aimed at. So whenever a man comes to that in which his
   desire terminates and rests, it being something valued on its own
   account, then he comes to an ultimate end, let the chain be longer or
   shorter; yea, if there be but one link or one step that he takes before
   he comes to this end. As when a man that loves honey puts it into his
   mouth, for the sake of the pleasure of the taste, without aiming at any
   thing further. So that an end which an agent has in view, may be both
   his immediate and his ultimate end; his next and his last end. That end
   which is sought for the sake of itself, and not for the sake of a
   further end, is an ultimate end; there the aim of the agent stops and
   rests.

   A thing sought may have the nature of an ultimate, and also of a
   subordinate end; as it may be sought partly on its own account, and
   partly for the sake of a further end. Thus a man, in what he does, may
   seek the love and respect of a particular person, partly on its own
   account, because it is in itself agreeable to men to be the objects of
   others' esteem and love; and partly, because he hopes, through the
   friendship of that person, to have his assistance in other affairs; and
   so to be put under advantage for obtaining further ends.

   A chief end, which is opposite to an inferior end, is something diverse
   from an ultimate end; it is most valued, and therefore most sought
   after by the agent in what he does. It is evident, that to be an end
   more valued than another end, is not exactly the same thing as to be an
   end valued ultimately, or for its own sake. This will appear, if it be
   considered,

   1. That two different ends may be both ultimate, and yet not be chief
   ends. They may be both valued for their own sake, and both sought in
   the same work or acts; and yet one valued more highly, and sought more
   than another. Thus a man may go a journey to obtain two different
   benefits or enjoyments, both which may be agreeable to him in
   themselves considered; and yet one may be much more agreeable than the
   other; and so be what he sets his heart chiefly upon. Thus a man may go
   a journey, partly to obtain the possession and enjoyment of a bride
   that is very dear to him; and partly to gratify his curiosity in
   looking in a telescope, or some new-invented and extraordinary optic
   glass; and the one not properly subordinate to the other; and therefore
   both may be ultimate ends. But yet obtaining his beloved bride may be
   his chief end; and the benefit of the optic glass his inferior end.

   2. An ultimate end is not always the chief end, because some
   subordinate ends may be more valued and sought after than some ultimate
   ends. Thus, for instance, a man may aim at two things in his journey;
   one, to visit his friends, and another, to receive a large sum of
   money. The latter may be but a subordinate end; he may not value the
   silver and gold on their own account, but only for pleasure,
   gratification, and honour; the money is valued only as a means of the
   other. But yet, obtaining the money may be more valued, and so is a
   higher end of his journey than the pleasure of seeing his friends;
   though the latter is valued on its own account, and so is an ultimate
   end.

   But here several things may be noted:

   First, When it is said, that some subordinate ends may be more valued
   than some ultimate ends, it is not supposed that ever a subordinate end
   is more valued than that to which it is subordinate. For that reason it
   is called a subordinate end, because it is valued and sought not for
   its own sake, but only in subordination to a further end. But yet a
   subordinate end may be valued more than some other ultimate end that it
   is not subordinate to. Thus, for instance, a man goes a journey to
   receive a sum of money, only for the value of the pleasure and honour
   that the money may be a means of. In this case it is impossible that
   the subordinate end, viz. his having the money, should be more valued
   by him than the pleasure and honour for which he values it. It would be
   absurd to suppose that he values the means more than the end, when he
   has no value for the means, but for the sake of the end of which it is
   the means. But yet he may value the money, though but a subordinate
   end, more than some other ultimate end to which it is not subordinate,
   and with which it has no connexion. For instance, more than the comfort
   of a friendly visit, which was one ultimate end of his journey.

   Secondly, The ultimate end is always superior to its subordinate end,
   and more valued by the agent, unless it be when the ultimate end
   entirely depends on the subordinate. If he has no other means by which
   to obtain his last end, then the subordinate may be as much valued as
   the last end; because the last end, in such a case, altogether depends
   upon, and is wholly and certainly conveyed by it. As for instance, if a
   pregnant woman has a peculiar appetite to a certain rare fruit that is
   to be found only in the garden of a particular friend of hers, at a
   distance--and she goes a journey to her friend's house or garden, to
   obtain that fruit--the ultimate end of her journey is to gratify that
   strong appetite; the obtaining that fruit, is the subordinate end of
   it. If she looks upon it, that the appetite can be gratified by no
   other means than the obtaining of that fruit; and that it will
   certainly be gratified if she obtain it, then she will value the fruit
   as much as she values the gratification of her appetite. But otherwise,
   it will not be so. If she be doubtful whether that fruit will satisfy
   her craving, then she will not value it equally with the gratification
   of her appetite itself. Or if there be some other fruit that she knows
   of, that will gratify her desire, at least in part, which she can
   obtain without such trouble as shall countervail the gratification--or
   if her appetite cannot be gratified without this fruit, nor yet with it
   alone, without something else to be compounded with it--then her value
   for her last end will be divided between these several ingredients as
   so many subordinate ends, and no one alone will be equally valued with
   the last end. Hence it rarely happens, that a subordinate end is
   equally valued with its last end; because the obtaining of a last end
   rarely depends on one single, uncompounded means, and infallibly
   connected with it. Therefore, men's last ends are commonly their
   highest ends.

   Thirdly, If any being has but one ultimate end, in all that he does,
   and there be a great variety of operations, his last end may justly be
   looked upon as his supreme end. For in such a case, every other end but
   that one, is in order to that end; and therefore no other can be
   superior to it. Because, as was observed before, a subordinate end is
   never more valued than the end to which it is subordinate. Moreover,
   the subordinate effects, or events, brought to pass, as means of this
   end, all uniting to contribute their share towards obtaining the one
   last end, are very various; and therefore, by what has been now
   observed, the ultimate end of all must be valued more than any one of
   the particular means. This seems to be the case with the works of God,
   as may more fully appear in the sequel.

   Fourthly, Whatsoever any agent has in view in any thing he does, which
   is agreeable to him in itself, and not merely for the sake of something
   else, is regarded by that agent as his last end. The same may be said
   of avoiding that which is in itself painful or disagreeable; for the
   avoiding of what is disagreeable is agreeable. This will be evident to
   any bearing in mind the meaning of the terms. By last end being meant,
   that which is regarded and sought by an agent, as agreeable or
   desirable for its own sake; a subordinate, that which is sought only
   for the sake of something else.

   Fifthly, From hence it will follow, that, if an agent has in view more
   things than one that will be brought to pass by what he does, which he
   loves and delights in on their own account, then he must have more
   things than one that he regards as his last ends in what he does. But
   if there be but one thing that an agent seeks, on its own account, then
   there can be but one last end which he has in all his actions and
   operations.

   But only here a distinction must be observed of things which may be
   said to be agreeable to an agent, in themselves considered: (1.) What
   is in itself grateful to an agent, and valued on its own account,
   simply and absolutely considered; antecedent to, and independent of all
   conditions, or any supposition of particular cases and circumstances.
   And, (2.) What may be said to be in itself agreeable to an agent,
   hypothetically and consequentially; or, on supposition of such and such
   circumstances, or on the happening of such a particular case.

   Thus, for instance, a man may originally love society. An inclination
   to society may be implanted in his very nature; and society may be
   agreeable to him antecedent to all pre-supposed cases and
   circumstances; and this may cause him to seek a family. And the comfort
   of society may be originally his last end, in seeking a family. But
   after he has a family, peace, good order, and mutual justice and
   friendship in his family, may be agreeable to him, and what he delights
   in for their own sake; and therefore these things may be his last end
   in many things he does in the government and regulation of his family.
   But they were not his original end with respect to his family. The
   justice and the peace of a family was not properly his last end before
   he had a family, that induced him to seek a family, but
   consequentially. And the case being put of his having a family, then
   these things wherein the good order and beauty of a family consist,
   become his last end in many things he does in such circumstances.

   In like manner we must suppose that God, before he created the world,
   had some good in view, as a consequence of the world's existence, that
   was originally agreeable to him in itself considered, that inclined him
   to bring the universe into existence, in such a manner as he created
   it. But after the world was created, and such and such intelligent
   creatures actually had existence, in such and such circumstances, then
   a wise, just regulation of them was agreeable to God, in itself
   considered. And God's love of justice, and hatred of injustice, would
   be sufficient in such a case to induce God to deal justly with his
   creatures, and to prevent all injustice in him towards them. But yet
   there is no necessity of supposing, that God's love of doing justly to
   intelligent beings, and hatred of the contrary, was what originally
   induced God to create the world, and make intelligent beings; and so to
   order the occasion of doing either justly or unjustly. The justice of
   God's nature makes a just regulation agreeable, and the contrary
   disagreeable, as there is occasion; the subject being supposed, and the
   occasion given. But we must suppose something else that should incline
   him to create the subjects, or order the occasion.

   So that perfection of God which we call his faithfulness, or his
   inclination to fulfil his promises to his creatures, could not properly
   be what moved him to create the world; nor could such a fulfilment of
   his promises to his creatures be his last end in giving the creatures
   being. But yet after the world is created, after intelligent creatures
   are made, and God has bound himself by promise to them, then that
   disposition, which is called his faithfulness, may move him in his
   providential disposals towards them; and this may be the end of many of
   God's works of providence, even the exercise of his faithfulness in
   fulfilling his promises, and may be in the lower sense his last end;
   because faithfulness and truth must be supposed to be what is in itself
   amiable to God, and what he delights in for its own sake. Thus God may
   have ends of particular works of providence, which are ultimate ends in
   a lower sense, which were not ultimate ends of the creation.

   So that here we have two sorts of ultimate ends; one of which may be
   called, original and independent, the other, consequential and
   dependent; for it is evident, the latter sort are truly of the nature
   of ultimate ends; because though their being agreeable to the agent, be
   consequential on the existence, yet the subject and occasion being
   supposed, they are agreeable and amiable in themselves. We may suppose,
   that, to a righteous Being, doing justice between two parties, with
   whom he is concerned, is agreeable in itself, and not merely for the
   sake of some other end: And yet we may suppose, that a desire of doing
   justice between two parties, may be consequential on the being of those
   parties, and the occasion given.--It may be observed, that when I speak
   of God's ultimate end in the creation of the world, in the following
   discourse, I commonly mean in that highest sense, viz. the original
   ultimate end.

   Sixthly, It may be further observed, that the original ultimate end or
   ends of the creation of the world is alone that which induces God to
   give the occasion for consequential ends, by the first creation of the
   world, and the original disposal of it. And the more original the end
   is, the more extensive and universal it is. That which God had
   primarily in view in creating, and the original ordination of the
   world, must be constantly kept in view, and have a governing influence
   in all God's works, or with respect to every thing he does towards his
   creatures. And therefore,

   Seventhly, If we use the phrase ultimate end in this highest sense,
   then the same that is God's ultimate end in creating the world, if we
   suppose but one such end, must be what be makes his ultimate aim in all
   his works, in every thing he does either in creation or providence. But
   we must suppose, that, in the use to which God puts his creatures, he
   must evermore have a regard to the end for which he has made them. But
   if we take ultimate end in the other lower sense, God may sometimes
   have regard to those things as ultimate ends, in particular works of
   providence, which could not in any proper sense be his last end in
   creating the world.

   Eighthly, On the other hand, whatever appears to be God's ultimate end,
   in any sense, of his works of providence in general; that must be the
   ultimate end of the work of creation itself. For though God may act for
   an end that is ultimate in a lower sense, in some of his works of
   providence, which is not the ultimate end of the creation of the world,
   yet this doth not take place with regard to the works of providence in
   general; for God's works of providence in general, are the same with
   the general use to which he puts the world he has made. And we may well
   argue from what we see of the general use which God makes of the world,
   to the general end for which he designed the world. Though there may be
   some ends of particular works of providence, that were not the last end
   of the creation, which are in themselves grateful to God in such
   particular emergent circumstances, and so are last ends in an inferior
   sense; yet this is only in certain cases, or particular occasions. But
   if they are last ends of God's proceedings in the use of the world in
   general, this shows that his making them last ends does not depend on
   particular cases and circumstances, but the nature of things in
   general, and his general design in the being and constitution of the
   universe.

   Ninthly, If there be but one thing that is originally, and independent
   on any future supposed cases, agreeable to God, to be obtained by the
   creation of the world, then there can be but one last end of God's
   work, in this highest sense. But if there are various things, properly
   diverse one from another, that are absolutely, and independently
   agreeable to the Divine Being, which are actually obtained by the
   creation of the world, then there were several ultimate ends of the
   creation in that highest sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. I.

   WHEREIN IS CONSIDERED, WHAT REASON TEACHES CONCERNING THIS AFFAIR.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Some things observed in general, which reason dictates.

   Having observed these things, to prevent confusion, I now proceed to
   consider what may, and what may not, be supposed to be God's ultimate
   end in the creation of the world.

   Indeed this affair seems property to be an affair of divine revelation.
   In order to be determined what was designed, in the creating of the
   astonishing fabric of the universe we behold, it becomes us to attend
   to, and rely on what HE has told us, who was the architect. He best
   knows his own heart, and what his own ends and designs were, in the
   wonderful works which he has wrought. Nor is it to be supposed that
   mankind--who, while destitute of revelation, by the utmost improvements
   of their own reason, and advances in science and philosophy, could come
   to no clear and established determination who the author of the world
   was--would ever have obtained any tolerable settled judgment of the end
   which the author of it proposed to himself in so vast, complicated, and
   wonderful a work of his hands. And though it be true, that the
   revelation which God has given to men, as a light shining in a dark
   place, has been the occasion of great improvement of their faculties,
   and has taught men how to use their reason; and though mankind now,
   through the long-continued assistance they have had by this divine
   light, have come to great attainments in the habitual exercise of
   reason; yet I confess it would be relying too much on reason, to
   determine the affair of God's last end in the creation of the world,
   without being herein principally guided by divine revelation, since God
   has given a revelation containing instructions concerning this very
   matter. Nevertheless, as objections have chiefly been made, against
   what I think the Scriptures have truly revealed, from the pretended
   dictates of reason, I would, in the first place, soberly consider in a
   few things, what seems rational to be supposed concerning this
   affair;--and then proceed to consider what light divine revelation
   gives us in it.

   As to the first of these, I think the following things appear to be the
   dictates of reason:

   1. That no notion of God's last end in the creation of the world, is
   agreeable to reason, which would truly imply any indigence,
   insufficiency, and mutability in God; or any dependence of the Creator
   on the creature, for any part of his perfection or happiness. Because
   it is evident, by both Scripture and reason, that God is infinitely,
   eternally, unchangeably, and independently glorious and happy: that he
   cannot be profited by, or receive any thing from, the creature; or be
   the subject of any sufferings, or diminution of his glory and felicity,
   from any other being. The notion of God creating the world, in order to
   receive any thing properly from the creature, is not only contrary to
   the nature of God, but inconsistent with the notion of creation; which
   implies a being receiving its existence, and all that belongs to it,
   out of nothing. And this implies the most perfect, absolute, and
   universal derivation and dependence. Now, if the creature receives its
   ALL from God, entirely and perfectly, how is it possible that it should
   have any thing to add to God, to make him in any respect more than he
   was before, and so the Creator become dependent on the creature ?

   2. Whatsoever is good and valuable in itself, is worthy that God should
   value it with an ultimate respect. It is therefore worthy to be made
   the last end of his operation; if it be properly capable of being
   attained. For it may be supposed that some things, valuable and
   excellent in themselves, are not properly capable of being attained in
   any divine operation; because their existence, in all possible
   respects, must be conceived of as prior to any divine operation. Thus
   God's existence and infinite perfection, though infinitely valuable in
   themselves, cannot be supposed to be the end of any divine operation;
   for we cannot conceive of them as, in any respect, consequent on any
   works of God. But whatever is in itself valuable, absolutely so, and is
   capable of being sought and attained, is worthy to be made a last end
   or the divine operation--Therefore,

   3. Whatever that be which is in itself most valuable, and was so
   originally, prior to the creation of the world, and which is attainable
   by the creation, if there be any thing which was superior in value to
   all others, that must be worthy to be God's last end in the creation;
   and also worthy to be his highest end.--In consequence of this it will
   follow,

   4. That if God himself be, in any respect, properly capable of being
   his own end in the creation of the world, then it is reasonable to
   suppose that he had respect to himself, as his last and highest end, in
   this work; because he is worthy in himself to be so, being infinitely
   the greatest and best of beings. All things else, with regard to
   worthiness, importance, and excellence, are perfectly as nothing in
   comparison of him. And therefore, if God has respect to things
   according to their nature and proportions, he must necessarily have the
   greatest respect to himself. It would be against the perfection of his
   nature, his wisdom, holiness, and perfect rectitude, whereby he is
   disposed to do every thing that is fit to be done, to suppose
   otherwise. At least, a great part of the moral rectitude of God,
   whereby he is disposed to every thing that is fit, suitable, and
   amiable in itself, consists in his having the highest regard to that
   which is in itself highest and best. The moral rectitude of God must
   consist in a due respect to things that are objects of moral respect;
   that is, to intelligent beings capable of moral actions and relations.
   And therefore it must chiefly consist in giving due respect to that
   Being to whom most is due; for God is infinitely the most worthy of
   regard. The worthiness of others is as nothing to his; so that to him
   belongs all possible respect. To him belongs the whole of the respect
   that any intelligent being is capable of. To him belongs all the heart.
   Therefore, if moral rectitude of heart consists in paying the respect
   of the heart which is due, or which fitness and suitableness requires,
   fitness requires infinitely the greatest regard to be paid to God; and
   the denying of supreme regard here would be a conduct infinitely the
   most unfit. Hence it will follow, that the moral rectitude of the
   disposition, inclination, or affection of God chiefly consists in a
   regard to himself, infinitely above his regard to all other beings; or,
   in other words, his holiness consists in this.

   And if it be thus fit that God should have a supreme regard to himself,
   then it is fit that this supreme regard should appear in those things
   by which he makes himself known, or by his word and works, i.e. in what
   he says, and in what he does. If it be an infinitely amiable thing in
   God, that he should have a supreme regard to himself, then it is an
   amiable thing that he should act as having a chief regard to himself;
   or act in such a manner, as to show that he has such a regard: that
   what is highest in God's heart, may be highest in his actions and
   conduct. And if it was God's intention, as there is great reason to
   think it was, that his works should exhibit an image of himself their
   author, that it might brightly appear by his works what manner of being
   he is, and afford a proper representation of his divine excellencies,
   and especially his moral excellence, consisting in the disposition of
   his heart; then it is reasonable to suppose that his works are so
   wrought as to show this supreme respect to himself, wherein his moral
   excellence primarily consists.

   When we are considering what would be most fit for God chiefly to
   respect, with regard to the universality of things, it may help us to
   judge with greater ease and satisfaction, to consider, what we can
   suppose would be determined by some third being of perfect wisdom and
   rectitude, that should be perfectly indifferent and disinterested. Or
   if we make the supposition, that infinitely wise justice and rectitude
   were a distinct disinterested person, whose office it was to determine
   how things shall be most properly ordered in the whole kingdom of
   existence, including king and subjects, God and his creatures; and,
   upon a view of the whole, to decide what regard should prevail in all
   proceedings. Now such a judge, in adjusting the proper measures and
   kinds of regard, would weigh things in an even balance; taking care,
   that a greater part of the whole should be more respected, than the
   lesser, in proportion (other things being equal) to the measure of
   existence. So that the degree of regard should always be in a
   proportion compounded of the proportion of existence, and proportion of
   excellence, or according to the degree of greatness and goodness,
   considered conjunctly. Such an arbiter, in considering the system of
   created intelligent beings by itself, would determine, that the system
   in general, consisting of many millions, was of greater importance, and
   worthy of a greater share of regard, than only one individual. For,
   however considerable some of the individuals might be, no one exceeds
   others so much as to countervail all the system. And if this judge
   consider not only the system of created beings, but the system of being
   in general, comprehending the sum total of universal existence, both
   Creator and creature; still every part must be considered according to
   its importance, or the measure it has of existence and excellence. To
   determine then, what proportion of regard is to be allotted to the
   Creator, and all his creatures taken together, both must be as it were
   put in the balance; the Supreme Being, with all in him that is great
   and excellent, is to be compared with all that is to be found in the
   whole creation: and according as the former is found to outweigh, in
   such proportion is he to have a greater share of regard. And in this
   case, as the whole system of created beings, in comparison of the
   Creator, would be found as the light dust of the balance, or even as
   nothing and vanity; so the arbiter must determine accordingly with
   respect to the degree in which God should be regarded, by all
   intelligent existence, in all actions and proceedings, determinations
   and effects whatever, whether creating, preserving, using, disposing,
   changing, or destroying. And as the Creator is infinite, and has all
   possible existence, perfection, and excellence, so he must have all
   possible regard. As he is every way the first and supreme, and as his
   excellency is in all respects the supreme beauty and glory, the
   original good, and fountain of all good; so he must have in all
   respects the supreme regard. And as he is God over all, to whom all are
   properly subordinate, and on whom all depend, worthy to reign as
   supreme Head, with absolute and universal dominion; so it is fit that
   he should be so regarded by all, and in all proceedings and effects
   through the whole system: The universality of things, in their whole
   compass and series, should look to him, in such a manner, as that
   respect to him should reign over all respect to other things, and
   regard to creatures should, universally, be subordinate and subject.

   When I speak of regard to be thus adjusted in the universal system, I
   mean the regard of the sum total; all intelligent existence, created
   and uncreated. For it is fit, that the regard of the Creator should be
   proportioned to the worthiness of objects, as well as the regard of
   creatures. Thus, we must conclude, that such an arbiter as I have
   supposed, would determine, that the whole universe, in all its actings,
   proceedings, revolutions, and entire series of events, should proceed
   with a view to God, as the supreme and last end; that every wheel, in
   all its rotations, should move with a constant invariable regard to him
   as the ultimate end of all; as perfectly and uniformly, as if the whole
   system were animated and directed by one common soul. Or, as if such an
   arbiter as I have before supposed, possessed of perfect wisdom and
   rectitude, became the common soul of the universe, and actuated and
   governed it in all its motions.

   Thus I have gone upon the supposition of a third disinterested person.
   The thing supposed is impossible; but the case is, nevertheless, just
   the same, as to what is most fit and suitable in itself. For it is most
   certainly proper for God to act, according to the greatest fitness, and
   he knows what the greatest fitness is, as much as if perfect rectitude
   were a distinct person to direct him. God himself is possessed of that
   perfect discernment and rectitude which have been supposed. It belongs
   to him as supreme arbiter, and to his infinite wisdom and rectitude, to
   state all rules and measures of proceedings. And seeing these
   attributes of God are infinite, and most absolutely perfect, they are
   not the less fit to order and dispose, because they are in him, who is
   a being concerned, and not a third person that is disinterested. For
   being interested unfits a person to be an arbiter or judge, no
   otherwise, than as interest tends to mislead his judgment, or incline
   him to act contrary to it. But that God should be in danger of either,
   is contrary to the supposition of his being absolutely perfect. And as
   there must be some supreme judge of fitness and propriety in the
   universality of things, or otherwise there could be no order, it
   therefore belongs to God, whose are all things, who is perfectly fit
   for this office, and who alone is so, to state all things according to
   the most perfect fitness and rectitude, as much as if perfect rectitude
   were a distinct person. We may therefore be sure it is and will be
   done.

   I should think that these things might incline us to suppose, that God
   has not forgot himself, in the ends which he proposed in the creation
   of the world; but that he has so stated these ends, (however
   self-sufficient, immutable, and independent,) as therein plainly to
   show a supreme regard to himself. Whether this can be, or whether God
   has done thus, must be considered afterwards, as also what may be
   objected against this view of things.

   5. Whatsoever is good, amiable, and valuable in itself, absolutely and
   originally, (which facts and events show that God aimed at in the
   creation of the world,) must be supposed to be regarded or aimed at by
   God ultimately, or as an ultimate end of creation. For we must suppose,
   from the perfection of God's nature, that whatsoever is valuable and
   amiable in itself, simply and absolutely considered, God values simply
   for itself; because God's judgment and esteem are according to truth.
   But if God values a thing simply and absolutely on its own account,
   then it is the ultimate object of his value. For to suppose that he
   values it only for some farther end, is in direct contradiction to the
   present supposition, which is, that he values it absolutely, and for
   itself. Hence it most clearly follows, that if that which God values
   for itself, appears, in fact and experience, to be what he seeks by any
   thing he does, he must regard it as an ultimate end. And, therefore, if
   he seeks it in creating the world, or any part of the world, it is an
   ultimate end of the work of creation. Having got thus far, we may now
   proceed a step farther, and assert,

   6. Whatsoever thing is actually the effect of the creation of the
   world, which is simply and absolutely valuable in itself, that thing is
   an ultimate end of God's creating the world. We see that it is a good
   which God aimed at by the creation of the world; because he has
   actually attained it by that means. For we may justly infer what God
   intends, by what he actually does; because he does nothing
   inadvertently, or without design. But whatever God intends to attain,
   from a value for it, in his actions and works, that he seeks in those
   acts and works. Because, for an agent to intend to attain something he
   values by the means he uses, is the same thing as to seek it by those
   means. And this is the same as to make that thing his end in those
   means. Now, it being, by the supposition, what God values ultimately,
   it must therefore, by the preceding position, be aimed at by God, as an
   ultimate end of creating the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Some further observations concerning those things which reason leads us
   to suppose God aimed at in the creation of the world.

   From what was last observed, it seems to be the most proper way of
   proceeding--as we would see what light reason will give us, respecting
   the particular end or ends, God had ultimately in view in the creation
   of the world--to consider, what thing or things are actually the effect
   or consequence of the creation of the world, that are simply and
   originally valuable in themselves. And this is what I would directly
   proceed to, without entering on any tedious metaphysical inquiries,
   wherein fitness, or amiableness, consists; referring what I say to the
   dictates of the reader's mind, on sedate and calm reflection.

   1. It seems a thing in itself proper and desirable, that the glorious
   attributes of God, which consist in a sufficiency to certain acts and
   effects, should be exerted in the production of such effects as might
   manifest his infinite power, wisdom, righteousness, goodness, &c. If
   the world had not been created, these attributes never would have had
   any exercise. The power of God, which is a sufficiency in him to
   produce great effects, must for ever have been dormant and useless as
   to any effect. The divine wisdom and prudence would have had no
   exercise in any wise contrivance, any prudent proceeding, or disposal
   of things; for there would have been no objects of contrivance or
   disposal. The same might be observed of God's justice, goodness, and
   truth. Indeed God might have known as perfectly that he possessed these
   attributes, if they never had been exerted or expressed in any effect.
   But then, if the attributes which consist in a sufficiency for
   correspondent effects, are in themselves excellent, the exercises of
   them must likewise be excellent. If it be an excellent thing, that
   there should be a sufficiency for a certain kind of action or
   operation, the excellency of such a sufficiency must consist in its
   relation to this kind of operation or effect; but that could not be,
   unless the operation itself were excellent. A sufficiency for any work
   is no further valuable, than the work itself is valuable [195] . As God
   therefore esteems these attributes themselves valuable, and delights in
   them; so it is natural to suppose that he delights in their proper
   exercise and expression. For the same reason that he esteems his own
   sufficiency wisely to contrive and dispose effects, he also will esteem
   the wise contrivance and disposition itself. And for the same reason,
   as he delights in his own disposition to do justly, and to dispose of
   things according to truth and just proportion; so he must delight in
   such a righteous disposal itself.

   2. It seems to be a thing in itself fit and desirable, that the
   glorious perfections of God should be known, and the operations and
   expressions of them seen, by other beings besides himself. If it be fit
   that God's power and wisdom, &c. should be exercised and expressed in
   some effects, and not lie eternally dormant, then it seems proper that
   these exercises should appear, and not be totally hidden and unknown.
   For if they are, it will be just the same, as to the above purpose, as
   if they were not. God as perfectly knew himself and his perfections,
   had as perfect an idea of the exercises and effects they were
   sufficient for, antecedently to any such actual operations of them, and
   since. If, therefore, it be nevertheless a thing in itself valuable,
   and worthy to be desired, that these glorious perfections be actually
   exhibited in their correspondent effects; then it seems also, that the
   knowledge of these perfections and discoveries is valuable in itself
   absolutely considered; and that it is desirable that this knowledge
   should exist. It is a thing infinitely good in itself, that God's glory
   should be known by a glorious society of created beings. And that there
   should be in them an increasing knowledge of God to all eternity, is
   worthy to be regarded by him, to whom it belongs to order what is
   fittest and best. If existence is more worthy than defect and
   non-entity, and if any created existence is in itself worthy to be,
   then knowledge is; and if any knowledge, then the most excellent sort
   of knowledge, viz. that of God and his glory. This knowledge is one of
   the highest, most real, and substantial parts of all created existence,
   most remote from non-entity and defect.

   3. As it is desirable in itself that God's glory should be known, so
   when known it seems equally reasonable it should be esteemed and
   delighted in, answerably to its dignity. There is no more reason to
   esteem it a suitable thing, that there should be an idea in the
   understanding corresponding unto the glorious object, than that there
   should be a corresponding affection in the will. If the perfection
   itself be excellent, the knowledge of it is excellent, and so is the
   esteem and love of it excellent. And as it is fit that God should love
   and esteem his own excellence, it is also fit that he should value and
   esteem the love of his excellency. And if it becomes a being highly to
   value himself, it is fit that he should love to have himself valued and
   esteemed. If the idea of God's perfection in the understanding be
   valuable, then the love of the heart seems to be more especially
   valuable, as moral beauty especially consists in the disposition and
   affection of the heart.

   4. As there is an infinite fulness of all possible good in God--a
   fulness of every perfection, of all excellency and beauty, and of
   infinite happiness--and as this fulness is capable of communication, or
   emanation ad extra; so it seems a thing amiable and valuable in itself
   that this infinite fountain of good should send forth abundant streams.
   And as this is in itself excellent, so a disposition to this in the
   Divine Being, must he looked upon as an excellent disposition. Such an
   emanation of good is, in some sense, a multiplication of it. So far as
   the stream may be looked upon as any thing besides the fountain, so far
   it may be looked on as an increase of good. And if the fulness of good
   that is in the fountain, is in itself excellent, then the emanation,
   which is as it were an increase, repetition, or multiplication of it,
   is excellent. Thus it is fit, since there is an infinite fountain of
   light and knowledge, that this light should shine forth in beams of
   communicated knowledge and understanding; and, as there is an infinite
   fountain of holiness, moral excellence, and beauty, that so it should
   flow out in communicated holiness. And that, as there is an infinite
   fulness of joy and happiness, so these should have an emanation, and
   become a fountain flowing out in abundant streams, as beams from the
   sun.

   Thus it appears reasonable to suppose, that it was God's last end, that
   there might be a glorious and abundant emanation of his infinite
   fulness of good ad extra, or without himself; and that the disposition
   to communicate himself, or diffuse his own fulness, [196] was what
   moved him to create the world. But here I observe, that there would be
   some impropriety in saying, that a disposition in God to communicate
   himself to the creature, moved him to create the world. For an
   inclination in God to communicate himself to an object, seems to
   presuppose the existence of the object, at least in idea. But the
   diffusive disposition that excited God to give creatures existence, was
   rather a communicative disposition in general, or a disposition in the
   fulness of the divinity to flow out and diffuse itself. Thus the
   disposition there is in the root and stock of a tree to diffuse sap and
   life, is doubtless the reason of their communication to its buds,
   leaves, and fruits, after these exist. But a disposition to communicate
   of its life and sap to its fruits, is not so properly the cause of its
   producing those fruits, as its disposition to diffuse its sap and life
   in general. Therefore, to speak strictly according to truth, we may
   suppose, that a disposition in God, as an original property of his
   nature, to an emanation of his own infinite fulness, was what excited
   him to create the world; and so, that the emanation itself was aimed at
   by him as a last end of the creation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [195] "The end of wisdom (says Mr. G. Tennent, in his sermon at the
   opening of the presbyterian church of Philadelphia) is design; the end
   of power is action; the end of goodness is doing good. To suppose these
   perfections no to be exerted would be to represent them as
   insignificant. Of what use would God's wisdom be, it had nothing to
   design or direct? To what purpose his almightiness, if it never brought
   any thing to pass ? And of what avail his goodness, if it never did any
   good?"

   [196] I shall often use the phrase God's fulness, as signifying and
   comprehending all the good which is in God natural and moral, either
   excellence or happiness; partly, because I know of no better phrase to
   be used in this general meaning; and partly, because I am led hereto by
   some of the inspired writers, particularly the apostle Paul, who often
   useth the phrase in this sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Wherein it is considered how, on the supposition of God's making the
   forementioned things his last end, he manifests a supreme and ultimate
   regard to himself in all his works.

   In the last section I observed some things which are actually the
   consequence of the creation of tire world, which seem absolutely
   valuable in themselves, and so worthy to be made God's last end in his
   work. I now proceed to inquire, how God's making such things as these
   his last end, is consistent with his making himself his last end, or
   his manifesting an ultimate respect to himself in his acts and works.
   Because it is agreeable to the dictates of reason, that in all his
   proceedings he should set himself highest; therefore, I would endeavour
   to show, how his infinite love to and delight in himself, will
   naturally cause him to value and delight in these things: or rather,
   how a value to these things is implied in his value of that infinite
   fulness of good that is in himself.

   Now, with regard to the first of the particulars mentioned above--God's
   regard to the exercise of those attributes of his nature, in their
   proper operations and effects, which consist in a sufficiency for these
   operations--it is not hard to conceive that God's regard to himself,
   and value for his own perfections, should cause him to value these
   exercises and expressions of' his perfections; inasmuch as their
   excellency consists in their relation to use, exercise, and operation.
   God's love to himself, and his own attributes, will therefore make him
   delight in that which is the use, end, and operation of these
   attributes. If one highly esteem and delight in the virtues of a
   friend, as wisdom, justice, &c. that have relation to action, this will
   make him delight in the exercise and genuine effects of these virtues.
   So if God both esteem and delight in his own perfections and virtues,
   he cannot but value and delight in the expressions and genuine effects
   of them. So that in delighting in the expressions of his perfections,
   he manifests a delight in himself; and in making these expressions of
   his own perfections his end, he makes himself his end.

   And with respect to the second and third particulars, the matter is no
   less plain. For he that loves any being, and has a disposition highly
   to prize and greatly to delight in his virtues and perfections, must
   from the same disposition be well pleased to have his excellencies
   known, acknowledged, esteemed, and prized by others. He that loves any
   thing, naturally loves the approbation of that thing, and is opposite
   to the disapprobation of it. Thus it is when one loves the virtues of a
   friend. And thus it will necessarily be, if a being loves himself and
   highly prizes his own excellencies; and thus it is fit it should be, if
   it be fit he should thus love himself, and prize his own valuable
   qualities; that is, it is fit that he should take delight in his own
   excellencies being seen, acknowledged, esteemed, and delighted in. This
   is implied in a love to himself and his own perfections; and in making
   this his end, he makes himself his end.

   And with respect to the fourth and last particular, viz. God's being
   disposed to an abundant communication, and glorious emanation, of that
   infinite fulness of good which he possesses, as of his own knowledge,
   excellency and happiness, in the manner he does; if we thoroughly
   consider the matter, it will appear, that herein also God makes himself
   his end, in such a sense, as plainly to manifest and testify a supreme
   and ultimate regard to himself.

   Merely in this disposition to cause an emanation of his glory and
   fulness--which is prior to the existence of any other being, and is to
   be considered as the inciting cause of giving existence to other
   beings--God cannot so properly be said to make the creature his end, as
   himself. For the creature is not as yet considered as existing. This
   disposition or desire in God, must be prior to the existence of the
   creature, even in foresight. For it is a disposition that is the
   original ground even of the future, intended, and foreseen existence of
   the creature. God's benevolence, as it respects the creature, may be
   taken either in a larger or stricter sense. In a larger sense, it may
   signify nothing diverse from that good disposition in his nature to
   communicate of his own fulness in general; as his knowledge, his
   holiness, and happiness; and to give creatures existence in order to
   it. This may be called benevolence, or love, because it is the same
   good disposition that is exercised in love. It is the very fountain
   from whence love originally proceeds, when taken in the most proper
   sense; and it has the same general tendency and effect in the
   creature's well-being. But yet this cannot have any particular present
   or future created existence for its object; because it is prior to any
   such object, and the very source of the futurition of its existence.
   Nor is it really diverse from God's love to himself; as will more
   clearly appear afterwards.

   But God's love may be taken more strictly, for this general disposition
   to communicate good, as directed to particular objects. Love, in the
   most strict and proper sense, presupposes the existence of the object
   beloved, at least in idea and expectation, and represented to the mind
   as future. God did not love angels in the strictest sense, but in
   consequence of his intending to create them, and so having an idea of
   future existing angels. Therefore his love to them was not properly
   what excited him to intend to create them. Love or benevolence,
   strictly taken, presupposes an existing object, as much as pity a
   miserable suffering object.

   This propensity in God to diffuse himself, may be considered as a
   propensity to himself diffused; or to his own glory existing in its
   emanation. A respect to himself, or an infinite propensity to and
   delight in his own glory is that which causes him to incline to its
   being abundantly diffused, and to delight in the emanation of it. Thus,
   that nature in a tree, by which it puts forth buds, shoots out
   branches, and brings forth leaves and fruit, is a disposition that
   terminates in its own complete self. And so the disposition in the sun
   to shine, or abundantly to diffuse its fulness, warmth, and brightness,
   is only a tendency to its own most glorious and complete state. So God
   looks on the communication of himself, and the emanation of his
   infinite glory, to belong to the fulness and completeness of himself;
   as though he were not in his most glorious state without it. Thus the
   church of Christ, (toward whom and in whom are the emanations of his
   glory, and the communication of his fulness,) is called the fulness of
   Christ; as though he were not in his complete state without her; like
   Adam without Eve. And the church is called the glory of Christ, as the
   woman is the glory of the man, 1 Cor. xi. 7. Isa. xlvi. 13. I will
   place salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory. [197] --Indeed, after the
   creatures are intended to be created, God may be conceived of as being
   moved by benevolence to them, in the strictest sense, in his dealings
   with them. His exercising his goodness, and gratifying his benevolence
   to them in particular, may be the spring of all God's proceedings
   through the universe; as being now the determined way of gratifying his
   general inclination to diffuse himself. Here God acting for himself; or
   making himself his last end, and his acting for their sake, are not to
   be set in opposition; they are rather to be considered as coinciding
   one with the other, and implied one in the other. But yet God is to be
   considered as first and original in his regard; and the creature is the
   object of God's regard, consequently, and by implication, as being as
   it were comprehended in God; as it shall be more particularly observed
   presently.

   But how God's value for, and delight in, the emanations of his fulness
   in the work of creation, argues his delight in the infinite fulness of
   good in himself, and the supreme regard he has for himself; and that in
   making these emanations, he ultimately makes himself his end in
   creation; will more clearly appear by considering more particularly the
   nature and circumstances of these communications of God's fulness.

   One part of that divine fulness which is communicated, is the divine
   knowledge. That communicated knowledge, which must be supposed to
   pertain to God's last end in creating the world, is the creature's
   knowledge of him. For this is the end of all other knowledge; and even
   the faculty of understanding would be vain without it. And this
   knowledge is most properly a communication of God's infinite knowledge,
   which primarily consists in the knowledge of himself. God, in making
   this his end, makes himself his end. This knowledge in the creature, is
   but a conformity to God. It is the image of God's own knowledge of
   himself. It is a participation of the same; though infinitely less in
   degree: as particular beams of the sun communicated are the light and
   glory of the sun itself, in part.

   Besides, God's glory is the object of this knowledge, or the thing
   known; so that God is glorified in it, as hereby his excellency is
   seen. As therefore God values himself, as he delights in his own
   knowledge, be must delight in every thing of that nature: as he
   delights in his own light, he must delight in every beam of that light;
   and as he highly values his own excellency, he must be well pleased in
   having it manifested, and so glorified.

   Another emanation of divine fulness, is the communication of virtue and
   holiness to the creature: this is a communication of God's holiness; so
   that hereby the creature partakes of God's own moral excellency; which
   is properly the beauty of the divine nature. And as God delights in his
   own beauty, he must necessarily delight in the creature's holiness;
   which is a conformity to and participation of it, as truly as a
   brightness of a jewel, held in the sun's beams, is a participation or
   derivation of the sun's brightness, though immensely less in degree.
   And then it must be considered wherein this holiness in the creature
   consists, viz. in love, which is the comprehension of all true virtue;
   and primarily in love to God, which is exercised in a high esteem of
   God, admiration of his perfections, complacency in them, and praise of
   them. All which things are nothing else but the heart exalting,
   magnifying, or glorifying God; which, as I showed before, God
   necessarily approves of, and is pleased with, as he loves himself, and
   values the glory of his own nature.

   Another part of God's fulness which he communicates, is his happiness.
   This happiness consists in enjoying and rejoicing in himself; and so
   does also the creature's happiness. It is a participation of what is in
   God; and God and his glory are the objective ground of it. The
   happiness of the creature consists in rejoicing in God; by which also
   God is magnified and exalted. Joy, or the exulting of the heart in
   God's glory, is one thing that belongs to praise. So that God is all in
   all, with respect to each part of that communication of the divine
   fulness which is made to the creature. What is communicated is divine,
   or something of God; and each communication is of that nature, that the
   creature to whom it is made, is thereby conformed to God, and united to
   him: and that in proportion as the communication is greater or less.
   And the communication itself is no other, in the very nature of it,
   than that wherein the very honour, exaltation, and praise of God
   consists.

   And it is farther to be considered, that what God aimed at in the
   creation of the world, as the end which he had ultimately in view, was
   that communication of himself which he intended through all eternity.
   And if we attend to the nature and circumstances of this eternal
   emanation of divine good, it will more clearly show how, in making this
   his end, God testifies a supreme respect to himself, and makes himself
   his end. There are many reasons to think that what God has in view, in
   an increasing communication of himself through eternity, is an
   increasing knowledge of God, love to him, and joy in him. And it is to
   be considered, that the more those divine communications increase in
   the creature, the more it becomes one with God: for so much the more is
   it united to God in love, the heart is drawn nearer and nearer to God,
   and the union with him becomes more firm and close: and, at the same
   time, the creature becomes more and more conformed to God. The image is
   more and more perfect, and so the good that is in the creature comes
   for ever nearer and nearer to an identity with that which is in God. In
   the view therefore of God, who has a comprehensive prospect of the
   increasing union and conformity through eternity, it must be an
   infinitely strict and perfect nearness, conformity, and oneness. For it
   will for ever come nearer and nearer to that strictness and perfection
   of union which there is between the Father and the Son. So that in the
   eyes of God, who perfectly sees the whole of it, in its infinite
   progress and increase, it must come to an eminent fulfilment of
   Christ's request, in John xvii. 21, 23.That they all may be one, as
   thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be onein us; I
   in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. In this
   view, those elect creatures, which must be looked upon as the end of
   all the rest of the creation, considered with respect to the whole of
   their eternal duration, and as such made God's end, must be viewed as
   being, as it were, one with God. They were respected as brought home to
   him, united with him, centering most perfectly, as it were swallowed up
   in him: so that his respect to them finally coincides, and becomes one
   and the same, with respect to himself. The interest of the creature is,
   as it were, God's own interest, in proportion to the degree of their
   relation and union to God. Thus the interest of a man's family is
   looked upon as the same with his own interest; because of the relation
   they stand in to him, his propriety in them, and their strict union
   with him. But God's elect creatures, with respect to their eternal
   duration, are infinitely dearer to God, than a man's family is to him.
   What has been said shows, that as all things are from God, as their
   first cause and fountain; so all things tend to him, and in their
   progress come nearer and nearer to him through all eternity: which
   argues, that he who is their first cause is their last end. [198]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [197] Very remarkable is that place, John xii. 23, 24. And Jesus
   answered them saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man should be
   glorified. Verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the
   ground and dies, it abideth alone; but if it die, if it die, it
   bringeth forth much fruit. Christ had respect herein to the blessed
   fruits of his death, in the conversion, salvation, and eternal
   happiness of those that should be redeemed by him. This consequence of
   his death, he calls his glory; and his obtaining this fruit, he calls
   his being glorified; as the flourishing, beautiful produce of a corn of
   wheat sown in the ground its glory. Without this he is alone, as Adam
   was before Eve was created. But from him, by his death, proceeds a
   glorious offspring; in which are communicated his fulness and glory: As
   from Adam, in his deep sleep, proceeds the woman, a beautiful companion
   to fill his emptiness, and relieve his solitariness; by Christ's death,
   his fulness is abundantly diffused in many streams; and expressed in
   the beauty and glory of a great multitude of his spiritual offspring.

   [198] This remark must be understood with limitation; as expressing the
   effect of benevolent influence, but not the effect of justice on a
   moral system. -- W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Some objections considered, which may be made against the
   reasonableness of what has been said of God making himself his last
   end.

   Object. I. Some may object against what has been said as being
   inconsistent with God's absolute independence and immutability:
   particularly, as though God were inclined to a communication of his
   fulness, and emanations of his own glory, as being his own most
   glorious and complete state. It may be thought that this does not well
   consist with God, being self-existent from all eternity; absolutely
   perfect in himself, in the possession of infinite and independent good.
   And that, in general, to suppose that God himself his end, in the
   creation of the world, seems to suppose that he aims at some interest
   or happiness of his own, not easily reconcilable with his being perfect
   and infinitely happy in himself. If it could be supposed that God
   needed any thing; or that the goodness of his creatures could extend to
   him; or that they could be profitable to him; it might be fit, that God
   should make himself, and his own interest, his highest and last end in
   creating the world. But seeing that God is above all need, and all
   capacity of being made better or happier in any respect; to what
   purpose should God make himself his end, or seek to advance himself in
   any respect by any of his works? How absurd is it to suppose that God
   should do such great things, with a view to obtain what he is already
   most perfectly possessed of, and was so from all eternity; and
   therefore cannot now possibly, need, nor with any colour of reason be
   supposed to seek!

   Ans. 1. Many have wrong notions of God's happiness, as resulting from
   his absolute self-sufficience, independence, and immutability. Though
   it be true, that God's glory and happiness are in and of himself, are
   infinite and cannot be added to, and unchangeable, for the whole and
   every part of which he is perfectly independent of the creature; yet it
   does not hence follow, nor is it true, that God has no real and proper
   delight, pleasure, or happiness, in any of his acts or communications
   relative to the creature, or effects he produces in them; or in any
   thing he sees in the creature's qualifications, dispositions, actions
   and state.

   God may have a real and proper pleasure or happiness in seeing the
   happy state of the creature; yet this may not be different from his
   delight in himself; being a delight in his own infinite goodness; or
   the exercise of that glorious propensity of his nature to diffuse and
   communicate himself and so gratifying this inclination of his own
   heart. This delight which God has in his creature's happiness, cannot
   properly be said to be what God receives from the creature. For it is
   only the effect of his own work in and communications to the creature;
   in making it, and admitting it to a participation of his fulness. As
   the sun receives no thing from the jewel that receives its light, and
   shines only, by a participation of its brightness.

   With respect also to the creature's holiness; God may have a proper
   delight and joy in imparting this to the creature, as gratifying hereby
   his inclination to communicate of his own excellent fulness. God may
   delight, with true and great pleasure, in beholding that beauty which
   is an image and communication of his own beauty, an expression and
   manifestation of his own loveliness. And this is so far from being an
   instance of his happiness not being in and from himself that it is an
   evidence that he is happy in himself, or delights and has pleasure in
   his own beauty. If he did not take pleasure in the expression of his
   own beauty, it would rather be an evidence that he does not delight in
   his own beauty; that he hath not his happiness and enjoyment in his own
   beauty and perfection. So that if we suppose God has real pleasure and
   happiness in the holy love and praise of his saints, as the image and
   communication of his own holiness, it is not properly any pleasure
   distinct from the pleasure he has in himself; but it is truly an
   instance of it.

   And with respect to God's being glorified in those perfections wherein
   his glory consists, expressed in their corresponding effects,--as his
   wisdom, in wise designs and well-contrived works, his power, in great
   effects, his justice, in acts of righteousness, his goodness, in
   communicating happiness,--this does not argue that his pleasure is not
   in himself, and his own glory; but the contrary. It is the necessary
   consequence of his delighting in the glory of his nature, that he
   delights in the emanation and effulgence of it.

   Nor do these things argue any dependence in God on the creature for
   happiness. Though he has real pleasure in the creature's holiness and
   happiness, yet this is not properly any pleasure which he receives from
   the creature. For these things are what he gives the creature. They are
   wholly and entirely from him. His rejoicing therein is rather a
   rejoicing in his own acts, and his own glory expressed in those acts,
   than a joy derived from the creature. God's joy is dependent on nothing
   besides his own act, which he exerts with an absolute and independent
   power. And yet, in some sense, it can be truly said, that God has the
   more delight and pleasure for the holiness and happiness of his
   creatures. Because God should be less happy if he were less good: or if
   he had not that perfection of nature which consists in a propensity of
   nature to diffuse his own fullness. And would be less happy, if it were
   possible for him to be hindered in the exercise of his goodness, and
   his other perfections, in their proper effects. But he has complete
   happiness, because he has these perfections, and cannot be hindered in
   exercising and displaying them in their proper effects. And this surely
   is not, because he is dependent; but because he is independent on any
   other that should hinder him.

   From this view, it appears, that nothing which has been said is in the
   least inconsistent with those expressions in Scripture, that signify,
   "man cannot be profitable to God," &c. For these expressions plainly
   mean no more, than that God is absolutely independent of us; that we
   have nothing of our own, no stock from whence we can give to God; and
   that no part of his happiness originates from man.

   From what has been said, it appears, that the pleasure God hath in
   those things which have been mentioned, is rather a pleasure in
   diffusing and communicating to, than in receiving from, the creature.
   Surely, it is no argument of indigence in God that he is inclined to
   communicate of his infinite fullness. It is no argument of the
   emptiness or deficiency of a fountain, that it is inclined to overflow.
   Nothing from the creature alters God's happiness, as though it were
   changeable either by increase or diminution. For though these
   communications of God--these exercises, operations, and expressions of
   his glorious perfections which God rejoices in--are in time; yet
   history in them is without beginning or change. They were always
   equally present in the divine mind. He beheld them with equal
   clearness, certainty, and fullness, in every respect, as he doth now.
   They were always equally present; as with him there is no variableness
   or succession. He ever beheld and enjoyed them perfectly in his own
   independent and immutable power and will.

   Ans. 2. If any are not satisfied with the preceding answer, but still
   insist on the objection, let them consider whether they can devise any
   other scheme of God's last end in creating the world, but what will be
   equally obnoxious to this objection in its full force, if there be any
   force in it. For if God had any last end in creating the world, then
   there was something in some respect future, that he aimed at, and
   designed to bring to pass by creating the world; something that was
   agreeable to his inclination or will; let that be his own glory, or the
   happiness of his creatures, or what it will. Now, if there be something
   that God seeks as agreeable, or grateful to him, then, in the
   accomplishment of it, he is gratified. If the last end which he seeks
   in the creation of the world be truly a thing grateful to him (as
   certainly it is, if it be truly his end, and truly the object of his
   will,) then it is what he takes a real delight and pleasure in. But
   then, according to the argument of the objection how can he have any
   thing future to desire or seek, who is already perfectly; eternally,
   and immutably satisfied in himself? What can remain for him to take any
   delight in, or to be further gratified by, whose eternal and
   unchangeable delight is in himself, as his own complete object of
   enjoyment. Thus the objector will be pressed with his own objection,
   let him embrace what notion he will of God's end in the creation. And I
   think he has no way left to answer but that which has been taken above.

   It may therefore be proper here to observe, that let what will be God's
   last end, that he must have a real and proper pleasure in. Whatever be
   the proper object of his will, he is gratified in. And the thing is
   either grateful to him in itself, or for something else for which he
   wills it; and so is his further end. But whatever is God's last end
   that he wills for its own sake; as grateful to him in itself, or in
   which he has some degree of true and proper pleasure. Otherwise we must
   deny any such thing as will in God with respect to any thing brought to
   pass in time, and so must deny his work of creation, or any work of his
   providence, to be truly voluntary. But we have as much reason to
   suppose, that God's works in creating and governing the world, are
   properly the fruits of his will, as of his understanding. And if there
   be any such thing at all, as what we mean by acts of will in God, then
   he is not indifferent whether his will be fulfilled or not. And if he
   is not indifferent, then he is truly gratified and pleased in the
   fulfillment of his will. And if he has a real pleasure in attaining his
   end, then the attainment of it belongs to his happiness; that in which
   God's delight or pleasure in any measure consists. To suppose that God
   has pleasure in things that are brought to pass in time, only
   figuratively and metaphorically, is to suppose that he exercises will
   about these things, and makes them his end only metaphorically.

   Ans. 3. The doctrine that makes God's creatures and not himself to be
   his last end, is a doctrine the furthest from having a favorable aspect
   on God's absolute self-sufficiency and independence. It far less agrees
   therewith than the doctrine against which this is objected. For we must
   conceive of the efficient as depending on his ultimate end. He depends
   on this end, in his desires, aims, actions and pursuits, so that he
   fails in all his desires, actions, and pursuits, if he fails of his
   end. Now if God himself be his last end, then in his dependence on his
   end, he depends on nothing but himself. If all things be of him, and to
   him, and he the first and the last, this shows him to be all in all. He
   is all to himself. He goes not out of himself in what he seeks; but his
   desires and pursuits as they originate from, so they terminate in,
   himself; and he is dependent on none but himself in the beginning or
   end of any of his exercises or operations. But if not himself, but the
   creature, were his last end, then as he depends on his last end, he
   would be in some sort dependent on the creature.

   OBJECT. II. Some may object, that to suppose God makes himself his
   highest and last end, is dishonorable to him; as it in effect supposes,
   that God does every thing from a selfish spirit. Selfishness is looked
   upon as mean and sordid in the creature; unbecoming and even hateful in
   such a worm of the dust as man. We should look upon a man as of a base
   and contemptible character, who should in every thing he did, be
   governed by selfish principles; should make his private interest his
   governing aim in all his conduct in life. How far then should we be
   from attributing any such thing to the Supreme Being, the blessed and
   only Potentate! Does it not become us to ascribe to him the most noble
   and generous dispositions, and qualities the most remote from every
   thing private, narrow, and sordid?

   Ans. 1. Such an objection must arise from a very ignorant or
   inconsiderate notion of the vice of selfishness and the virtue of
   generosity. If by selfishness be meant, a disposition in any being to
   regard himself; this is no otherwise vicious or unbecoming, than as one
   is less than a multitude, and so the public weal is of greater value
   than his particular interest. Among created beings one single person is
   inconsiderable in comparison of the generality; and so his interest is
   of little importance compared with the interest of the whole system.
   Therefore in them, a disposition to prefer self, as if it were more
   than all, is exceeding vicious. But it is vicious on no other account,
   than as it is a disposition that does not agree with the nature of
   things; and that which is indeed the greatest good. And a disposition
   in any one to forego his own interest for the sake of others, is no
   further excellent, no further worthy the name of generosity, than it is
   treating things according to their true value; prosecuting something
   most worthy to be prosecuted; an expression of a disposition to prefer
   something to self-interest, that is indeed preferable in itself. But if
   God be indeed so great, and so excellent, that all other beings are as
   nothing to him, and all other excellency be as nothing, and less than
   nothing and vanity, in comparison of his, and God be omniscient and
   infallible, and perfectly knows that he is infinitely the most valuable
   being, then it is fit that his heart should be agreeable to this--which
   is indeed the true nature and proportion of things, and agreeable to
   this infallible and all-comprehending understanding which he has of
   them, and that perfectly clear light in which he views them--and that
   he should value himself infinitely more than his creatures.

   Ans. 2. In created beings, a regard to self-interest may properly be
   set in opposition to the public welfare; because the private interest
   of one person may be inconsistent with the public good; at least it may
   be so in the apprehension of that person. That, which this person looks
   upon as his interest, may interfere with or oppose the general good.
   Hence his private interest may be regarded and pursued in opposition to
   the public. But this cannot be with respect to the Supreme Being, the
   author and head of the whole system; on whom all absolutely depend; who
   is the fountain of being and good to the whole. It is more absurd to
   suppose that his interest should be opposite to the interest of the
   universal system, than that the welfare of the head, heart, and vitals
   of the natural body, should be opposite to the welfare of the body. And
   it is impossible that God, who is omniscient, should apprehend his
   interest, as being inconsistent with the good and interest of the
   whole.

   Ans. 3. God seeking himself in the creation of the world in the manner
   which has been supposed, is so far from; being inconsistent with the
   good of its creatures, that it is a kind of regard to himself that
   inclines him to seek the good of his creature. It is a regard to
   himself that disposes him to diffuse and communicate himself. It is
   such a delight in his own internal fullness and glory, that disposes
   him to an abundant effusion and emanation of that glory. The same
   disposition, that inclines him to delight in his glory, causes him to
   delight in the exhibitions, expressions, and communications of it. If
   there were any person of such a taste and disposition of mind, that the
   brightness and light of the sun seemed unlovely to him, he would be
   willing that the sun's brightness and light should be retained within
   itself. But they that delight in it, to whom it appears lovely and
   glorious, will esteem it an amiable and glorious thing to have it
   diffused and communicated through the world.

   Here, by the way, it may be properly considered, whether some writers
   are not chargeable with inconsistency in this respect. They speak
   against the doctrine of GOD making himself his own highest and last
   end, as though this were an ignoble selfishness--when indeed he only is
   fit to be made the highest end, by himself and all other beings;
   inasmuch as he is infinitely greater and more worthy than all
   others--yet with regard, to creatures, who are infinitely less worthy
   of supreme and ultimate regard, they suppose, that they necessarily, at
   all times, seek their own happiness, and make it their ultimate end in
   all, even their most virtuous actions; and that this principle,
   regulated by wisdom and prudence, as leading to that which is their
   true and highest happiness, is the foundation of all virtue, and every
   thing that is morally good and excellent in them.

   OBJECT. III. To what has been supposed, that God makes himself his
   end--in seeking that his glory and excellent perfections should be
   known, esteemed, loved, and delighted in by his creatures--it may be
   objected, that this seems unworthy of God. It is considered as below a
   truly great man, to be much influenced in his conduct by a desire of
   popular applause. The notice and admiration of a gazing multitude,
   would be esteemed but a low end, to be aimed at by a prince or
   philosopher, in any great and noble enterprise. How much more is it
   unworthy the great God, to perform his magnificent works, e. g. the
   creation of the vast universe, out of regard to the notice and
   admiration of worms of the dust, that the displays of his magnificence
   may be gazed at, and applauded by those who are infinitely more beneath
   him, than the meanest rabble are beneath the greatest prince or
   philosopher.

   This objection is specious. It hath a show of argument; but it will
   appear to be nothing but a show, if we consider,

   1. Whether it be not worthy of God, to regard and value what is
   excellent and valuable in itself; and so to take pleasure in its
   existence.

   It seems not liable to any doubt, that there could be no future
   existence worthy to be desired or sought by God, and so worthy to be
   made his end, if no future existence was valuable and worthy to be
   brought to effect. If, when the world was not, there was any possible
   future thing fit and valuable in itself, I think the knowledge of God's
   glory, and the esteem and love of it, must be so. Understanding and
   will are the highest kind of created existence. And if they be
   valuable, it must be in their exercise. But the highest and most
   excellent kind of their exercise is in some actual knowledge, and
   exercise of will. And, certainly, the most excellent actual knowledge
   and will that can be in the creature, is the knowledge and the love of
   God. And the most true excellent knowledge of God, is the knowledge of
   his glory or moral excellence; and the most excellent exercise of the
   will consists in esteem and love, and a delight in his glory.--If any
   created existence is in itself worthy to be, or any thing that ever was
   future is worthy of existence, such a communication of divine fullness,
   such an emaciation and expression of the divine glory, is worthy of
   existence. But if nothing that ever was future was worthy to exist,
   then no future thing was, worthy to be aimed at by God in creating the
   world. And if nothing was worthy to be aimed at in creation, then
   nothing was worthy to be God's end in creation.

   If God's own excellency and glory is worthy to be highly valued and
   delighted in by him, then the value and esteem hereof by others, is
   worthy to be regarded by him: for this is a necessary consequence. To
   make this plain let it be considered, how it is with regard to the
   excellent qualities of another. If we highly value the virtues and
   excellencies of a friend, in proportion, we shall approve of others'
   esteem of them; and shall disapprove the contempt of them. If these
   virtues are truly valuable, they are worthy that we should thus approve
   others' esteem, and disapprove their contempt of them. And the case is
   the same with respect to any being's own qualities or attributes. If he
   highly esteems them, and greatly delights in them, he will naturally
   and necessarily love to see esteem of them in others, and dislike their
   disesteem. And if the attributes are worthy to be highly esteemed by
   the being who hath them, so is the esteem of them in others worthy to
   be proportionately approved and regarded. I desire it may he
   considered, whether it be unfit that God should be displeased with
   contempt of himself? If not, but on the contrary it be fit and suitable
   that he should be displeased with this, there is the same reason that
   he should be pleased with the proper love, esteem, and honor of
   himself.

   The matter may be also cleared, by considering what it would become us
   to approve of and value with respect to any public society we belong
   to, e. g. our nation or country. It becomes us to love our country; and
   therefore it becomes us to value the just honor of our country. But the
   same that it becomes us to value and desire for a friend, and the same
   that it becomes us to desire and seek for the community, the same does
   it become God to value and seek for himself; that is, on supposition,
   that it becomes God to love himself as it does men to love a friend or
   the public; which I think has been before proved.

   Here are two things that ought particularly to be adverted to. (1.)
   That in God, the love of himself and the love of the public are not to
   be distinguished, as in man: because God's being, as it were,
   comprehends all. His existence, being infinite, must be equivalent to
   universal existence. And for the same reason that public affection in
   the creature is fit and beautiful, God's regard to himself must be so
   likewise.--(2.) In God, the love of what is fit and decent, cannot he a
   distinct thing from the love of himself; because the love of God is
   that wherein all holiness primarily and chiefly consists, and God's own
   holiness must primarily consist in the love of himself. And if God's
   holiness consists in love to himself, then it will imply an approbation
   of the esteem and love of him in others. For a being that loves
   himself, necessarily loves love to himself. If holiness in God consist
   chiefly in love to himself, holiness in the creature must chiefly
   consist in love to him. And if God loves holiness in himself, he must
   love it in the creature.

   Virtue, by such of the late philosophers as seem to be in chief repute,
   is placed in public affection, or general benevolence. And if the
   essence of virtue lies primarily in this, then the love of virtue
   itself is virtuous no otherwise, than as it is implied in, or arises
   from, this public affection, or extensive benevolence of mind. Because
   if a man truly loves the public, he necessarily loves love to the
   public.

   Now therefore, for the same reason, if universal benevolence in the
   highest sense, be the same thing with benevolence to the Divine Being,
   who is in effect universal Being, it will follow, that love to virtue
   itself is no otherwise virtuous, than as it is implied in, or arises
   from, love to the Divine Being. Consequently, God's own love to virtue
   is implied in love to himself: and is virtuous no otherwise than as it
   arises from love to himself. So that God's virtuous disposition,
   appearing in love to holiness in the creature, is to be resolved into
   the same thing with love to himself. And consequently, whereinsoever he
   makes virtue his end, he makes himself his end. In fine, God being as
   it were an all-comprehending Being, all his moral perfections--his
   holiness, justice, grace, and benevolence--are some way or other to be
   resolved into a supreme and infinite regard to himself; and if so, it
   will be easy to suppose that it becomes him to make himself his supreme
   and last end in his works.

   I would here observe, by the way, that if any insist that it becomes
   God to love and take delight in the virtue of his creatures for its own
   sake, in such a manner as not to love it from regard to himself; this
   will contradict a former objection against God taking pleasure in
   communications of himself; viz. that inasmuch as God is perfectly
   independent and self-sufficient, therefore all his happiness and
   pleasure consists in the enjoyment of himself. So that if the same
   persons make both objections, they must be inconsistent with
   themselves.

   2. I would observe, that it is not unworthy of God to take pleasure in
   that which is in itself fit and amiable, even in those that are
   infinitely below him. If there be infinite grace and condescension in
   it, yet these are not unworthy of God, but infinitely to his honor and
   glory.

   They who insist, that God's own glory was not an ultimate end of his
   creation of the world; but the happiness of his creatures: do it under
   a color of exalting God's benevolence to his creatures. But if his love
   to them be so great, and he so highly values them as to look upon them
   worthy to be his end in all his great works, as they suppose; they are
   not consistent with themselves, in supposing that God has so little
   value for their love and esteem. For as the nature of love, especially
   great love, causes him that loves to value the esteem of the person
   beloved, so, that God should take pleasure in the creature's just love
   and esteem, will follow from God's love both to himself and to his
   creatures. If he esteem and love himself, he must approve of esteem and
   love to himself, and disapprove the contrary. And if he loves and
   values the creature, he must value and take delight in their mutual
   love and esteem.

   3. As to what is alleged, that it is unworthy of great men to be
   governed in their conduct and achievements by a regard to the applause
   of the populace; I would observe, What makes their applause worthy of
   so little regard, is their ignorance, giddiness, and injustice. The
   applause of the multitude very frequently is not founded on any just
   view of things, but on humor, mistake, folly, and unreasonable
   affections. Such applause deserves to be disregarded.--But it is not
   beneath a man of great dignity and wisdom, to value the wise and just
   esteem of others, however inferior to him. The contrary, instead of
   being an expression of greatness of mind, would show a haughty and mean
   spirit. It is such an esteem in his creatures, that God regards; for,
   such an esteem only is fit and amiable in itself.

   OBJECT. IV. To suppose that God makes himself his ultimate end in the
   creation of the world, derogates from the freeness of his goodness, in
   his beneficence to his creatures; and from their obligations to
   gratitude for the good communicated. For if God, in communicating his
   fullness, makes himself, and not the creatures, his end; then what good
   he does, he does for himself, and not for them; for his sake, and not
   theirs.

   Answer. God and the creature, in the emanation of the divine fullness,
   are not properly set in opposition; or made the opposite parts of a
   disjunction. Nor ought God's glory and the creature's good, to be
   viewed as if they were properly and entirely distinct, in the
   objection. This supposeth, that God having respect to his glory, and
   the communication of good to his creatures, are things altogether
   different: that God communicating his fullness for himself, and his
   doing it for them, are things standing in a proper disjunction and
   opposition. Whereas, if we were capable of more perfect views of God
   and divine things, which are so much above us, it probably would appear
   very clear, that the matter is quite otherwise: and that these things,
   instead of appearing entirely distinct, are implied one in the other.
   God is seeking his glory, seeks the good of his creatures; because the
   emanation of his glory (which he seeks and delights in, as he delights
   in himself and his own eternal glory) implies the communicated
   excellency and happiness of his creatures. And in communicating his
   fullness for them, he does it for himself; because their good, which he
   seeks, is so much in union and communion with himself. God is their
   good. Their excellency and happiness is nothing, but the emanation and
   expression of God's glory: God, in seeking their glory and happiness,
   seeks himself: and in seeking himself, i.e. himself diffused and
   expressed, (which he delights in, as he delights in his own beauty and
   fullness,) he seeks their glory and happiness.

   This will better appear, if we consider the degree and manner in which
   he aimed at the creature's excellency and happiness in creating the
   world; viz. during the whole of its designed eternal duration; in
   greater and greater nearness, and strictness of union with himself, in
   his own glory and happiness, in constant progression, through all
   eternity. As the creature's good was viewed, when God made the world,
   with respect to its whole duration, and eternally progressive union to,
   and communion with him: so the creature must be viewed as in infinitely
   strict union of himself. In this view it appears, that God's respect to
   the creature, in the whole, unites with his respect to himself. Both
   regards are like two lines, which at the beginning appear separate, but
   finally meet in one, both being directed to the same center. And as to
   the good of the creature itself, in its whole duration and infinite
   progression, it must be viewed as infinite; and as coming nearer and
   nearer to the same thing in its infinite fullness. The nearer anything
   comes to infinite, the nearer it comes to identity with God. And if any
   good, as viewed by God, is beheld as infinite, it cannot be viewed as a
   distinct thing from God's own infinite glory.

   The apostle's discourse of the great love of Christ to men, (Eph. 5:25,
   &c.) leads us thus to think of the love of Christ to his church; as
   considering with his love to himself, by virtue of the strict union of
   the church with him. "Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved
   the church, and gave himself for it--that he might present it to
   himself a glorious church. So ought men to love their wives, as their
   own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself--even as the Lord
   loved the church; for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
   his bones." Now I apprehend, that there is nothing in God's disposition
   to communicate of his own fullness to the creatures, that at all
   derogates from the excellence of it, or the creature's obligation.

   God's disposition to cause his own infinite fullness to flow forth, is
   not the less properly called his goodness, because the good he
   communicates is what he delights in, as he delights in his own glory.
   The creature has no less benefit by it; neither has such disposition
   less of a direct tendency to the creature's benefit. Nor is this
   disposition in God, to diffuse his own good, the less excellent,
   because it is implied in his love to himself. For his love to himself
   does not imply it any otherwise, but is as it implies a love to
   whatever is worthy and excellent. The emanation of God's glory is in
   itself worthy and excellent, and so God delights in it; and this
   delight is implied in his love to his own fullness; because that is the
   fountain, the sum and comprehension of everything that is excellent.
   Nor does God's inclination to communicate good from regard to himself,
   or delight in his own glory, at all diminish the freeness in his
   beneficence. This will appear, if he consider particularly, in what
   ways doing good to others from self-love, may be consistent with the
   freeness of beneficence. And I conceive there are only these two ways,

   1. When any does good to another from confined self-love, which is
   opposite to a general benevolence. This kind of self-love is properly
   called selfishness. In some sense, the most benevolent, generous person
   in the world, seeks his own happiness in doing good to others; because
   he places his happiness in their good. His mind is so enlarged as to
   take them, as it were, into himself. Thus when they are happy, he feels
   it; he partakes with them, and is happy in their happiness. This is as
   far from being inconsistent with the freeness of benevolence, that, on
   the contrary, free benevolence and kindness consists in it. The most
   free beneficence that can be in men, is doing good, not from a confined
   selfishness, but from a disposition of free benevolence, or love to
   begin in general.

   But now, with respect to Divine Being, there is no such thing as
   confined selfishness in him, or a love to himself opposite to general
   benevolence. It is impossible, because he comprehends all entity, and
   all excellence, in his own essence. The eternal and infinite Being, is
   in effect, being in general; and comprehends universal existence. God,
   in his benevolence to his creatures, cannot have his heart enlarged, in
   such a manner as to take in beings who are originally out of himself,
   distinct and independent. This cannot be in an infinite Being, who
   exists alone from eternity. But he, from his goodness, as it were
   enlarges himself in an more excellent and divine manner. This is by
   communicating and diffusing himself; and so, instead of finding, he
   makes objects of his benevolence--not by taking what he finds distinct
   from himself, and so partaking of their good, and being happy in them,
   but--by flowing forth, and expressing himself in them, and making them
   partake of him, and then rejoicing in himself expressed in them, and
   communicated in them.

   2. Another thing, in doing good to others from self-love that derogates
   from the freeness of the goodness, is acting from dependence of them
   for the good we need or desire. So that, in our beneficence, we are not
   self-moved, but as it were constrained by something without ourselves.
   But it has been particularly shown already, that God making himself his
   end, argues no dependence; but is consistent with absolute independence
   and self- sufficiency.

   And I would here observe, that there is something in that disposition
   to communicate goodness, that shows God to be independent and
   self-moved in it, in a manner that is peculiar, and above the
   beneficence of the creatures. Creatures, even the most excellent, are
   not independent and self-moved in their goodness; but in all its
   exercises they are excited by some object they find; something
   appearing good, or in some respect worthy of regard, presents itself,
   and moves their kindness. But God, being all, and alone is absolutely
   self-moved. The exercises of his communicative disposition are
   absolutely from within himself; all that is good and worthy in the
   object, and its very being, proceeding from the overflowing of this
   fullness.

   These things show that the supposition of God making himself his
   ultimate end, does not all diminish the creature's obligation to
   gratitude for communications of good received. For if it lessen its
   obligation, it must be on one of the following accounts. Either, that
   the creature has not so much benefit by it; or, that the disposition it
   flows from, is not proper goodness, not having so direct a tendency to
   the creature's benefit, or, that the disposition is not so virtuous and
   excellent in its kind; or, that the beneficence is not so free. But it
   has been observed, that none of these things take place, with regard to
   that disposition, which has been supposed to have excited God to create
   the world.

   I confess there is a degree of indistinctness and obscurity in the
   close consideration of such subjects, and a great imperfection in the
   expressions we use concerning them; arising unavoidably from the
   infinite sublimity of the subject, and the incomprehensibleness of
   those things that are divine. Hence revelation is the surest guide in
   these matters: and what that teaches shall in the next place be
   considered. Nevertheless, the endeavors used to discover what the voice
   of reason is, so far as it can go, may serve to prepare the way, by
   obviating cavils insisted on by many; and to satisfy us, that what the
   word of God says of the matter is not unreasonable.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. II.

   WHEREIN IT IS INQUIRED, WHAT IS TO BE LEARNED FROMHOLY SCRIPTURES,
   CONCERNING GOD'S LAST END IN THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   The Scriptures represent God as making himself his own last end in the
   creation of the world.

   It is manifest, that the Scriptures speak, on all occasions, as though
   God made himself his end in all his works; and as though the same
   being, who is the first cause of all things, were the supreme and last
   end of all things. Thus in Isa. xliv. 6. "Thus saith the Lord, the king
   of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of hosts, I am the first, I also
   am the last, and besides me there is no God." Chap. xlviii. 12. "I am
   the first and I am the last." Rev. i. 8. "I am Alpha and Omega, the
   beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and was, and which
   is to come, the Almighty." ver. 11. "I am Alpha and Omega, the first
   and the last." Ver. 17. "I am the first and the last." Chap. xxi. 6.
   "And he said unto me, it is done; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
   and the end." Chap. xxii. 13. "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
   the end, the first and the last."

   When God is so often spoken of as the last as well as the first, the
   end as well as the beginning, it is implied, that as he is the first,
   efficient cause and fountain, from whence all things originate; so, he
   is the last, final cause for which they are made; the final term to
   which they all tend in their ultimate issue. This seems to be the most
   natural import of these expressions; and is confirmed by other parallel
   passages; as Rom. xi. 36. "For of him, and through him, and to him, are
   all things." Col. i. 16. "For by him were all things created, that are
   in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they
   be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were
   created by him, and for him." Heb. ii. 10. "For it became him, by whom
   are all things, and for whom are all things." And in Prov. xvi. 4. it
   is said expressly, "The Lord hath made all things for himself."

   And the manner is observable, in which God is said to be the last, to
   whom, and for whom, are all things. It is evidently spoken of as a meet
   and suitable thing, a branch of his glory; a meet prerogative of the
   great, infinite, and eternal Being; a thing becoming the dignity of him
   who is infinitely above all other beings; from whom all things are, and
   by whom they consist; and in comparison with whom all other things are
   as nothing.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Wherein some positions are advanced concerning a just method of arguing
   in this affair, from what we find in the Holy Scriptures.

   We have seen, that the Scriptures speak of the creation of the world as
   being for God, as its end. What remains therefore to be inquired into,
   is, which way do the Scriptures represent God as making himself his
   end? It is evident, that God does not make his existence or being the
   end of the creation; which cannot be supposed without great absurdity.
   His existence cannot be conceived of but as prior to any of God's
   designs. Therefore he cannot create the world to the end that he may
   have existence; or may have certain attributes and perfections. Nor do
   the Scriptures give the least intimation of any such thing. Therefore,
   what divine effect, or what in relation to God, is that which the
   Scripture teacheth us to be the end he aimed at, in his works of
   creation, and in designing which he makes himself his end?

   In order to a right understanding of the Scripture doctrine, and
   drawing just inferences from what we find said in the word of God,
   relative to this matter; and so to open the way to a true and definite
   answer to the above inquiry, I would lay down the following positions.

   Position 1. That which appears to be God's ultimate end in his works of
   providence in general, we may justly suppose to be his last end in the
   work of creation. This appears from what was observed before, under the
   fifth particular of the introduction, which I need not now repeat.

   Position. 2. When any thing appears, by the Scripture, to be the last
   end of some of the works of God, that thing appears to be the result of
   God's works in general. And though it be not mentioned as the end of
   those works, but only of some of them; yet as nothing appears peculiar
   in the nature of the case, that renders it a fit, beautiful, and
   valuable result of those particular works, more than of the rest; we
   may justly infer that thing to be the last end of those other works
   also. For we must suppose it to be on account of the value of the
   effect, that it is made the end of those works of which it is expressly
   spoken as the end; and this effect, by the supposition, being equally,
   and in like manner, the result of the work, and of the same value, it
   is but reasonable to suppose, that it is the end of the work, of which
   it is naturally the consequence, in one case as well as in another.

   Position 3. The ultimate end of God in creating the world being also
   the last end of all his works of providence, we may well presume that,
   if there be any particular thing, more frequently mentioned in
   Scripture, as God's ultimate aim in his works of providence, than any
   thing else, this is the ultimate end of God's works in general, and so
   the end of the work of creation.

   Position 4. That which appears, from the word of God, to be his
   ultimate end with respect to the moral world, or the intelligent part
   of the system, that is God's last end in the work of creation general.
   Because it is evident, from the constitution of the world itself, as
   well as from the word of God, that the moral part is the end of all the
   rest of the creation. The inanimate, unintelligent part, is made for
   the rational, as much as a house is prepared for the inhabitant. And it
   is evident also from reason and the word of God, that it is for the
   sake of some moral good in them, that moral agents are made, and the
   world made for them. But it is further evident, that whatsoever is the
   last end of that part of creation, which is the end of all the rest,
   and for which all the rest of the world was made, must be the last end
   of the whole. If all the other parts of a watch are made for the hand
   of the watch, in order to move that aright, then it will follow, that
   the last end of the hand is the last end of the whole machine.

   Position 5. That which appears from the Scripture to be God's ultimate
   end in the chief works of his providence, we may well determine is
   God's last end in creating the world. For, as observed, we may justly
   infer the end of a thing from the use of it. We must justly infer the
   end of a clock, a chariot, a ship, or water-engine, from the main use
   to which it is applied. But God's providence is his use of the world he
   has made. And if there be any works of providence which are evidently
   God's main works, herein appears and consists the main use that God
   makes of the creation.--From these two last positions we may infer the
   next, viz.

   Position 6. Whatever appears, by the Scriptures, to be God's ultimate
   end in his main works of Providence towards the moral world, that we
   may justly infer to be the last end of the creation of the world.
   Because, as was just now observed, the moral world is the chief part of
   the creation, and the end of the rest; and God's last end in creating
   that part of the world, must be his last end in the creation of the
   whole. And it appears, by the last position, that the end of God's main
   works of Providence towards moral beings, or the main use to which he
   puts them, shews the last end for which he has made them; and
   consequently the main end for which he has made the whole world.

   Position 7. That which divine revelation shows to be God's ultimate end
   with respect to that part of the moral world which are good, in their
   being and in their being good, this we must suppose to be the end of
   God's creating the world. For it has been already shown, that God's
   last end in the moral part of creation must be the end of the whole.
   But his end in that part of the moral world that are good, must be the
   last end for which he has made the moral world in general. For therein
   consists the goodness of a thing, its fitness to answer its end; at
   least this must be goodness in the eyes of its author. For goodness in
   his eyes, is its agreeableness to his mind. But an agreeableness to his
   mind, in what he makes for some end or use, must be an agreeableness or
   fitness to that end. For his end in this case is his mind. That which
   he chiefly aims at in that thing, is chiefly his mind with respect to
   that thing. And therefore, they are good moral agents who are fitted
   for the end for which God has made moral agents. And consequently, that
   which is the chief end to which good created moral agents, in being
   good, are fitted, this is the chief end of the moral part of the
   creation; and consequently of the creation in general.

   Position. 8. That which the word of God requires the intelligent and
   moral part of the world to seek, as their ultimate and highest end,
   that we have reason to suppose is the last end for which God has made
   them; and consequently, by position fourth, the last end for which he
   has made the whole world. A main difference between the intelligent and
   moral parts, and the rest of the world, lies in this, that the former
   are capable of knowing their Creator, and the end for which he made
   them, and capable of actively complying with his design in their
   creation, and promoting it; while other creatures cannot promote the
   design of their creation, only passively and eventually. And seeing
   they are capable of knowing the end for which their author has made
   them, it is doubtless their duty to fall in with it. Their wills ought
   to comply with the will of the Creator in this respect, in mainly
   seeking the same, as their last end, which God mainly seeks as their
   last end. This must be the law of nature and reason with respect to
   them. And we must suppose that God's revealed law, and the law of
   nature, agree; and that his will, as a lawgiver, must agree with his
   will as a Creator. Therefore we justly infer, that the same thing which
   God's revealed law requires intelligent creatures to seek, as their
   last and greatest end, that God their Creator had made their last end,
   and so the end of the creation of the world.

   Position 9. We may well suppose, that what is in Holy Scripture, stated
   as the main end of the goodness of the moral world--so that the respect
   and relation their goodness has to that end, is what chiefly makes it
   valuable and desirable--is God's ultimate end in the creation of the
   moral world; and so, by position the fourth, of the whole world. For
   the end of the goodness of a thing, is the end of the thing.

   Position 10. That which persons who are described in Scripture as
   approved saints, and set forth as examples of piety, sought as their
   last and highest end, in the instances of their good and approved
   behaviour; that, we must suppose, was what they ought to seek as their
   last end: and consequently by the preceding position, was the same with
   God's last end in the creation of the world.

   Position 11. What appears by the word of God to be that end, in the
   desires of which the souls of the best, and in their best frames, most
   naturally and directly exercise their goodness, and in expressing their
   desire of this end, they do most properly and directly express their
   respect to God; we may well suppose that end to be the chief and
   ultimate end of a spirit of piety and goodness, and God's chief end in
   making the moral world, and so the whole world. For, doubtless, the
   most direct tendency of a spirit of true goodness, in the best part of
   the moral world, is to the chief end of goodness, and so the chief end
   of the creation of the moral world. And in what else can the spirit of
   the true respect and friendship to God be expressed by way of desire,
   than in desires of the same end which God himself chiefly and
   ultimately desires in making them and all other things.

   Position 12. Since the Holy Scriptures teach us that Jesus Christ is
   the Head of the moral world, and especially of all the good part of it;
   the chief of God's servants, appointed to be the Head of his saints and
   angels, and set forth as the chief and most perfect pattern and example
   of goodness; we may well suppose, by the foregoing positions, that what
   he sought as his last end, was God's last end in the creation of the
   world.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Particular texts of Scripture, that show that God's glory is an
   ultimate end of the creation.

   1. What God says in his word, naturally leads us to suppose, that the
   way in which he makes himself his end in his work or works, which he
   does for his own sake, is in making his glory his end.

   Thus Isa. xlviii. 11. "For my own sake, even for in own sake, will I do
   it. For how should my name be polluted; and I will not give my glory to
   another." Which is as much as to say, I will obtain my end; I will not
   forego my glory; another shall not take this prize from me. It is
   pretty evident here, that God's name and his glory, which seem to
   intend the same thing, as shall be observed more particularly
   afterwards, are spoken of as his last end in the great work mentioned;
   not as an inferior, subordinate end, subservient to the interest of
   others. The words are emphatical. The emphasis and repetition constrain
   us to understand, that what God does is ultimately for his own sake:
   "For my own sake, even for my own sake will I do it."

   So the words of the apostle, in Rom. xi. 36. naturally lead us to
   suppose, that the way in which all things are to God, is in being for
   his glory. Rom. xi. 36."For of him, and through him, and to him are all
   things, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." In the preceding
   context, the apostle observes the marvellous disposals of divine
   wisdom, for causing all things to be to him, in their final issue and
   result, as they are from him at first, and governed by him. His
   discourse shows how God contrived this and brought it to pass, by
   setting up the kingdom of Christ in the world; leaving the Jews and
   calling the Gentiles; including what he would hereafter do in bringing
   in the Jews, with the fulness of the Gentiles; with the circumstances
   of these wonderful works, so as greatly to show his justice and his
   goodness, to magnify his grace, and manifest the sovereignty and
   freeness of it, and the absolute dependence of all on him. And then, in
   the four last verses, he breaks out into a most pathetic exclamation,
   expressing his great admiration of the depth of divine wisdom, in the
   steps he takes for attaining his end, and causing all things to be to
   him: and finally, expresses a joyful consent to God's excellent design
   in all to glorify himself; in saying, "to him be glory for ever;" as
   much as to say, as all things are so wonderfully ordered for his glory,
   so let him have the glory of all, for evermore.

   2. The glory of God is spoken of in Holy Scripture as the last end for
   which those parts of the moral world that are good were made.

   Thus in Isa. xliii. 6,7. "I will say to the north, Give up, and to the
   south, Keep not back; bring my sons from afar; and my daughters from
   the ends of the earth, even every one that is called by my name; for I
   have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him."
   Again, Isa. lx. 21. "Thy people also shall be all righteous. They shall
   inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting hand, that I may
   be glorified." Also Isa. xli. 3. chap. xli. 3. "That they may be called
   trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be
   glorified."

   In these places we see, that the glory of God is spoken of as the end
   of God's saints, the end or which he makes them, i. e. either gives
   them being, or gives them a being as saints, or both. It is said, that
   God has made and formed them to be his sons and daughters, for his own
   glory: That they are trees of his planting, the work of his hands, as
   trees of righteousness, that he might be glorified. And if we consider
   the words, especially as taken with the context in each of the places,
   it will appear quite natural to suppose, that God's glory is here
   spoken of only as an end inferior and subordinate to the happiness of
   God's people. On the contrary, they will appear rather as promises of
   making God's people happy, that God therein might be glorified.

   So is that in Isa. xliii. as we shall see plainly, if we take the whole
   that is said from the beginning of the chapter, ver. 1-7. It its wholly
   a promise of a future, great, and wonderful work of God's power and
   grace, delivering his people from all misery, and making them exceeding
   happy; and then the end of all, or the sum of God's design in all, is
   declared to be God's own glory. "I have redeemed thee, I have called
   thee by thy name, thou art mine.--I will be with thee.--When thou
   walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the
   flame kindle upon thee.--Thou art precious and honourable in my sight.
   I will give men for thee, and people for thy life. Fear not, I am with
   thee.--I will bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of
   the earth; every one that is called by my name: for I have created him
   for my glory."

   So Isa. lx. 21. The whole chapter is made up of nothing but promises of
   future, exceeding happiness to God's church; but, for brevity's sake,
   let us take only the two preceding verses 19, 20. "The sun shall be no
   more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light
   unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light and thy
   God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall the moon
   withdraw itself; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the
   days of the mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all
   righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my
   planting, the work of my hands; and then the end of all is added, "that
   I might be glorified." All the preceding promises are plainly mentioned
   as so many parts, or constituents, of the great, and exceeding
   happiness of God's people; and God's glory is mentioned, as the sum of
   his design in this happiness.

   In like manner is the promise in chap. lxi. 3. "To appoint unto them
   that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
   for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that
   they might be called tress of righteousness, the planting of the Lord,
   that he might be glorified." The work of God promised to be affected,
   is plainly an accomplishment of the joy, gladness, and happiness of
   God's people, instead of their mourning and sorrow; and the end in
   which God's design in this work is obtained and summed up, is his
   glory. This proves, by the seventh position, that God's glory is the
   end of the creation.

   The same thing may be argued from Jer. xiii. 11. "For as a girdle
   cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the
   whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Judah, saith the Lord:
   that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a
   praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear." That is, God sought
   to make them to be his own holy people; or, as the apostle expresses
   it, his peculiar people, zealous of good works; that so they might be a
   glory to him; as girdles were used in those days for ornament and
   beauty, and as badges of dignity and honour. [199]

   Now when God speaks of himself, as seeking a peculiar and holy people
   for himself, to be for his glory and honour, as a man that seeks an
   ornament and badge of honour for his glory, it is not natural to
   understand it merely of a subordinate end, as though God had no respect
   to himself in it; but only the good of others. If so, the comparison
   would not be natural; for men are commonly wont to seek their own glory
   and honour in adorning themselves, and dignifying themselves with
   badges of honour.

   The same doctrine seems to be taught, Eph. i. 5. "Having predestinated
   us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, unto himself, according
   to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory f his
   grace."--And the same may be argued from Isa. xliv. 23. "For the Lord
   hath redeemed Jacob, he hath glorified himself in Israel." And chap.
   xlix. 3. "Thou art my servant Jacob, in whom I will glorified." John
   xvii. 10. "And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am
   glorified in them." 2 Thess. i. 10. "When he shall come to be glorified
   in his saints." Ver. 11, 12. "Wherefore also we pray always for you,
   that our God would count you worthy of his calling, and fulfil all the
   good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power: that
   the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and ye in him,
   according to the grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ."

   3. The Scripture speaks of God's glory, as his ultimate end of the
   goodness of the moral part of the creation; and that end, in relation
   to which chiefly the value of their virtue consists.

   As in Phil. i. 10, 11. "That ye may approve things that are excellent,
   that ye may be sincere, and without offence, till the day of Christ:
   being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
   Christ, unto the glory and praise of God." Here the apostle shows how
   the fruits of righteousness in them are valuable, and how they answer
   their end, viz. in being "by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of
   God." John xv. 8. "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
   fruit." Signifying, that by this means it is that the great end of
   religion is to be answered. And in 1 Pet. iv. 11. the apostle directs
   the Christians to regulate all their religious performances with
   reference to that one end. "If any man speak, let him speak as the
   oracles of God if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
   which God giveth, that God in all things may be glorified; to whom be
   praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."

   And, from time to time, embracing and practising true religion, and
   repenting of sin, and turning to holiness, is expressed by glorifying
   God, as though that were the sum and end of the whole matter. Rev. xi.
   13. "And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the
   remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven." So Rev.
   xiv. 6, 7. "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having
   the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth;
   saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him." As though
   this were the sum and end of that virtue and religion, which was the
   grand design of preaching the gospel, every where through the world.
   Rev. xvi. 9. "And repented not to give him glory." Which is as much as
   to say, they did not forsake their sins and turn to true religion, that
   God might receive that which is the great end he seeks, in the religion
   he requires of men. (See to the same purpose, Psal. xxii. 21-23. Isa.
   lxvi. 19.and Isa. xxiv. 15.and Isa. xxv. 3. Jer. xiii. 15, 16. Dan. v.
   23. Rom. xv. 5, 6.)

   And as the exercise of true religion and virtue in Christians is
   summarily expressed by their glorifying God, so, when the good
   influence of this on others is spoken of, it is expressed in the same
   manner. Matt. v. 16. "Let your light so shine before men, that others
   seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven." 1
   Pet. ii. 12. "Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that
   whereas they speak evil against you as evildoers, they may, by your
   good works which they behold, glorify God in the day of visitation."

   That the ultimate end of moral goodness, or righteousness, is answered
   in God's glory being attained, is supposed in the objection which the
   apostle makes, or supposes some will make, Rom. iii. 7. "For if the
   truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why am I
   judged as a sinner?" i. e. seeing the great end of righteousness is
   answered by my sin, in God being glorified, why is my sin condemned and
   punished? and why is not my vice equivalent to virtue?

   And the glory of God is spoken of as that wherein consists the value
   and end of particular graces. As of faith. Rom. iv. 20. "He staggered
   not at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in faith,
   giving glory to God." Phil ii. 11. "That every tongue should confess
   that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father." Of repentance,
   Josh. vi. 19. "Give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
   make confession unto him." Of charity. 2 Cor. viii. 19. "With this
   grace, which is administered by us, to the glory of the same Lord, and
   declaration of your ready mind." Thanksgiving and praise. Luke vii. 18.
   "There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this
   stranger." Psal. l. 23. "Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me; and to
   him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
   God." Concerning which last place may be observed, that God seems to
   say this to such as supposed, in their religious performances, that the
   end of all religion was to glorify God. They supposed they did this in
   the best manner, in offering a multitude of sacrifices; but God
   corrects their mistake, and informs them, that this grand end of
   religion is not attained this way, but in offering the more spiritual
   sacrifices of praise and a holy conversation.

   In fine, the words of the apostle in 1 Cor. vi. 20. are worthy of
   particular notice. "Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a
   price: therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are
   his." Here, not only is glorifying God spoken of, as what summarily
   comprehends the end of religion, and of Christ redeeming us; but the
   apostle urges, that inasmuch as we are not our own, we ought not to act
   as if we were our own, but as God's; and should not use the members of
   our bodies, or faculties of our souls, for ourselves, but for God, as
   making him our end. And he expresses the way in which we are to make
   God our end, viz. in making his glory our end. "Therefore glorify God
   in your body and in your spirit, which are his." [200] Here it cannot
   be pretended, that though Christians are indeed required to make God's
   glory their end; yet it is but as a subordinate end, as subservient to
   their own happiness; for then, in acting chiefly and ultimately for
   their ownselves, they would use themselves more as their own than as
   God's; which is directly contrary to the design of the apostle's
   exhortation, and the argument he is upon; which is, that we should give
   ourselves as it were away from ourselves to God, and use ourselves as
   his, and not our own, acting for his sake, and not our own sakes. Thus
   it is evident, by position the ninth, that the glory of God is the last
   end for which he created the world.

   4. There are some things in the word of God which lead us to suppose,
   that it requires of men that they should desire and seek God's glory,
   as their highest and last end in what they do.

   As particularly, from 1 Cor. x. 30. "Whether therefore ye eat or drink,
   or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God." And 1 Pet. iv.
   11--"That God in all things may be glorified." And this may be argued,
   that Christ requires his followers should desire and seek God's glory
   in the first place, and above all things else, from that prayer which
   he gave his disciples, as the pattern and rule for the first petition
   of which is, Hallowed be thy name. Which in scripture language is the
   same with glorified be thy name; as is manifest from Lev. x. 3. Ezek.
   xxviii. 22. and many other places. Now our last and highest end is
   doubtless what should be first in our desires, and consequently first
   in our prayers; and therefore, we may argue, that since Christ directs
   that God's glory should be first in our prayers; and therefore, we may
   argue, that since Christ directs that God's glory should be first in
   our prayers, that therefore this is our last end. This is further
   confirmed by the conclusion of the Lord's prayer, For thine is the
   kingdom, the power, and the glory. Which, as it stands in connexion
   with the rest of the prayer, implies, that we desire and ask all the
   things mentioned in each petition, with a subordination, and in
   subservience, to the dominion and glory of God; in which all our
   desires ultimately terminate, as their last end. God's glory and
   dominion are the two first things mentioned in the prayer, and are the
   subject of the first half of the prayer; and they are the two last
   things mentioned in the same prayer, in its conclusion. God's glory is
   the Alpha and Omega in the prayer. From these things we may argue,
   according to position the eighth, that God's glory is the last end of
   the creation.

   5. The glory of God appears, by the account given in Scripture, to be
   that event, in the earnest desires of which, and in their delight in
   which, the best part of the moral world, and when in their best frames,
   most naturally express the direct tendency of the spirit of true
   goodness, the virtuous and pious affections of their heart.

   This is the way in which the holy apostles, from time to time, gave
   vent to the ardent exercises of their piety, and breathed forth their
   regard to the Supreme Being. Rom. xi. 36. "To whom be glory forever and
   ever. Amen." Chap .xvi. 27. "To God only wise, be glory, through Jesus
   Christ, for ever. Amen." Gal. i. 4, 5. "Who gave himself for our sins,
   that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the
   will of God and our Father, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen."
   2 Tim. iv. 18. "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and
   will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory forever and
   ever. Amen." Eph. iii. 21. "Unto him be glory in the church by Christ
   Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end." Heb. xiii.
   21.--"Through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen."
   Phil. iv. 20. "Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever.
   Amen." 2 Pet. iii. 18. "To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen."
   Jude 25. "To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty,
   dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen." Rev. i. 5, 6. "Unto him
   that loved us, &c.--to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
   Amen."

   It was in this way that holy David, the sweet psalmist of Israel,
   vented the ardent tendencies and desires of his pious heart. 1 Chron.
   xvi. 28, 29. "Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto
   the Lord glory and strength: give unto the Lord the glory due unto his
   name." We have much the same expressions again, Psal. xxix. 1, 2. and
   lxix. 7, 8. See also, Psal. lvii. 5. lxxii. 18, 19. cxv. 1. So the
   whole church of God through all parts of the earth, Isa. xlii. 10-12.
   In like manner the saints and angels in heaven express the piety of
   their hearts, Rev. iv. 9, 11-14. and vii. 12. This is the event that
   the hearts of the seraphim especially exult in, as appears by Isa. vi.
   2, 3. "Above it stood the seraphim--And one cried unto another, and
   said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of
   his glory." So at the birth of Christ, Luke ii. 14. "Glory to God in
   the highest," &c.

   It is manifest that these holy persons in earth and heaven, in thus
   expressing their desires of the glory of God, have respect to it, not
   merely as a subordinate end, but as that which is in itself valuable in
   the highest degree. It would be absurd to say, that in these ardent
   exclamations, they are only giving vent to their vehement benevolence
   to their fellow-creatures, and expressing their earnest desire that God
   might be glorified, that so his subjects may be made happy by that
   means. It is evident, it is not so much their love, either to
   themselves, or their fellow-creatures, which they express, as their
   exalted and supreme regard to the most high and infinitely glorious
   Being. When the church says, Not unto us, not unto us, O Jehovah, but
   to thy name give the glory, it would be absurd to say, that she only
   desires that God may have glory, as a necessary or convenient means of
   their own advancement and felicity. From these things it appears by the
   eleventh position, that God's glory is the end of the creation.

   6. The Scripture leads us to suppose, that Christ sought God's glory,
   as his highest and last end.

   John vii. 18. "He that speaketh of himself, seeketh his own glory; but
   he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
   unrighteousness is in him." When Christ says, he did not seek his own
   glory, we cannot reasonably understand him, that he had no regard to
   his own glory, even the glory of the human nature; for the glory of
   that nature was part of the reward promised him, and of the joy set
   before him. But we must understand him, that this was not his ultimate
   aim; it was not the end that chiefly governed his conduct: and
   therefore, when in opposition to this, in the latter part of the
   sentence, he says, "But he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the
   same is true" &c. It is natural from the antithesis to understand him,
   that this was his ultimate aim, his supreme governing end.

   John xii. 27, 28. "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say?
   Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this
   hour, Father, glorify thy name." Christ was now going to Jerusalem, and
   expected in a few days there to be crucified: and the prospect of his
   last sufferings, in this near approach, was very terrible to him. Under
   this distress of mind, he supports himself with a prospect of what
   would be the consequence of his sufferings, viz. God's glory. Now, it
   is the end that supports the agent in any difficult work that he
   undertakes, and above all others, his ultimate and supreme end; for
   this is above all others valuable in his eyes; and so, sufficient to
   countervail the difficulty of the means. That end, which is in itself
   agreeable and sweet to him, and which ultimately terminates his
   desires, is the centre of rest and support; and so must be the fountain
   and sum of all the delight and comfort he has in his prospects, with
   respect to his work. Now Christ has his soul straitened and distressed
   with a view of that which was infinitely the most difficult part of his
   work, and which was just at hand. Now certainly, if his mind seeks
   support in the conflict from a view of his end, it must most naturally
   repair to the highest end, which is the proper fountain of all support
   in this case. We may well suppose, that when his soul conflicts with
   the most extreme difficulties, it would resort to the idea of his
   supreme and ultimate end, the fountain of all the support and comfort
   he has in the work.

   The same thing, Christ seeking the glory of God as his ultimate end, is
   manifest by what he says, when he comes yet nearer to the hour of his
   last sufferings, in that remarkable prayer, the last he ever made with
   his disciples, on the evening before his crucifixion; wherein he
   expresses the sum of his aims and desires. His first words are John
   xvii. 1 "Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also
   may glorify thee." As this is his first request, we may suppose it to
   be his supreme request and desire, and what he ultimately aimed at in
   all. If we consider what follows to the end, all the rest that is said
   in the prayer, seems to be but an amplification of this great
   request.--On the whole, I think it is pretty manifest, that Jesus
   Christ sought the glory of God as his highest and last end; and that
   therefore, by position twelfth, this was God's last end in the creation
   of the world.

   7. It is manifest from Scripture, that God's glory is the last end of
   that great work of providence, the work of redemption by Jesus Christ.

   This is manifest from what is just now observed, of its being the end
   ultimately sought Jesus Christ the Redeemer. And if we further consider
   the texts mentioned in the proof of that, and take notice of the
   context, it will be very evident, that it was what Christ sought as his
   last end, in that great work which he came into the world upon, viz. to
   procure redemption for his people. It is manifest, that Christ
   professes in John vii. 18. that he did not seek his own glory in what
   he did, but the glory of him that sent him. He means, in the work of
   his ministry; the work he performed, and which he came into the world
   to perform, which is the work of redemption. And with respect to that
   text, John xii. 27, 28. it has been already observed, that Christ
   comforted himself in the view of the extreme difficulty of his work, in
   the prospect of the highest, ultimate, and most excellent end of that
   work, which he set his heart most upon, and delighted most in.

   And in the answer that the Father made him from heaven at that time, in
   the latter part of the same verse, John xii. 28. "I have both glorified
   it, and will glorify it again." The meaning plainly is, that God had
   glorified his name in what Christ had done, in the work he sent him
   upon; and would glorify it again, and to a greater degree, in what he
   should further do, and in the success thereof. Christ shows that he
   understood it thus, in what he says upon it, when the people took
   notice of it, wondering at the voice; some saying, that it thundered,
   others, that an angel spake to him. Christ says, "This voice came not
   because of me, but for your sakes." And then he says, (exulting in the
   prospect of this glorious end and success,) "Now is the judgment of
   this world; now is the prince of this world cast out; and I, if I be
   lift up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." In the success of
   the same work of redemption, he places his own glory, as was observed
   before. John xii. 23, 24. "The hour is come that the Son of Man should
   be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat
   fall into the ground, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth
   forth much fruit."

   So it is manifest, that when be seeks his own and his Father's glory,
   in that prayer, John xvii. he seeks it as the end of that great work he
   came into the world upon, and which he is about to finish in his death.
   What follows through the whole prayer, plainly shows this; particularly
   the 4th and 5th verses. "I have glorified thee on earth: I have
   finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father,
   glorify thou me with thine own self." Here it is pretty plain, that
   declaring to his Father he had glorified him on earth, and finished the
   work which God had given him to do, meant that he had finished the work
   which God gave him to do for this end, that he might be glorified. He
   had now finished that foundation that he came into the world to lay for
   his glory. He had laid a foundation for his Father's obtaining his
   will, and the utmost that he designed. By which it is manifest, that
   God's glory was the utmost of his design, or his ultimate end in this
   great work.

   And it is manifest, by John xiii. 31, 32. that the glory of the Father,
   and his own glory, are what Christ exulted in, in the prospect of his
   approaching sufferings, when Judas was gone out to betray him, as the
   end his heart was mainly set upon, and supremely delighted in.
   "Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of Man
   glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God
   shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him."
   [201]

   That the glory of God is the highest and last end of the work of
   redemption, is confirmed by the song of the angels at Christ's birth.
   Luke ii. 14. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, and good
   will toward men." It must be supposed that they knew what was God's
   last end in sending Christ into the world: and that in their rejoicing
   on the occasion, their minds would most rejoice in that which was most
   valuable and glorious in it; which must consist in its relation to that
   which was its chief and ultimate end. And we may further suppose, that
   the thing which chiefly engaged their minds was most glorious and
   joyful in the affair; and would be first in that song which was to
   express the sentiments of their minds, and exultation of their hearts.

   The glory of the Father and the Son is spoken of as the end of the work
   of redemption, in Phil. ii. 6-11. (very much in the same manner as in
   John xii. 23, 28. and xiii. 31, 32, xvii. 1, 4, 5.) Phil. ii. 6-11.Who
   being in the form of God,--made himself of no reputation, and took upon
   him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and
   being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
   obedient unto death, even the death of the cross: wherefore God also
   hath highly exalted him, and given him a name, &c. that at the name of
   Jesus every knee should bow,--and every tongue confess, that Jesus is
   the Lord, to the glory of God the Father." So God's glory, or the
   praise of his glory, is spoken of as the end of the work of redemption,
   in Eph. i. 3, &c. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
   places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him. Having
   predestinated us to the adoption of children, to the praise of the
   glory of his grace." And in the continuance of the same discourse,
   concerning the redemption of Christ, God's glory is once and again
   mentioned as the great end of all.

   Several things belonging to that great redemption, are mentioned in the
   following verses: Such as God's great wisdom in it, ver. 8. The
   clearness of light granted through Christ, ver. 9. God's gathering
   together in one, all things in heaven and earth in Christ, ver. 10.
   God's giving the Christians that were first converted to the Christian
   faith from among the Jews, an interest in this great redemption, ver.
   11. Then the great end is added, ver. 12. "That we should be to the
   praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ." And then is
   mentioned the bestowing of the same great salvation on the Gentiles, in
   its beginning or first fruits in the world, and in completing it in
   another world, in the two next verses. And then the same great end is
   added again."In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of
   truth, the gospel of your salvation: In whom also, after that ye
   believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. Which is the
   earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
   possession, unto the praise of his glory." [202] The same thing is
   expressed much the same manner, in 2 Cor. iv. 14, 15--"He which raised
   up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present
   us with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundance of
   grace might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of
   God."

   The same is spoken of as the end of the work of redemption in the Old
   Testament, Psal. lxxix. 9. "Help us, O God of our salvation, for the
   glory of thy name; deliver us and purge away our sins, for thy name's
   sake." So in the prophecies of the redemption of Jesus Christ. Isa.
   xliv. 23. "Sing, O ye heavens; for the lord hath done it: shout, ye
   lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains: O
   forest, and every tree there-in: for the lord hath redeemed Jacob, and
   glorified himself in Israel!" Thus the works of creation are called
   upon to rejoice at the attaining of the same end, by the redemption of
   God's people, that the angels rejoiced at when Christ was born. See
   also Isa. xlviii. 10, 11. and Isa. xlix. 3.

   Thus it is evident, that the glory of God is the ultimate end of the
   work of redemption; which is the chief work of providence towards the
   moral world, as is abundantly manifest from Scripture. For the whole
   universe is put in subjection to Jesus Christ; all heaven and earth,
   angels and men, are subject to him, as executing this office; and are
   put under him to that end, that all things may be ordered by him, in
   subservience to the great designs of his redemption. All power, as he
   says, is given to him, in heaven and in earth, that he may give eternal
   life to as many as the Father has given him; and he is exalted far
   above all principality and power, and might and dominion, and made head
   over all things to the church. The angels are put in subjection to him,
   that he may employ them all as ministering spirits, for the good of
   them that shall be the heirs of salvation: and all things are so
   governed by their Redeemer, that all things are theirs, whether things
   present or things to come: and all God's works of providence in the
   moral government of the world, which we have an account of in scripture
   history, or that are foretold in scripture prophecy, are evidently
   subordinate to the great purposes and end of this great work. And
   besides, the work of redemption is that, by which good men are, as it
   were, brought into being, as good men, or as restored to holiness and
   happiness. The work of redemption is a new creation, according to
   Scripture, whereby men are brought into a new existence, or are made
   new creatures.

   From these things it follows, according to the 5th, 6th, and 7th
   positions, that the glory of God is the last end of the creation of the
   world.

   8. The Scripture leads us to suppose that God's glory is his last end
   in his moral government of the world in general. This has been already
   shown concerning several things that belong to God's moral government
   of the world. As particularly in the work of redemption, the chief of
   all his dispensations in his moral government of the world. And I have
   also observed it, with respect to the duty which God requires of the
   subjects of his moral government, in requiring them to seek his glory
   as their last end. And this is actually the last end of the moral
   goodness required of them, the end which gives their moral goodness its
   chief value. And also, that it is what that person which God has set at
   the head of the moral world, as its chief governor, even Jesus Christ,
   seeks as his chief end. And it has been shown, that it is the chief end
   for which that part of the moral world which are good are made, or have
   their existence as good.

   I now further observe, that this is the end of the establishment of the
   public worship and ordinances of God among mankind. Hag. i. 8. "Go up
   to the mountain and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take
   pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord." This is
   spoken of as the end of God's promises of rewards, and of fulfilment. 2
   Cor. i. 20. "For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him
   Amen, to the glory of God by us." And this is spoken of as the end of
   the execution of God's threatenings, in the punishment of sin. Numb.
   xiv. 20, 21, 22, 23. "And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to
   thy word. But, as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with
   the glory of Jehovah." The glory of Jehovah is evidently here spoken
   of, as that to which he had regard, as his highest and ultimate end,
   which therefore he could not fail of; but must take place every where,
   and in every case, through all parts of his dominion, whatever became
   of men. And whatever abatements might be made, as to judgments
   deserved; and whatever changes might be made in the course of God's
   proceedings from compassion to sinners; yet the attaining of God's
   glory was an end, which, being ultimate and supreme, must in no case
   whatsoever give place. This is spoken of as the end of God executing
   judgments on his enemies in this world. Exod. xiv. 17, 18. "And I will
   get me honour (NOT ENGLISH) I will be glorified) upon Pharaoh, and upon
   all his host," &c. Ezek. xxviii. 22. "Thus saith the Lord God, Behold,
   I am against thee, O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of
   thee: And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have
   executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her." So Ezek.
   xxxix. 13. "Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it
   shall be to them a renown, the day that I shall be glorified, saith the
   Lord God." And this is spoken of as the end, both of the executions of
   wrath, and in the glorious exercises of mercy, in the misery and
   happiness of another world. Rom. ix. 22, 23. "What if God, willing to
   show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much
   long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; and that he
   might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which
   he had afore prepared unto glory." And this is spoken of as the end of
   the day of judgment, which is the time appointed for the highest
   exercises of God's authority as moral Governor of the world; and is as
   it were the day of the consummation of God's moral government, with
   respect to all his subjects in heaven, earth, and hell. 2 Thess. i. 9,
   10. "Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
   presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when he shall
   come to be glorified in his saints and to be admired in all them that
   believe." Then his glory shall be obtained, with respect both to saints
   and sinners.--From these things it is manifest, by the fourth position,
   that God's glory is the ultimate end of the creation of the world.

   9. It appears, from what has been already observed, that the glory of
   God is spoken of in Scripture as the last end of many of his works: and
   it is plain that this is in fact the result of the works of God's
   common providence, and of the creation of the world. Let us take God's
   glory in what sense soever, consistent with its being a good attained
   by any work of God, certainly it is the consequence of these works: and
   besides, it is expressly so spoken of in Scripture.

   This is implied in the eighth psalm, wherein are celebrated the works
   of creation: the heavens, the work of God's fingers; the moon and the
   stars, ordained by him; and man, made a little lower than the angels,
   &c. The first verse is Psal. viii. 1--"O Lord, our Lord, how excellent
   is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the
   heavens," or upon the heavens. By name and glory, very much the same
   thing is intended here, as in many other places, as shall be
   particularly shown afterwards. The psalm concludes as it began. Psal.
   i. 9. "O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!"
   So, in the 148th psalm, after a particular mention of most of the works
   of creation, enumerating them in order, the psalmist says, ver. 13.
   "Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is excellent,
   his glory is above the earth and the heaven." And in the 104th psalm,
   after a very particular, orderly, and magnificent representation of
   God's works of creation and common providence, it is said in the 31st
   verse, "The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
   rejoice in his works." Here God's glory is spoken of as the grand
   result and blessed consequence, on account of which he rejoices in
   these works. And this is one thing doubtless implied in the song of the
   seraphim, Isa. vi. 3. "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole
   earth is full of his glory."

   The glory of God, in being the result and consequence of those works of
   providence that have been mentioned, is in fact the consequence of the
   creation. The good attained in the use of a thing, made for use, is the
   result of the making of that thing; as signifying the time of day, when
   actually attained by the use of a watch, is the consequence of making
   the watch. So it is apparent, that the glory of God is actually the
   result and consequence of the creation of the world. And from what has
   been, already observed, it appears, that it is what God seeks as good,
   valuable, and excellent in itself. And I presume none will pretend,
   that there is any thing peculiar in the nature of the case, rendering
   it a thing valuable in some of the instances wherein it takes place,
   and not in others: or that the glory of God, though indeed an effect of
   all God's works, is an exceeding desirable effect of some of them; but
   of others, a worthless and insignificant effect. God's glory therefore
   must be a desirable, valuable consequence of the work of creation.
   Therefore it is manifest, by position the third, that the glory of God
   is an ultimate end in the creation of the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [199] See ver 9. and also Isa. iii. 24. xxii.21. and xxiii. 10. Exod.
   xxviii. 8.

   [200] 1 Cor. vi. 20.

   [201] John xiii. 31, 32.

   [202] Eph. i 13, 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Places of Scripture that lead us to suppose, that God created the world
   for his name, to make his perfections known; and that he made if for
   his praise.

   1. Here I shall first take notice of some passages of Scripture that
   speak of God's name as being the object of his regard, and the regard
   of his virtuous and holy intelligent creatures, much in the same manner
   as has been observed of God's glory.

   God's name is, in like manner, spoken of as the end of his acts of
   goodness towards the good part of the moral world, and of his works of
   mercy and salvation towards his people. As 1 Sam. xii. 22. "The Lord
   will not forsake his people, for his great name's sake." Psal. xxiii.
   3. "He restoreth my soul, he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness,
   for his name's sake." Psal. xxxi. 3. "For thy name's sake, lead me, and
   guide me." Psal. cix. 21. "But do thou for me,--for thy name's sake."
   The forgiveness of sin in particular is often spoken of as being for
   God's name's sake. 1 John ii. 12. "I write unto you, little children,
   because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake." Psal. xxv. 11.
   "For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great."
   Psal. lxxix. 9. "Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy
   name; and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake."
   Jer. xiv. 7. "O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou
   it for thy name's sake."

   These things seem to show, that the salvation of Christ is for God's
   name's sake. Leading and guiding in the way of safety and happiness,
   restoring the soul, the forgiveness of sin; and that help, deliverance,
   and salvation, that is consequent therein, is for God's name. And here
   it is observable, that those two great temporal salvations of God's
   people, the redemption from Egypt, and that from Babylon, often
   represented as figures and similitudes of the redemption of Christ, are
   frequently spoken of as being wrought for God's name's sake.

   Thus that great work of God, in delivering his people from Egypt, and
   conducting them to Canaan. 2 Sam. vii. 23. "And what one nation in the
   earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for
   a people to himself, and to make him a name." Psal. cvi. 8.
   "Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake." Isa. lxiii. 12. "That
   led them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing
   the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name." In the
   20th chap. of Ezekiel God, rehearsing the various parts of this
   wonderful work, adds, from time to time,Ezek. xx. 9"I wrought for my
   name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen," as ver
   9, 14, 22. (See also Josh. vii. 8, 9. Dan. ix. 15.)

   So is the redemption from the Babylonish captivity. Isa. xlviii. 9, 10.
   "For my name's sake will I defer mine anger. For mine own sake, even
   for mine own sake, will I do it; for how should my name be polluted?"
   In Ezek. xxxvi. 21, 22, 23. the reason is given for God's mercy in
   restoring Israel. xxxvi. 21, 22. "But I had pity for my holy name. Thus
   saith the Lord, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but
   for my holy name's sake;--And I will sanctify my great name, which was
   profaned among the heathen." And chap. xxxix. 25. "Therefore, thus
   saith the Lord God, now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and
   have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my
   holy name." Daniel prays, that God would forgive his people, and show
   them mercy for his own sake. Dan. ix. 19.

   When God, from time to time, speaks of showing mercy, and exercising
   goodness, and promoting his people's happiness for his name's sake, we
   cannot understand it as of a merely subordinate end. How absurd would
   it be to say that he promotes their happiness for his name's sake, in
   subordination to their good; and that his name may be exalted only for
   their sakes, as a means of promoting their happiness! especially when
   such expressions as these are used, "For mine own sake, even for mine
   own sake will I do it; for how should my name be polluted?" and "Not
   for your sakes do I this, but for my holy name's sake."

   Again, it is represented as though God's people had their existence, at
   least as God's people, for God's name's sake. God's redeeming or
   purchasing them, that they might be his people, for his name, implies
   this. As in that passage mentioned before, 2 Sam. vii. 23. "Thy people
   Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make
   him a name." So God making them a people for his name, is implied in
   Jer. xiii. 11. "For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so
   have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel, &c.--that
   they may be unto me for a people, and for a name." Acts xv. 14. "Simeon
   hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out
   of them a people for his name."

   This also is spoken of as the end of the virtue, religion, and holy
   behavior of the saints. Rom. i. 5. "By whom we have received grace and
   apostleship, for obedience to the faith among all nations for his
   name." Matt. xix. 29. "Every one that forsaketh houses, or brethren,
   &c.--for my name's sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
   inherit everlasting life." 3 John 7. "Because, that for his name's
   sake, they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles." Rev. ii. 3.
   "And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name's sake hast
   laboured and hast not fainted."

   And we find that holy persons express their desire of this, and their
   joy in it, in the same manner as in the glory of God. 2 Sam. vii. 26.
   11 Let thy name be magnified for ever." Psal. lxxvi. 1. "In Judah is
   God known, his name is great in Israel." Psal. cxlviii. 13. "Let them
   praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is excellent, his glory
   is above the earth and heaven." Psal. cxxxv. 13. "Thy name, O Lord,
   endureth for ever, and thy memorial throughout all generations." Isa.
   xii. 4. "Declare his doings among the people, make mention that his
   name is exalted."

   The judgments God executes on the wicked, are spoken of as being for
   the sake of his name, in like manner as for his glory. Exod. ix. 16.
   "And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in
   thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the
   earth." Neh. ix. 10. "And showedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and
   on all his servants, and on all the people of his land; for thou
   knewedst that they dealt proudly against them: so didst thou get thee a
   name, as at this day."

   And this is spoken of as a consequence of the works of creation, in
   like manner as God's glory. Psal. viii. 1. "O Lord, how excellent is
   thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens."
   And then, at the conclusion of the observations on the works of
   creation, the ends thus, ver. 9. "O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy
   name in all the earth!" So Psal. cxlviii. 13. after a particular
   mention of the various works of creation. Psal. cxlviii. 13. "Let them
   praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is excellent in all the
   earth, his glory is above the earth and the heaven."

   2. So we find the manifestation of God's perfections, his greatness,
   and excellency, is spoken of very much in the same manner as God's
   glory.

   There are several scriptures which would lead us to suppose this to be
   the great thing that God sought of the moral world, and the end aimed
   at in moral agents, wherein they are to be active in answering their
   end. This seems implied in that argument God's people sometimes made
   use of, in deprecating a state of death and destruction: that, in such
   a state, they cannot know, or make known, the glorious excellency of
   God. Psal. lxxxviii. 18, 19. "Shall thy loving-kindness be declared in
   the grave, or thy faithfulness in destruction? Shall thy wonders be
   known in the dark, and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?"
   So Psal. xxx. 9. Isa. xxxviii. 18, 19. The argument seems to be this:
   Why should we perish? and how shall thine end, for which thou hast made
   us, be obtained in a state of destruction, in which thy glory cannot be
   known or declared?

   This is the end of the good part of the moral world, or the end of
   God's people in the same manner as the glory of God. Isa. xliii. 21.
   "This people have I formed for myself, they shall show forth my
   praise." 1 Pet. ii. 9. "But ye are a chosen generation; a royal
   priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show
   forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into
   marvellous light."

   And this seems to be represented as the thing wherein the value, the
   proper fruit and end of their virtue appears. Isa. lx. 6. speaking of
   the conversion of the Gentile nations to true religion, Isa. lx. 6.
   "They shall come and show forth the praises of the Lord." Isa. lxvi.
   19. "I will send--unto the nations--and to the isles afar off, that
   have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall
   declare my glory among the Gentiles."--To which we may add, the proper
   tendency and rest of true virtue, and holy dispositions. 1 Chron. xvii.
   8. "Make known his deeds among the people." Verse 23, 24. "Show forth
   from day to day thy salvation. Declare his glory among the heathen."
   [203]

   This seems to be spoken of as a great end of the acts of God's moral
   government; particularly, the great judgments he executes for sin.
   Exod. ix. 16. "And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up,
   to show in thee my power; and that my name might be declared throughout
   all the earth." Dan. iv. 17. "This matter is by the decree of the
   watchers, &c. To the intent, that the living may know that the Most
   High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will;
   and setteth up over it the basest of men." But places to this purpose
   are too numerous to be particularly recited. See them in the margin.
   [204]

   This is also a great end of God's works of favour and mercy to his
   people. 2 Kings xix. 19. "Now, therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech
   thee, save thou us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth
   may know that thou art the Lord God, even thou only." 1 Kings viii. 59,
   60.--"That he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his
   people Israel, at all times, as the matter shall require, that all the
   people of the earth may know that the Lord is God, and that there is
   none else." See other passages to the same purpose referred to in the
   margin. [205]

   This is spoken of as the end of the eternal damnation of the wicked,
   and also the eternal happiness of the righteous. Rom. ix. 22, 23. "What
   if God, willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured
   with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction:
   and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
   mercy, which he hath afore prepared unto glory?"

   This is spoken of, from time to time, as a great end of the miracles
   which God wrought. (See Exod. vii. 17. and Exod. viii. 10. and Exod. x.
   2. Deut. xxix. 5, 6. Ezek. xxiv. 17.) And of the ordinances he has
   established. Exod. xxix. 44, 45, 46. "And I will sanctify also both
   Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priests' office. And I
   will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God. And
   they shall know that I am the Lord their God," &c. Chap. xxxi. 13.
   "Verily, my Sabbaths shall ye keep; for it is a sign between me and
   you, throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord
   that doth sanctify you." We have again almost the same words, Ezek. xx.
   12.and ver. 20.

   This was a great end of the redemption out of Egypt. Psal. cvi. 8.
   "Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make his
   mighty power to be known." (See also Exod. vii. 5. and Deut. iv. 34,
   35.) And also of the redemption from the Babylonish captivity. Ezek.
   xx. 34-38. "And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather
   you out of the countries whither ye are scattered.--And I will bring
   you into the wilderness of the people; and there I will plead with you,
   as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of
   Egypt.--And I will bring you into the bond of the covenant. And I will
   purge out the rebels.--And ye shall know that I am the Lord." Verse 42.
   "And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the
   land of Israel." Verse 44. "And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when
   I have wrought with you for my name's sake." (See also chap. xxviii.
   25, 26. and xxxvi. 11. and xxxvii. 6, 13.)

   This is also declared to be a great end of the work of redemption by
   Jesus Christ: both of its purchase, and its application. Rom. iii. 25,
   26. "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
   blood, to declare his righteousness.--To declare, I say, at this time,
   his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
   believeth in Jesus." Eph. ii. 4-7. "But God, who is rich in mercy, &c.
   That he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness
   towards us through Jesus Christ." Chap. iii. 8, 9, 10. "To preach among
   the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men
   see, what is the fellowship of that mystery which, from the beginning
   of the world, hath been hid in God, who, created all things by Jesus
   Christ: To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
   heavenly places, might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of
   God." Psal. xxii. 21, 22. "Save me from the lion's mouth. I will
   declare thy name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation
   will I praise thee." (Compared with Heb. ii. 12. and John xvii. 26.)
   Isa. lxiv. 4. "O that thou wouldest rend the heavens--to make thy name
   known to thine adversaries."

   And it is pronounced to be the end of that great, actual salvation,
   which should follow Christ's purchase of salvation, both among Jews and
   Gentiles. Isa. xlix. 22, 23. "I will lift up my hand to the
   Gentiles,--and they shall bring thy sons in their arms--and kings shall
   be nursing-fathers--and thou shalt know that I am the Lord." [206]

   This appears to be the end of God's common providence, Job xxxvii. 6,
   7. "For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth. Likewise to the
   small rain and to the great rain of his strength. He sealeth up the
   hand of every man, that all men may know his work." And of the day of
   judgement, that grand consummation of God's moral government of the
   world, and the day for bringing all things to their designed ultimate
   issue. It is called, "The day of the revelation of the righteous
   judgment of God." Rom. ii. 5.

   And the declaration, or openly manifesting of God's excellency, is
   spoken of as the actual, happy consequence and effect of the work of
   creation. Psal. xix. 1, &c. "The heavens declare the glory of God, and
   the firmament showeth his handy-work. Day unto day uttereth speech,
   night unto night showeth knowledge.--In them hath he placed a
   tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his
   chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his race," &c.

   3. In like manner, there are many scriptures that speak of God's
   praise, in many of the forementioned respects, just in the same manner
   as of his name and glory.

   This is spoken of as the end of the very being of God's people, in the
   same manner as before, Jer. xiii. 11. "For, as the girdle cleaveth to
   the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house
   of Israel, and the whole house of Judah, saith the Lord: that they
   might be unto me for a name, and for a praise, and a glory."

   It is spoken of as the end of the moral world. Matt. xxi. 16. "Out of
   the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou perfected praise." That is,
   so hast thou in thy sovereignty and wisdom ordered it, that thou
   shouldest obtain the great end for which intelligent creatures are
   made, more especially from some of them that are in themselves weak,
   inferior, and more insufficient. (Compare Psal. viii. 1, 2.)

   And the same thing that was observed before concerning the making known
   God's excellency, may also be observed concerning God's praise. That it
   is made use of as an argument in deprecating a state of destruction;
   that, in such a state, this end cannot be answered, in such a manner as
   seems to imply its being an ultimate end, for which God had made man.
   Psal. lxxxviii. 10. "Shall the dead arise and praise thee? Shall thy
   loving-kindness be declared in the grave?--Shall thy wonders be known
   in the dark?" Psal. xxx. 9. "What profit is there in my blood? When I
   go down to the pit, shall the dust praise thee? Shall it declare thy
   truth?" Psal. cxv. 17, 18. "The dead praise not the Lord, neither any
   that go down into silence: but we will bless the Lord, from this time
   forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord." Isa. xxxviii. 18,19. "For
   the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee; they that go
   down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he
   shall praise thee." And God's praise is spoken of as end of the virtue
   of God's people, in like manner as his glory. Phil. i. 11. "Being
   filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to
   the praise and glory of God."

   God's praise is the end of the work of redemption. In Eph. i. where
   that work in its various parts is particularly insisted on, and set
   forth in its exceeding glory, this is mentioned, from time to time, as
   the great end of all, that it should be "to the praise of his glory."
   As in ver. 6, 12, 14. By which we may doubtless understand much the
   same thing, with what in Phil. i. 11. is expressed, "his praise and
   glory." Agreeably to this, Jacob's fourth son, from whom the great
   Redeemer was to proceed, by the special direction of God's providence,
   was called praise. This happy consequence, and glorious end of that
   great redemption, Messiah, one of his posterity, was to work out.

   In the Old Testament this praise is spoken of as the end of the
   forgiveness of God's people, and their salvation, in the same manner as
   God's name and glory. Isa. xlviii. 9, 10, 11. "For my name's sake will
   I defer mine anger, and for my praise, will I refrain for thee, that I
   cut thee not off. Behold I have refined thee--for mine own sake, even
   for mine own sake will I do it; for how should my name be polluted? and
   my glory will I not give to another." Jer. xxxiii. 8, 9. "And I will
   cleanse them from all their iniquity--and I will pardon all their
   iniquities. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an
   honour."

   And that the holy part of the moral world express desires of this, and
   delight in it, as the end which holy principles in them tend to, reach
   after, and rest in, in their highest exercises--just in the same manner
   as the glory of God, is abundantly manifest. It would be endless to
   enumerate particular places wherein this appears; wherein the saints
   declare this, by expressing their earnest desires of God's praise;
   calling on all nations, and all beings in heaven and earth, to praise
   him; in a rapturous manner calling on one another, crying "Hallelujah;
   praise ye the Lord, praise him for ever." Expressing their resolutions
   to praise him as long as they live through all generations, and for
   ever; declaring how good, how pleasant and comely the praise of God is,
   &c. And it is manifest, that God's praise is the desirable and glorious
   consequence and effect of all the works of creation, by such places as
   these. Psal. cxlv. 5-10. and cxlviii. throughout, and ciii. 19-22.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [203] See also, Psal. ix. 1, 11, 14and Psal. xix. 1.and Psal. xxvi.
   7.and Psal. lxxi. 18.and Psal. lxxv. 9.and Psal. lxxvi. 1and Psal.
   lxxix 13and Psal.xcvi. 2, 3. and Psal. ci. 1and Psal. cvii. 22and
   Psal.cxviii. 17and Psal. cxlv. 6, 11, 12. Isa. xlii. 12. Isa. lxiv. 1,
   2. Jer. li. 10.

   [204] Exod. xiv 17, 18. 1 Sam. xvii. 46. Psal. lxxxii. 18 Isa. xiv.
   3.Ezek. vi. 7, 10, 13, 14and Ezek. vii. 4, 9, 27.and Ezek. xi. 10, 11,
   12.and Ezek. xii. 15, 16, 20.and xiii. 9, 14, 21, 23.and Ezek. xiv.
   8.and Ezek. xv. 7.and Ezek. xxi. 5.and Ezek. xxii. 16.and Ezek. xxv. 7,
   11, 17.and Ezek. xxvi. 6.and Ezek. xxvii. 22, 23, 24.and Ezek. xxix. 9,
   16.and Ezek. xxx. 8, 19, 26, 26.and Ezek. xxxii. 15.and Ezek. xxxii.
   29.and Ezek. xxxv. 4, 12, 15. and Ezek. xxxviii. 23.and Ezek. xxxix. 6,
   7, 21, 22.

   [205] Exod. vi. 7.and Exod. viii. 22.and Exod. xvi. 12. 1 Kings viii.
   43.and 1 Kings xx. 28.Psal. cii. 21.Ezek. xxiii. 49.and Ezek. xxiv.
   21.and Ezek. xxv. 5.and Ezek.xxxv. 9.and Ezek. xxxix. 21, 22.

   [206] See also, Ezek. xvi. 62.and Ezek. xxix. 21.and Ezek. xxxiv.
   27.and Ezek. xxxvi. 38.and Ezek. xxxix. 28, 29. Joel iii. 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Places of Scripture from whence it may be argued, that communication of
   good to the creature, was one thing which God had in view, as an
   ultimate end of the creation of the world.

   1. According to the Scripture, communicating good to the creatures is
   what is in itself pleasing to God. And this is not merely subordinately
   agreeable, and esteemed valuable on account of its relation to a
   further end, as it is in executing justice in punishing the sins of
   men; but what God is inclined to on its own account, and what he
   delights in simply and ultimately. For though God is sometimes in
   Scripture spoken of as taking pleasure in punishing men's sins, Deut.
   xxviii. 63. "The Lord will rejoice over you, to destroy you." Ezek. v.
   13. "Then shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to
   rest upon them, and I will be comforted." Yet God is often spoken of as
   exercising goodness and showing mercy, with delight, in a manner quite
   different, and opposite to that of his executing wrath. For the latter
   is spoken of as what God proceeds to with backwardness and reluctance;
   the misery of the creature being not agreeable to him on its own
   account. Neh. ix. 17. "Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and
   merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness." Psal. ciii. 8. "The
   Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy."
   Psal. cxlv. 8. "The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to
   anger, and of great mercy." We have again almost the same words, Jonah
   iv. 2. Mic. vii. 18. "Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth
   iniquity, &c.--He retaineth not his anger for ever, because he
   delighteth in mercy." Ezek. xviii. 32. "I have no pleasure in the death
   of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves, and
   live ye." Lam. iii. 33. "He doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
   children of men." Ezek. xxxiii. 11. "As I live, saith the Lord God, I
   have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
   from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why
   will ye die, O house of Israel!" 2 Pet. iii. 9. "Not willing that any
   should perish, but that all should come to repentance."

   2. The work of redemption wrought out by Jesus Christ, is spoken of in
   such a manner as, being from the grace and love of God to men, does not
   well consist with his seeking a communication of good to them, only
   subordinately. Such expressions as that in John iii. 16. carry another
   idea. John iii. 16."God so loved the world, that he gave his
   only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish,
   but have everlasting life." And 1 John iv. 9, 10. "In this was
   manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his
   only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
   Herein is love; not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
   his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." So Eph. ii. 4. "But God
   who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us" &c But
   if indeed this was only from a regard to a further end, entirely
   diverse from our good; then all the love is truly terminated in that,
   its ultimate object, and therein is his love manifested, strictly and
   properly speaking, and not in that he loved us, or exercised such high
   regard towards us. For if our good be not at all regarded ultimately,
   but only subordinately, then our good or interest is, in itself
   considered, nothing in God's regard.

   The Scripture every where represents it, as though the great things
   Christ did and suffered, were in the most direct and proper sense from
   exceeding love to us. Thus the apostle Paul represents the matter, Gal.
   ii. 20. "Who loved me, and gave himself for me." Eph. v. 25. "Husbands,
   love your wives, even as Christ loved the church, and gave himself for
   it." And Christ himself, John xvii. 19. "For their sakes I sanctify
   myself." And the scripture represents Christ as resting in the
   salvation and glory of his people, when obtained as in what he
   ultimately sought, as having therein reached the goal, obtained the
   prize he aimed at, enjoying the travail of his soul in which he is
   satisfied, as the recompense of his labours and extreme agonies, Isa.
   liii. 10. 11. "When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he
   shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the
   Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his
   soul, and shall be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous
   servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities." He sees the
   travail of his soul, in seeing his seed, the children brought forth as
   the result of his travail. This implies, that Christ has his delight,
   most truly and properly, in obtaining the salvation of his church, not
   merely as a means, but as what he rejoices and is satisfied in, most
   directly and properly. This is proved by those scriptures which
   represent him as rejoicing in his obtaining this fruit of his labour
   and purchase, as the bridegroom, when he obtains his bride, Isa. lxii.
   5. "As the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice
   over thee." And how emphatical and strong to the purpose, are the
   expressions in Zeph. iii. 17. "The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
   mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest
   in his love, he will rejoice over thee with singing." The same thing
   may be argued from Prov. viii. 30, 31. "Then was I by him, as one
   brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
   before him: rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my
   delights were with the sons of men." And from those places, that speak
   of the saints as God's portion, his jewels and peculiar treasure, these
   things are abundantly confirmed, John xii. 23-32. But the particular
   consideration of what may be observed to the present purpose, in that
   passage of Scripture, may be referred to the next section.

   3. The communications of divine goodness, particularly forgiveness of
   sin, and salvation, are spoken of, from time to time, as being for
   God's goodness' sake, and for his mercies' sake, just in the same
   manner as they are spoken of as being for God's name's sake, in the
   places observed before. Psal. xxv. 7. "Remember not the sins of my
   youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me,
   for thy goodness' sake, O Lord." In the 11th verse, the Psalmist says,
   "For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity." [207] Neh. ix. 31.
   "Nevertheless, for thy great mercies' sake, thou hast not utterly
   consumed them, nor forsaken them; for thou art a gracious and a
   merciful God." Psal. vi. 4. "Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me
   for thy mercies' sake." Psal. xxxi. 16. "Make thy face to shine upon
   thy servant: save me for thy mercies' sake." Psal. xliv. 26. "Arise for
   our help; redeem us for thy mercies' sake." And here it may be
   observed, after what a remarkable manner God speaks of his love to the
   children of Israel in the wilderness, as though his love were for
   love's sake, and his goodness were its own end and motive. Deut. vii.
   7, 8. "The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because
   ye were more in number than any people, for ye were the fewest of all
   people: but because the Lord loved you."

   4. That the government of the world in all its parts, is for the good
   of such as are to be the eternal subjects of God's goodness, is implied
   in what the Scripture teaches us of Christ being set at God's right
   hand, made king of angels and men; set at the head of the universe,
   having all power given him in heaven and earth, to that end that he may
   promote their happiness; being made head over all things to the church,
   and having the government of the whole creation for their good. [208]
   Christ mentions it, Mark ii. 28. as the reason why the Son of Man is
   made Lord of the Sabbath, because "the Sabbath was made for man." And
   if so, we may in like manner argue, that all things were made for man,
   because the Son of Man is made Lord of all things.

   5. That God uses the whole creation, in his government of it, for the
   good of his people, is most elegantly represented in Deut. xxxiii. 26.
   "There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
   heaven." The whole universe is a machine, or chariot, which God hath
   made for his own use, as is represented in Ezekiel's vision. God's seat
   is heaven, where he sits and governs, Ezek. i. 22, 26-28. The inferior
   part of the creation, this visible universe, subject to such continual
   changes and revolutions, are the wheels of the chariot. God's
   providence, in the constant revolutions, alterations, and successive
   events, is represented by the motion of the wheels of the chariot, by
   the spirit of him who sits on his throne on the heavens, or above the
   firmament. Moses tells us for whose sake it is, that God moves the
   wheels of this chariot, or rides in it, sitting in his heavenly seat;
   and to what end he is making his progress, or goes his appointed
   journey in it, viz. the salvation of his people.

   6. God's judgments on the wicked in this world, and also their eternal
   damnation in the world to come, are spoken of, as being for the
   happiness of God's people. So are his judgments on them in this world.
   Isa. xliii. 3, 4. "For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel,
   thy Saviour. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.
   Since thou hast been precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable,
   and I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and people
   for thy life." So the works of God's vindictive justice and wrath are
   spoken of as works of mercy to his people, Psal. cxxxvi. 10, 15, 17-20.
   And so is their eternal damnation in another world. Rom. ix. 22, 23.
   "What if God, willing to show his wrath and make his power known,
   endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
   destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on
   the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory." Here it
   is evident the last verse comes in, in connexion with the foregoing, as
   giving another reason of the destruction of the wicked, viz. showing
   the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy: higher degrees of
   their glory and happiness, in a relish of their own enjoyments, and a
   greater sense of their value, and of God's free grace in bestowing
   them.

   7. It seems to argue, that God's goodness to them who are to be the
   eternal subjects of his goodness, is the end of the creation; since the
   whole creation, in all its parts, is spoken of as theirs. 1 Cor. iii.
   22, 23. "All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
   the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all
   are yours." The terms are very universal; and both works of creation
   and providence are mentioned; and it is manifestly the design of the
   apostle to be understood of every work of God whatsoever. Now, how can
   we understand this any otherwise, than that all things are for their
   benefit; and that God made and uses all for their good?

   8. All God's works, both of creation and providence, are represented as
   works of goodness or mercy to his people; as in the 136th psalm. His
   wonderful works in general. Ver. 4. "To him who alone doth great
   wonders; for his mercy endureth for ever." The works of creation in all
   its parts. Ver. 5-9. "To him that by wisdom made the heavens; for his
   mercy endureth for ever. To him that stretched out the earth above the
   waters; for his mercy endureth for ever. To him that made great lights;
   for his mercy endureth for ever. The sun to rule by day; for his mercy
   endureth for ever. The moon and stars to rule by night; for his mercy
   endureth forever." And God's works of providence, in the following part
   of the psalm.

   9. That expression in the blessed sentence pronounced on the righteous
   at the day of judgment, "Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
   foundation of the world," seems to hold forth thus much, that the
   fruits of God's goodness to them was his end in creating the world, and
   in his providential disposals: that God in all his works, in laying the
   foundation of the world, and ever since the foundation of it, had been
   preparing this kingdom and glory for them.

   10. Agreeable to this, the good of men is spoken of as an ultimate end
   of the virtue of the moral world. Rom. xiii. 8, 9, 10. "He that loveth
   another hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not commit
   adultery, Thou shalt not kill, &c.--And if there be any other
   commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shalt love
   thy neighbour as thyself. Love worketh no ill to his neighbour;
   therefore love is the fulfilling of the law." Gal. v. 14. "All the law
   is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
   as thyself." Jam. ii. 8. "If ye fulfil the royal law, according to the
   scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself, thou shalt do
   well."

   If the good of the creature be one end of God in all he does; and in
   all he requires moral agents to do; an end by which they should
   regulate all their conduct; these things may be easily explained: but
   otherwise, it seems difficult to be accounted for, that the Holy Ghost
   should thus express himself. The Scripture represents it to be the
   spirit of all true saints, to prefer the welfare of God's people to
   their chief joy. This was the spirit of Moses and the prophets of old:
   the good of God's church was an end by which they regulated all their
   conduct. And so it was with the apostles. 2 Cor. iv. 15. "For all
   things are for your sakes." 2 Tim. ii. 10. "I endured all things for
   the elect's sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in
   Christ Jesus, with eternal glory." And the Scriptures represent it, as
   though every Christian should in all he does, be employed for the good
   of the church, as each particular member is employed for the good of
   the body; Rom. xii. 4, 5, &c. Eph. iv. 15, 16. 1 Cor. xii. 12, 25. &c.
   To this end, the Scripture teaches us, the angels are continually
   employed, Heb. i. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [207] Psal.xxv. 11.

   [208] Eph. i. 20-23 John xvii. 2 Matt. xi. 27 Matt. xxviii. 18, 19 John
   iii. 35
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Wherein is considered what is meant by the glory of God and the name of
   God in Scripture, when spoken of as God's ends in his works.

   Having thus considered, what are spoken of in the Holy Scriptures, as
   the ends which God had ultimately in view in the creation of the world,
   I now proceed particularly to inquire what they are, and how the terms
   are to be understood?

   1. Let us begin with the phrase, the glory of god--And here I might
   observe, that it is sometimes used to signify the second person in the
   Trinity; but it is not necessary, at this time, to prove it from
   particular passages of Scripture. Omitting this, I proceed to observe
   some things concerning the Hebrew word (NOT ENGLISH ) which is most
   commonly used in the Old Testament, where we have the word glory in the
   English Bible. The root it comes from, is either the verb, (NOT ENGLISH
   ) which signifies to be heavy, or make heavy, or from the adjective
   (NOT ENGLISH) which signifies heavy or weighty. These, as seems pretty
   manifest, are the primary signification of these words, though they
   have also other meanings, which seem to be derivative. The noun (NOT
   ENGLISH ) signifies gravity, heaviness, greatness, and abundance. Of
   very many places it will be sufficient to specify a few. Prov. xxvii.
   3. 2 Sam. xiv. 26. 1 Kings xii. 11. Psal. xxxviii. 4. Isa. xxx. 27. And
   as the weight of bodies arises from two things, density and magnitude;
   so we find the word used to signify dense, Exod. xix. 16. (NOT ENGLISH
   ) nubes gravis, Vulg. densissima,) a dense cloud; and is very often
   used for great. Isa. xxxii. 2. Gen. v. 9. 1 Kings x. 2. 2 Kings vi. 14.
   and xviii. 17. Isa. xxxvi. 2. &c.

   The Hebrew word (NOT ENGLISH) which is commonly translated glory, is
   used in such a manner as might be expected from this signification of
   the words from whence it comes. Sometimes it is used to signify what is
   internal, inherent, or in the possession of the person: and sometimes
   for emanation, exhibition, or communication of this internal glory: and
   sometimes for the knowledge, or sense of these, in those to whom the
   exhibition or communication is made; or an expression of this
   knowledge, sense or effect. And here I would note, that agreeable to
   the use of this word in the Old Testament, is the Greek word (NOT
   ENGLISH) in the New. For as the word (NOT ENGLISH ) is generally
   translated by the just mentioned Greek word (NOT ENGLISH ) in the
   Septuagint; so it is apparent, that this word is designed to be used to
   signify the same thing in the New Testament with the other in the Old.
   This might be abundantly proved, by comparing particular places of the
   Old Testament; but probably it will not be denied. I therefore proceed
   particularly to consider these words, with regard to their use in
   Scripture, in each of the forementioned ways.

   1. The word glory denotes sometimes what is internal. When the word is
   used to signify what is within, or in the possession of the subject, it
   very commonly signifies excellency, dignity, or worthiness of regard.
   This, according to the Hebrew idiom, is, as it were, the weight of a
   thing, as that by which it is heavy; as to be light, is to be
   worthless, without value, contemptible. Numb. xxi. 5. "This light
   bread." 1 Sam. xviii. 2 3. "Seemeth it a light thing." Judg. ix. 4
   "Light persons," i.e. worthless, vain, vile persons. So Zeph. iii. 4.
   To set light by is to despise, 2 Sam. xix. 43. Belshazzar's vileness in
   the sight of God is represented by his being Tekel, weighed in the
   balances and found light, Dan. v. 27. And as the weight of a thing
   arises from its magnitude, and its specific gravity conjunctly; so the
   word glory is very commonly used to signify the excellency of a person
   or a thing, as consisting either in greatness, or in beauty, or in both
   conjunctly; as will abundantly appear by considering the places
   referred to in the margin. [209]

   Sometimes that internal, great and excellent good, which is called
   glory, is rather in possession, than inherent. Any one may be called
   heavy, that possesses an abundance; and he that is empty and destitute,
   may be called light. Thus we find riches are sometimes called glory.
   Gen. xxxi. 1. "And of that which was our fathers' hath he gotten all
   this glory." Esth. v. 11. "Haman told them of the glory of his riches."
   Psal. xlix. 16, 17. "Be not afraid when one is made rich, when the
   glory of his house is increased. For when he dieth, he shall carry
   nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him." Nah. ii. 9. "Take
   ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold; for there is none end
   of the store and glory out of the pleasant furniture."

   And it is often put for a great height of prosperity, and fulness of
   good in general. Gen. xlv. 13. "You shall tell my father of all my
   glory in Egypt." Job xix. 9. "He hath stripped me of my glory." Isa. x.
   3. "Where will you leave your glory." Ver. 16. "Therefore shall the
   Lord of hosts send among his fat ones leanness, and under his glory
   shall he kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire." Isa. xvii. 3,
   4. "The kingdom shall cease from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria;
   they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel. And in that day,
   it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall he made thin, and
   the fatness of his flesh shall be made lean." Isa. xxi. 16. "And all
   the glory of Kedar shall fail." Isa. lxi. 6. "Ye shall eat the riches
   of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves." Chap.
   11, 12. "That ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of
   her glory.--I will extend peace to her, like a river, and the glory of
   the Gentiles like a flowing stream." Hos. ix. 11. "As for Ephraim,
   their glory shall fly away as a bird." Matt. iv. 8. "Showeth him all
   the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them." Luke xxiv. 26.
   "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
   glory?" John xvii. 22. "And the glory which thou gavest me, have I
   given them." Rom. v. i. "And rejoice in hope of the glory of God."
   Chap. viii. 18. "The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to
   be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." (See also
   chap. ii. 7, 10. and ii. 7, 10. and ix. 23.) 1 Cor. ii. 7. "The hidden
   wisdom which God ordained before the world, unto our glory." 2 Cor. iv.
   17. "Worketh out for us a far more exceeding arid eternal weight of
   glory." Eph. i. 18. "And what the riches of the glory of his
   inheritance in the saints." 1 Pet iv. 13. "But rejoice, inasmuch as ye
   are made partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be
   revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy." Chap. i. 8. "Ye
   rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. [210]

   2. The word glory is used in Scripture often to express the exhibition,
   emanation, or communication of the internal glory. Hence it often
   signifies an effulgence, or shining brightness, by an emanation of
   beams of light. Thus the brightness of the sun, and moon, and stars, is
   called their glory, in 1 Cor. xv. 41. But in particular, the word is
   very often thus used, when applied to God and Christ. As in Ezek. i.
   28. "As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
   rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the
   appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord." And chap. x. 4.
   "Then the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub, and stood over the
   threshold of the house, and the house was filled with the cloud, and
   the court was full of the brightness of the Lord's glory." Isa. vi. 1,
   2, 3. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and
   his train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphim--And one cried
   to another and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole
   earth is full of his glory." Compared with John xii. 41. "These things
   said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spake of him." Ezek. xliii. 2.
   "And behold the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the
   east.--And the earth shined with his glory." Isa. xxiv. 23. "Then the
   moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts
   shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients
   gloriously." Isa. lx. 1, 2. "Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and
   the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold the darkness shall
   cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; but the Lord shall
   arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee." Together with
   verse 19. "The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
   brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be
   unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory." Luke ii. 9.
   "The glory of the Lord shone round about them." Acts xxii. 11. "And
   when I could not see for the glory of that light." In 2 Cor. iii. 7.
   the shining of Moses's face is called the glory of his countenance. And
   to this Christ's glory is compared, verse 18. "But we all with open
   face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
   the same image, from glory to glory." And so chap. iv. 4. "Lest the
   light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
   shine unto them." Ver. 6. "For God, who commanded the light to shine
   out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
   knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ." Heb. i. 3.
   "Who is the brightness of his glory." The apostle Peter, speaking of
   that emanation of exceeding brightness, from the bright cloud that
   overshadowed the disciples in the mount of transfiguration, and of the
   shining of Christ's face at that time, says, 2 Pet. i. 17. "For he
   received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a
   voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom
   I am well pleased." Rev. xviii. 1. "Another angel came down from
   heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened with his
   glory." Rev. xxi. 11. "Having the glory of God, and her light was like
   unto a stone most precious, like a jasper stone, clear as crystal."
   Ver. 23. "And the city had no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine
   in it,: for the glory of God did lighten it." See the word for a
   visible effulgence or emanation of light in the places to be seen in
   the margin. [211]

   The word glory, as applied to God or Christ, sometimes evidently
   signifies the communications of God's fulness, and means much the same
   thing with God's abundant goodness and grace. So Eph. iii. 16. "That he
   would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be
   strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man." The
   expression, "According to the riches of his glory," is apparently
   equivalent to that in the same epistle, chap. i. 7. "According to the
   riches of his grace." And chap. ii. 7. "The exceeding riches of his
   grace in his kindness towards us, through Christ Jesus." In like manner
   is the word glory used in Phil. iv. 19. "But my God shall supply all
   your need, according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus." And Rom.
   ix. 23. "And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the
   vessels of his mercy." In this and the foregoing verse, the apostle
   speaks of God's making known two things, his great wrath, and his rich
   grace. The former on the vessels of wrath, ver. 22. The latter, which
   he calls the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy, ver. 23. So
   when Moses says, "I beseech thee show me thy glory;" [212] God granting
   his request, makes answer, "I will make all my goodness to pass before
   thee Exod. xxxiii. 18, 19. [213]

   What we find in John xii. 23-32. is worthy of particular notice in this
   place. The words and behaviour of Christ, of which we have here an
   account, argue two things.

   (1.) That the happiness and salvation of men, was an end that Christ
   ultimately aimed at in his labours and sufferings. The very same things
   which were observed before, (chapter second, section third,) concerning
   God's glory, are in the same manner observable, concerning the
   salvation of men. Christ, in the near approach of the most extreme
   difficulties which attended his undertaking, comforts himself in a
   certain prospect of obtaining the glory of God, as his great end. And
   at the same time, and exactly in the same manner, is the salvation of
   men mentioned, as the end of these great labours and sufferings, which
   satisfied his soul in the prospect of undergoing them. (Compare the
   23rd and 24th verses; and also the 28th and 29th verses. ; ver. 31 and
   32.)

   (2.) The glory of God, and the emanations and fruits of his grace in
   man's salvation, are so spoken of by Christ on this occasion in just
   the same manner, that it would be quite unnatural to understand him as
   speaking of two distinct things. Such is the connexion, that what he
   says of the latter, must most naturally be understood as exegetical of
   the former. He first speaks of his own glory, and the glory of his
   Father, as the great end that should be obtained by what he was about
   to suffer; and then explains and amplifies this, in what he expresses
   of the salvation of men that shall be obtained by it. Thus, in the 23rd
   verse, he says, "The hour is come that the Son of Man should be
   glorified." And in what next follows, he evidently shows how he was to
   be glorified, or wherein his glory consisted: "Verily, verily, I say
   unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it
   abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." [214] As
   much fruit is the glory of the seed, so is the multitude of redeemed
   ones, which should spring from his death, his glory. [215] So
   concerning the glory of his Father, in the 27th and following verses.
   "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from
   this hour! But for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify
   thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both
   glorified it, and will glorify it again." In an assurance this, which
   this voice declared, Christ was greatly comforted and his soul even
   exulted under the view of his approaching sufferings. And what this
   glory was, in which Christ's soul was so comforted on this occasion,
   his own words plainly show. When the people said, it thundered; and
   others said, an angel spake to him; then Christ tells them what this
   voice meant. Ver. 30-32. "Jesus answered and said, This voice came not
   because of me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world;
   now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted
   up form the earth, will draw all men unto me." By this behaviour and
   these speeches of our Redeemer, it appears, that the expressions of
   divine grace, in the sanctification and happiness of the redeemed, are
   especially that glory of his, and his Father, which was the joy that
   was set before him, for which he endured the cross, and despised the
   shame: and that this glory especially was the end of the travail of his
   soul, in obtaining which end he was satisfied. (Isa. liii. 10, 11.)

   This is agreeable to what has been just observed, of God's glory being
   so often represented by an effulgence, or emanation, or communication
   of light, from a luminary or fountain of light. What can so naturally
   and aptly represent the emanation of the internal glory of God; or the
   flowing forth and abundant communication of that infinite fulness of
   good that is in God? Light is very often in Scripture put for comfort,
   joy, happiness, and for good in general. [216]

   3. Again, the word glory, as applied to God in Scripture, implies the
   view or knowledge of God's excellency. The exhibition of glory is to
   the view of beholders. The manifestation of glory, the emanation or
   effulgence of brightness, has relation to the eye. Light or brightness
   is a quality that has relation to the sense of seeing; we see the
   luminary by its light. And knowledge is often expressed in Scripture by
   light. The word glory very often in Scripture signifies, or implies,
   honour, as any one may soon see by casting his eye on a concordance.
   But [217] honour implies the knowledge of the dignity and excellency of
   him who hath the honour; and this is often more especially signified by
   the word glory, when applied to God. Num. xiv. 21. "But as truly as I
   live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord," i. e.
   All the inhabitants of the earth shall see the manifestations I will
   make of my perfect holiness and hatred of sin, and so of my infinite
   excellence. This appears by the context. So Ezek. xxxix. 21, 22, 23.
   "And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall
   see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon
   them. So the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God.
   And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity
   for their iniquity." And it is manifest in many places, where we read
   of God glorifying himself, or of his being glorified, that one thing,
   directly intended, is making known his divine greatness and excellency.

   4. Again, glory, as the word is used in Scripture, often signifies or
   implies praise. This appears from what was observed before, that glory
   very often signifies honour, which is much the same thing with praise,
   viz. high esteem and the expression of it in words and actions. And it
   is manifest that the words glory and praise, are often used as
   equivalent expressions in Scripture. Psal. l. 23. "Whoso offereth
   praise, glorifieth me." Psal. xxii. 23. "Ye that fear the Lord, praise
   him; all ye seed of Israel, glorify him." Isa. xlii. 8. "My glory I
   will not give unto another, nor my praise to graven images." Ver. xlii
   12. "Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the
   islands." Isa. xlviii. 9-11. "For my name's sake will I defer mine
   anger; for my praise will I refrain for thee.--For mine own sake will I
   do it; for--I will not give my glory unto another." Jer. xiii. 11.
   "That they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a
   praise, and for a glory." Eph. i. 6. "To the praise of the glory of his
   grace." Ver. 12. "To the praise of his glory." So Ver. 14. The phrase
   is apparently equivalent to this, Phil. i. 11. "Which are by Jesus
   Christ unto the praise and glory of God." 2 Cor. iv. 15. "That the
   abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the
   glory of God."

   It is manifest the praise of God, as the phrase is used in Scripture,
   implies the high esteem and love of the heart, exalting thoughts of
   God, and complacence in his excellence and perfection. This is manifest
   to every one acquainted with the Scripture. However, if any need
   satisfaction, they may, among innumerable other places which might be
   mentioned, turn to those in the in the margin. [218]

   It also implies joy in God, or rejoicing in his perfections, as is
   manifest by Psal. xxxiii. 2. "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for
   praise is comely for the upright." Other passages to the same purpose,
   see in the margin. [219] How often do we read of singing praise! But
   singing is commonly an expression of joy. It is called, making a joyful
   noise. And as it is often used, it implies gratitude or love to God for
   his benefits to us. [220]

   II. Having thus considered what is implied in the phrase, the glory of
   God, as we find it used in Scripture; I proceed to inquire what is
   meant by the name of God.

   God's name and his glory, at least very often, signify the same thing
   in Scripture. As it has been observed concerning the glory of God, that
   it sometimes signifies the second perso [221] n in the Trinity; the
   same might be shown of the name of God, if it were needful in this
   place. But that the name and glory of God are often equipollent
   expressions, is manifest by Exod. xxxiii. 18, 19. When Moses says, "I
   beseech thee, show me thy glory," and God grants his request, he says,
   "I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee." Psal. viii. 1. "O
   Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy
   glory above the heavens," Psal. lxxix. 9. "Help us! O God of our
   salvation, for the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and purge away
   our sins for thy name's sake." Psal. cii. 15. "So the heathen shall
   fear the name of the Lord; and all the kings of the earth thy glory."
   Psal. cxlviii. 13. "His name alone is excellent, and his glory is above
   the earth and heaven." Isa. xlviii. 9. "For my name's sake will I defer
   mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee." Ver. 11. "For
   mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it: for how should my
   name be polluted? And I will not give my glory unto another." Isa. lix.
   19. "They shall fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory
   from the rising of the sun." Jer. xiii. 11. "That they might be unto me
   for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory." As glory often implies
   the manifestation, publication, and knowledge of excellency, and the
   honour that any one has in the world; so does name. Gen. xi. 4. "Let us
   make us a name." Deut. xxvi. 19. "And to make thee high above all
   nations, in praise, in name, and in honour." [222]

   So it is evident, that by name is sometimes meant much the same thing
   as praise, by several places which have been just mentioned, (as Isa.
   xlviii. 9. Jer. xiii. 11. Deut. xxvi. 19.) And also by Jer. xxxiii. 9.
   "And it shall be unto me for a name, a praise, and an honour, before
   all the nations of the earth, which shall hear of all the good I do
   unto them." Zeph. iii. 20. "I will make you a name and a praise among
   all people of the earth."

   And it seems that the expression or exhibition of God's goodness is
   especially called his name, in Exod. xxxiii. 19. "I will make all my
   goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord
   before thee." And chap. 5, 6, 7. "And the Lord descended in the cloud,
   and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord. And the
   Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God,
   gracious and merciful, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and
   truth; keeping mercy for thousands," &c.

   And the same illustrious brightness and effulgence in the pillar of
   cloud that appeared in the wilderness, and dwelt above the mercy-seat
   in the tabernacle and temple, (or rather the spiritual, divine
   brightness and effulgence represented by it,) so often called the glory
   of the Lord, is also often called the name of the Lord. Because God's
   glory was to dwell in the tabernacle, therefore he promises, Exod.
   xxix. 43. "There will I meet with the children of Israel, and the
   tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory." And the temple was called
   the house of God's glory, Isa. lx. 7. In like manner, the name of God
   is said to dwell in the sanctuary. Thus we often read of the place that
   God chose, to put his name there: or, as it is in the Hebrew, to cause
   his NAME to inhabit there. So it is sometimes rendered by our
   translators. As Deut. xii. 11. "Then there shall be a place which the
   Lord your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there." And the
   temple is often spoken of as built for God's name. And in Psal. lxxiv.
   7. the temple is called the dwelling-place of God's name. The
   mercy-seat in the temple was called the throne of God's name or glory,
   Jer. xiv. 21. "Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake do not disgrace the
   throne of thy glory." Here God's name and his glory seem to be spoken
   of as the same.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [209] Exod. xvi. 7.and Exod. xxviii. 2, 40and Exod. iii. 8. Numb. xvi.
   19 Deut. v. 24.and Deut. xxviii. 58. 2 Sam. 6, 20 1 Chron. xvi. 24.
   Esth. i. 4. Job xxix. 20. Psal. xix. 1and Psal. xiv. 13and Psal. lxiii.
   3and Psal. lxvi. 3.and Psal. lxviii. 6and Psal.lxxxvii. 6and Psal. cii.
   16and Psal. cxiv. 5, 12, 13 Isa. iv. 2.and Isa. x. 18.and Isa. xvi.
   40.and Isa. xxxv. 3. Isa. xl. 5.and Isa. lx. 13.and Isa. lxii. 2 Ezek.
   xxxi. 18 Hab. ii. 14. Hag. ii. 3, 9 Matt. vi. 29. Matt. xvi. 27. Matt.
   xxiv. 30. Luke ix. 31, 32. John i. 14.and John ii. 11.and John xi. 40
   Rom. vi. 4. 1 Cor. ii. 8. 1 Cor. xv. 40 2 Cor. iii. 10 Eph. iii. 21.
   Col. i. 11 2 Thess. i. 9. Tit. ii. 13. 1 Pet. i. 24. 2 Pet. i. 17

   [210] See also. Colos. i. 27and Colos. iii. 4 1 Thess. ii. 12. 2 Thess.
   ii. 14 1 Tim. iii. 16. 2 Tim. ii. 10 Heb. ii. 10. 1 Pet. 11, 21and 1
   Pet. v. 10 2 Pet. i. 3. Rev. xxi. 24, 26. Psal. lxxiii.and Psal. cxlix.
   5 Isa. vi. 10.

   [211] Exod. xvi. 12and Exod. xxiv. 16, 17, 23.and Exod. xl. 35, 35.
   Lev. 6, 23. Num. xiv. 10. and Num. xvi. 19. 1 Kings viii. 11. 2 Chron.
   v. 14.and 2 Chron. vii. 1, 2, 3. Isa. lviii. 8. Ezek. iii. 23.and Ezek.
   viii. 4.and Ezek. ix. 3.and Ezek. x. 18, 19. and Ezek. xi. 22, 23.and
   Ezek. xiii. 4, 5.and Ezek. xliv. 4. Acts vii. 55. Rev. xv. 8

   [212] Exod. xxxiii. 18.

   [213] Dr. Goodwin observes, (Vol. I. of his works, part 2d, page 166)
   that riches of grace are called riches of glory in Scripture. "The
   Scripture," says he, "speaks of riches in glory in Eph. iii. 6 That he
   would grant you according to the riches of glory; yet eminently mercy
   is there intended: for it is that which God bestows, and which the
   apostle there prayeth for. And he calls his mercy there his glory, as
   elsewhere he doth, as being the most eminent excellency in God.-- That
   in Rom. ix. 22, 23. compared, is observable. In the 22nd verse, where
   the apostle speaks of God's making known the power of his wrath, saith
   he, God is willing to show his wrath, and make his power known. But in
   verse 3d, when he comes to speak of mercy, he saith, That he might make
   known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy."

   [214] John xii. 24.

   [215] Here may be remembered what was before observed of the church
   being so often spoken of as the glory and fulness of Christ.

   [216] Exod. vi. 3 -- "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole
   earth is full of his glory." In the original, His glory is the fulness
   of the whole earth: which signifies much more than the words of the
   translation. God's glory, consisting especially in his holiness, is
   that, in the sight or communications of which man's fulness, i.e. his
   holiness and happiness, consists. By God's glory here, there seems to
   be respect to those effulgent beams that filled the temple: these beams
   signifying God's glory shining forth and communicated. This effulgence
   or communication, is the fulness of all intelligent creatures, who have
   no fulness of their own.

   [217] See particularly, Heb. iii. 3..

   [218] Psal. cxiv. 1-12and Psal. xxiv. 1, 2, 3. and Psal. xliv. 8.and
   Psal. xxi. 14, 15and Psal. xcix. 2, 3and Psal. cvii. 31, 32and Psal.
   cviii. 3, 4, 5.and Psal. cxix. 164ans Psal. cxlvii. 13and Psal. cl. 2.
   Rev. xix. 1, 2, 3. --

   [219] Psal. ix. 1, 2, 14 and Psal. xxviii. 7.and Psal. xxxv. 27, 28and
   Psal. xlii. 4. and Psal. lxiii. 5.and Psal. lxvii. 3, 4, 5.and Psal.
   lxxi. 22, 23.and Psal. civ. 33, 34.and Psal. cvi. 47and Psal. cxxxv.
   3and Psal. cxlvii. 1and Psal. cxlix. 1, 2, 5, 6. Acts ii. 46, 47. Acts
   46, 47. Acts iii. 8 Rev. xix. 6, 7.

   [220] Psal. xxx. 12.and Psal. xxxv. 4, 5.and Psal. cvii. 21, 22.and
   cxxxviii. 2. And many other places.

   [221]

   [222] See also, 2 Sam. vii. 9and 2 Sam. vii. 13and 2 Sam. xxii. 18 Neh.
   ix. 10 Job xxx. 8 Prov. xxii. 1 Many other places import the same
   thing.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Showing that the ultimate end of the creation of the world is but one,
   and what that one end is.

   From what has been observed in the last section, it appears, if the
   whole of what is said relating to this affair be duly weighed, and one
   part compared with another, we shall have reason to think, that the
   design of the Spirit of God is not to represent God's ultimate end as
   manifold, but as ONE. For though it be signified by various names yet
   they appear not to be names of different things, but various names
   involving each other in their meaning either different names of the
   same thing, or names of several parts of one whole; or of the same
   whole viewed in various lights or in its different respects and
   relations. For it appears, that all that is ever spoken of in the
   Scripture as a ultimate end of God's works, is included in that one
   phrase, the glory of God; which is the name by which the ultimate end
   of God's works is most commonly called in Scripture; and seems most
   aptly to signify the thing.

   The thing signified by that name, the glory of God, when spoken of as
   the supreme and ultimate end of all God's works, is the emanation and
   true external expression of God's internal glory and fulness; meaning
   by his fulness what has already been explained; or, in other words,
   God's internal glory, in a true and just exhibition, or external
   existence of it. It is confessed, that there is a degree of obscurity
   in these definitions; but perhaps an obscurity which is unavoidable,
   through the imperfection of language to express things of so sublime a
   nature. And therefore the thing may possibly be better understood, by
   using a variety of expressions, by a particular consideration of it, as
   it were, by parts, than by any short definition.

   It includes the exercise of God's perfections to produce a proper
   effect, in opposition to their lying eternally dormant and ineffectual:
   as his power being eternally without any act or fruit of that power;
   his wisdom eternally ineffectual in any wise production, or prudent
   disposal of any thing, &c. The manifestation of his internal glory to
   created understandings. The communication of the infinite fulness of
   God to the creature. The creature's high esteem of God, love to him,
   and complacence and joy in him; and the proper exercises and
   expressions of these.

   These at first view may appear to be entirely distinct things: but if
   we more closely consider the matter, they will all appear to be one
   thing, in a variety of views and relations. They are all but the
   emanation of God's glory; or the excellent brightness and fulness of
   the divinity diffused, overflowing, and as it were enlarged; or in one
   word, existing ad extra. God exercising his perfection to produce a
   proper effect, is not distinct from the emanation or communication of
   his fulness: for this is the effect, viz. his fulness communicated, and
   the producing of this effect is the communication of his fulness; and
   there is nothing in this effectual exerting of God's perfection, but
   the emanation of God's internal glory.

   Now God's internal glory, is either in his understanding or will. The
   glory or fulness of his understanding, is his knowledge. The internal
   glory and fulness of God, having its special seat in his will, is his
   holiness and happiness. The whole of God's internal good or glory, is
   in these three things, viz. his infinite knowledge, his infinite virtue
   or holiness, and his infinite joy and happiness. Indeed there are a
   great many attributes in God, according to our way of conceiving them:
   but all may be reduced to these; or to their degree, circumstances, and
   relations. We have no conception of God's power, different from the
   degree of these things, with a certain relation of them to effects.
   God's infinity is not properly a distinct kind of good, but only
   expresses the degree of good there is in him. So God's eternity is not
   a distinct good; but is the duration of good. His immutability is still
   the same good, with a negation of change. So that, as I said, the
   fulness of the Godhead is the fulness of his understanding, consisting
   in his knowledge; and the fulness of his will consisting in his virtue
   and happiness.

   And therefore, the external glory of God consists in the communication
   of these. The communication of his knowledge is chiefly in giving the
   knowledge of himself: for this is the knowledge in which the fulness of
   God's understanding chiefly consists. And thus we see how the
   manifestation of God's glory to created understandings, and their
   seeing and knowing it, is not distinct from an emanation or
   communication of God's fulness, but clearly implied in it. Again, the
   communication of God's virtue or holiness, is principally in
   communicating the love of himself. And thus we see how, not only the
   creature's seeing and knowing God's excellence, but also supremely
   esteeming and loving him, belongs to the communication of God's
   fulness. And the communication of God's joy and happiness, consists
   chiefly in communicating to the creature that happiness and joy which
   consists in rejoicing in God, and in his glorious excellency; for in
   such joy God's own happiness does principally consist. And in these
   things, knowing God's excellency, loving God for it, and rejoicing in
   it, and in the exercise and expression of these, consists God's honour
   and praise; so that these are clearly implied in that glory of God,
   which consists in the emanation of his internal glory.

   And though all these things, which seem to be so various, are signified
   by that glory, which the Scripture speaks of as the ultimate end of all
   God's works; yet it is manifest there is no greater, and no other
   variety in it, than in the internal and essential glory of God itself.
   God's internal glory is partly in his understanding, and partly in his
   will. And this internal glory, as seated in the will of God, implies
   both his holiness and his happiness: both are evidently God's glory,
   according to the use of the phrase. So that as God's external glory is
   only the emanation of his internal, this variety necessarily follows.
   And again, it hence appears that here is no other variety or
   distinction, but what necessarily arises from the distinct faculties of
   the creature, to which the communication is made, as created in the
   image of God: even as having these two faculties of understanding and
   will. God communicates himself to the understanding of the creature, in
   giving him the knowledge of his glory; and to the will of the creature,
   in giving him holiness, consisting primarily in the love of God: and in
   giving the creature happiness, chiefly consisting in joy in God. These
   are the sum of that emanation of divine fulness called in Scripture,
   the glory of God. The first part of this glory is called truth, the
   latter, grace, John i. 14. "We beheld his glory, the glory of the
   only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth."

   Thus we see that the great end of God's works, which is so variously
   expressed in Scripture, is indeed but one; and this one end is most
   properly and comprehensively called, the glory of god; by which name it
   is most commonly called in Scripture; and is fitly compared to an
   effulgence or emanation of light from a luminary. Light is the external
   expression, exhibition, and manifestation of the excellency of the
   luminary, of the sun for instance: It is the abundant, extensive
   emanation and communication of the fulness of the sun to innumerable
   beings that partake of it. It is by this that the sun itself is seen,
   and his glory beheld, and all other things are discovered: it is by a
   participation of this communication from the sun, that surrounding
   objects receive all their lustre, beauty, and brightness. It is by this
   that all nature receives life, comfort, and joy. Light is abundantly
   used in Scripture to represent and signify these three things,
   knowledge, holiness, and happiness. [223]

   What has been said may be sufficient to show, how those things, which
   are spoken of in Scripture as ultimate ends of God's works, though they
   may seem at first view to be distinct, are all plainly to be reduced to
   this one thing, viz. God's internal glory or fulness existing in its
   emanation. And though God, in seeking this end, seeks the creature's
   good; yet therein appears his supreme regard to himself.

   The emanation or communication of the divine fulness, consisting in the
   knowledge of God, love to him, and joy in him, has relation indeed both
   to God and the creature: but it has relation to God as its fountain, as
   the thing communicated is something of its internal fulness. The water
   in the stream is something of the fountain; and the beams of the sun
   are something of the sun. And again, they have relation to God as their
   object: for the knowledge communicated, is the knowledge of God; and
   the love communicated, is the love of God; and the happiness
   communicated, is joy in God. In the creature's knowing, esteeming,
   loving, rejoicing in, and praising God, the glory of God is both
   exhibited and acknowledged; his fulness is received and returned. Here
   is both an emanation and re-emanation. The refulgence shines upon and
   into the creature, and is reflected back to the luminary. The beams of
   glory come from God, are something of God, and are refunded back again
   to their original. So that the whole is of God, and in God, and to God;
   and he is the beginning, and the middle, and the end.

   And though it be true that God has respect to the creature in these
   things; yet his respect to himself, and to the creature, are not
   properly a double and divided respect. What has been said, (chap. I.
   sect. 3, 4.) may be sufficient to show this. Nevertheless, it may not
   be amiss here briefly to say a few things; though mostly implied in
   what has been said already.

   When God was about to create the world, he had respect to that
   emanation of his glory, which is actually the consequence of the
   creation, both with regard to himself and the creature. He had regard
   to it as an emanation from himself, a communication of himself, and, as
   the thing communicated, in its nature returned to himself, as its final
   term. And he had regard to it also as the emanation was to the
   creature, and as the thing communicated was in the creature, as its
   subject.

   And God had regard to it in this manner, as he had a supreme regard to
   himself, and value for his own infinite, internal glory. It was this
   value for himself that caused him to value and seek that his internal
   glory should flow forth from himself. It was from his value for his
   glorious perfections of wisdom, righteousness, &c. that he valued the
   proper exercise and effect of these perfections, in wise and righteous
   acts and effects. It was from his infinite value for his internal glory
   and fulness, that he valued the thing itself communicated, which is
   something of the same, extant in the creature. Thus, because he
   infinitely values his own glory, consisting in the knowledge of
   himself, love to himself, and complacence and joy in himself; he
   therefore valued the image, communication, or participation of these in
   the creature. And it is because he values himself, that he delights in
   the knowledge, and love, and joy of the creature; as being himself the
   object of this knowledge, love, and complacence. For it is the
   necessary consequence of true esteem and love, that we value others'
   esteem of the same object, and dislike the contrary. For the same
   reason, God approves of others' esteem and love of himself.

   Thus it is easy to conceive, how God should seek the good of the
   creature, consisting in the creature's knowledge and holiness, and even
   his happiness, from a supreme regard to himself; as his happiness
   arises from that which is an image and participation of God's own
   beauty; and consists in the creature's exercising a supreme regard to
   God, and complacence in him; in beholding God's glory, in esteeming and
   loving it, and rejoicing in it, and in his exercising and testifying
   love and supreme respect to God: which is the same thing with the
   creature's exalting God as his chief good, and making him his supreme
   end.

   And though the emanation of God's fulness, intended in the creation, is
   to the creature as its object; and though the creature is the subject
   of the fulness communicated, which is the creature's good; yet it does
   not necessarily follow, that even in so doing, God did not make himself
   his end. It comes to the same thing. God's respect to the creature's
   good, and his respect to himself, is not a divided respect; but both
   are united in one, as the happiness of the creature aimed at is
   happiness in union with himself. The creature is no farther happy with
   this happiness which God makes his ultimate end, than he becomes one
   with God. The more happiness the greater union: when the happiness is
   perfect, the union is perfect. And as the happiness will be increasing
   to eternity, the union will become more and more strict and perfect;
   nearer and more like to that between God the Father and the Son; who
   are so united, that their interest is perfectly one. If the happiness
   of the creature be considered in the whole of the creature's eternal
   duration, with all the infinity of its progress, and infinite increase
   of nearness and union to God; in this view, the creature must be looked
   upon as united to God in an infinite strictness.

   If God has respect to something in the creature, which he views as of
   everlasting duration, and as rising higher and higher through that
   infinite duration, and that not with constantly diminishing (but
   perhaps an increasing) celerity; then he has respect to it, as, in the
   whole, of infinite height; though there never will be any particular
   time when it can be said already to have come to such a height.

   Let the most perfect union with God be represented by something at an
   infinite height above us; and the eternally increasing union of the
   saints with God, by something that is ascending constantly towards that
   infinite height, moving upwards with a given velocity; and that is to
   continue thus to move to all eternity. God, who views the whole of this
   eternally increasing height, views it as an infinite height. And if he
   has respect to it, and makes it his end, as in the whole of it, he has
   respect to it as an infinite height, though the time will never come
   when it can be said it has already arrived at this infinite height.

   God aims at that which the motion or progression which he causes, aims
   at, or tends to. If there be many things supposed to be so made and
   appointed, that, by a constant eternal motion, they all tend to a
   certain centre; then it appears that he who made them, and is the cause
   of their motion, aimed at that centre: that term of their motion, to
   which they eternally tend, and are eternally, as it were, striving
   after. And if God be this centre, then God aimed at himself. And herein
   it appears, that as he is the first author of their being and motion,
   so he is the last end, the final term, to which is their ultimate
   tendency and aim.

   We may judge of the end that the Creator aimed at, in the being,
   nature, and tendency he gives the creature, by the mark or term which
   they constantly aim at in their tendency and eternal progress; though
   the time will never come, when it can be said it is attained to, in the
   most absolutely perfect manner.

   But if strictness of union to God be viewed as thus infinitely exalted;
   then the creature must be regarded as nearly and closely united to God.
   And viewed thus, their interest must be viewed as one with God's
   interest; and so is not regarded properly with a disjunct and separate,
   but an undivided respect. And as to any difficulty of reconciling God's
   not making the creature his ultimate end, with a respect properly
   distinct from a respect to himself; with his benevolence and free
   grace, and the creature's obligation to gratitude, the reader must be
   referred to chap. I. sect. 4. obj. 4. where this objection has been
   considered and answered at large.

   If by reason of the strictness of the union of a man and his family,
   their interest may be looked upon as one, how much more so is the
   interest of Christ and his church,--whose first union in heaven is
   unspeakably more perfect and exalted, than that of an earthly father
   and his family--if they be considered with regard to their eternal and
   increasing union? Doubtless it may justly be esteemed so much one, that
   it may be sought, not with a distinct and separate, but an undivided
   respect. It is certain that what God aimed at in the creation of the
   world, was the good that would be the consequence of the creation, in
   the whole continuance of the thing created.

   It is no solid objection against God aiming at an infinitely perfect
   union of the creature with himself, that the particular time will never
   come when it can be said, the union is now infinitely perfect. God aims
   at satisfying justice in the eternal damnation of sinners; which will
   be satisfied by their damnation, considered no otherwise than with
   regard to its eternal duration. But yet there never will come that
   particular moment, when it can be said, that now justice is satisfied.
   But if this does not satisfy our modern free-thinkers who do not like
   the talk about satisfying justice with an infinite punishment; I
   suppose it will not be denied by any, that God, in glorifying the
   saints in heaven with eternal felicity, aims to satisfy his infinite
   grace or benevolence, by the bestowment of a good infinitely valuable,
   because eternal: and yet there never will come the moment, when it can
   be said, that now this infinitely valuable good has been actually
   bestowed. [224] [225]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [223] It is used to signify knowledge, or that manifestation and
   evidence by which knowledge is received. Psal. xix. 8.and Psal. cxix.
   105, 130 Prov. vi. 23 Isa. viii. 20and Isa. ix. 2 and Isa. xxix-. 18
   Dan. v. 11 Eph. v. 13"But all things that are reproved , are made
   manifest by the light; for whatsoever doth make manifest , is light.
   &c. It is used to signify virtue, or moral ground. Job xxv. 5. Eccl.
   viii. 1 Isa. v. 20.and Isa. xxiv. 23.and Isa. lxii. 1. Ezek. xxviii. 7,
   17. Dan. ii. 31 John i. 5 &c And it is abundantly used to signify
   comfort, joy & happiness. Est. viii. 16. Job xviii. 8.and Job xxii.
   28.and Job xxix. 3.and Job xxx. 26. Psal. xxvii. 1and Psal. xcvi. 11and
   Psal. cxvii. 27.abd Psal. cxii. 4. Isa. xliii. 16and Isa. i. 10and Isa.
   lix. 9 Jer. xiii. 16. Lam. iii. Ezek. xxxii. 8. Amos v. 18. Mic. vii.
   8, 9. &c.

   [224] Our author has produced, from the purest principles of reason,
   and the fountain of revealed truth, abundant evidence, that God's
   ultimate and chief end in the creation of the universe, in the
   operations of providence, and in the methods of salvation, is his own
   glory. But we do not think it superfluous to add a few observations on
   this important subject. 1. A clear and comprehensive view of the
   universe, or what our author calls "the world," will lead us to observe
   two grand divisions, which may be termed physical and moral. And though
   in both the glory of God is the chief end, yet this end is not attained
   by the same means in the moral as in the physical department. 2. By the
   creation and disposal of the physical part of the universe, the glory
   of God's natural perfections, as of sovereign wisdom, power, and
   goodness, is chiefly displayed. But by the creation and government of
   the moral part, the glory of the moral perfections of Deity, that is,
   of infinite moral rectitude, or equity, and of sovereign benevolence
   and mercy, is made to appear. 3. God being an infinite sovereign,
   controlled by no consideration but infinite rectitude, or a regard to
   the consistency of his own character; and a created universe being
   capable of two forms, and it should seem, for ought that appears, to
   the contrary, of two only, physical and moral; a full emanation and
   display ad extra of the moral perfections of Deity could not be made
   without a moral system in all its capabilities of relation. 4. The
   physical part of the universe, even including the physical operations
   of intelligent beings, may subsist, it is evident, without requiring
   any other display of glory than what is included in sovereign wisdom,
   power, and goodness; and it is equally plain, that there would be no
   opportunity of manifesting strict equity, much less mercy, to existent
   beings, without a moral system. Therefore, 5. If strict or absolute
   equity, and sovereign mercy, be manifested, a moral system was
   necessary. To exercise strict, unmixed, or absolute equity, whereby is
   given to its object what is due to it, (a capacity for moral agency
   being supposed,) and yet to preserve that object, that is, a moral
   agent, from being liable to sin, involves a contradiction. For it is
   the same as to say, a free agent is not free to sin, though fully
   permitted to follow his own tendencies. And this is the same thing as
   to say, an accountable creature is not liable to fall; in other words,
   a moral agent is no moral agent, and a moral system is no moral system.
   Man would be impeccable, and the very existence of sin impossible. 6.
   If it be asked, might not the whole of the moral part of the universe
   have been preserved from sin? We reply, undoubtedly it might; if
   sovereign benevolence had though proper to interpose, in order to
   counteract the exercise of strict, unmixed, and absolute rectitude or
   equity; but then it must have been at the expense of eternally
   concealing the glory of this divine perfection.--absolute rectitude. 7.
   To permit the creature to sin, and to exercise absolute equity, is the
   same thing; in other words, to exercise this glorious perfection, and
   not to permit the creature to sin, are incompatible ideas. If this
   perfection be exercised, there is, there can be, no principle belonging
   to a moral system, which preserves it from being liable to sin. Nor is
   there any principle belonging to it independent of sovereign
   benevolence, which is adequate to preserve that liability to sin from
   actual defection. But to appeal, in the way of objection, to the
   alternative of sovereign benevolence, which alone can preserve from
   sin, is the same as to concede what the proposition asserts. 8. Equity,
   in one view of it, is indeed compatible with the exercise of sovereign
   benevolence towards the same object, and at the same time. To question
   this, would be to question God's proper sovereignty, and therefore his
   right of creating and preserving the universe, and of beatifying and
   creatures he hath made. For neither of these effects could take place
   but by sovereign benevolence as a cause. But if sovereign benevolence
   were not compatible with justice, or equity, in one view of it, God
   could not be benevolent without being unjust, which is absurd. 9. Yet
   equity, in another view, stands as a contrast to benevolence. Strict or
   absolute equity, is that which excludes all sovereign, benevolent
   influence; and when moral agents are its object, (their being and
   natural capacities, or their moral capabilities, being supposed,) the
   exercise of absolute equity must necessarily exclude benevolent,
   sovereign influence. Thus among men we find some resemblance of this
   abstract but momentous truth. In one view, justice and generosity are
   compatible; for strict, absolute justice, is the same as justice and
   nothing more, and therefore must exclude generosity. 10. Therefore,
   equity, in the one view, implies the exclusion of injustice; and in the
   other, the exclusion of undeserved favour, or sovereign benevolent
   influence. The exercise of rectitude in the former sense, might have
   been without the permission of sin; but not so in the latter sense. If
   perfect absolute rectitude towards a moral system, be made to emanate
   ad extra, to the full development of the capabilities of such a system,
   the permission of sin is not only equitable, but even metaphysically
   necessary. That is, it involves a contradiction to say, that such a
   divine perfection may be so displayed, or its glory made to appear ad
   extra, and yet not to permit the existence of moral defect, or, in
   other words, to actually hinder its existence. 11. The very idea of a
   moral system, in which the permission of defect is excluded by equity,
   is one of the most absurd that can be conceived. For it is the same as
   to say that God was bound in equity not to permit sin, while at the
   same time he constituted the agent free, and accountable for the
   exercise of his freedom; and as he has in fact permitted the
   introduction of sin into the world, such an idea would be the same as
   to charge infinite perfection with want of equity. 12. We may therefore
   safely conclude, that the glory of the divine rectitude, towards the
   intelligent and moral part of the universe, could not be manifested
   without the permission of sin. The full exercise of equity must
   necessarily leave the moral system to its own tendencies and
   operations. 13. To permit the event of sin, or not to hinder it,
   implies, that the cause of defection is not in the permitter, but in
   the permitted; not in the governor, but the governed. There is in the
   moral part of the universe a cause, why an event which ought not to
   take place, will take place, if not hindered. If there be no such cause
   in the system, how could the event take place on permission? If it be
   said, There is a chance it may not take place, and there is a chance of
   the contrary -- it is but fair to ask, Is this chance something which
   has a cause, or has it no cause? If the latter, the concession itself
   reduces chance to a mere nothing. For a contingent event, as the
   operation of chance is supposed to be, without any cause, is a
   metaphysical impossibility. If the former; what is the cause of what
   the objector calls chance? Is it something external, or internal? What
   is its nature and character? To say that liberty of indifference or a
   self-determining power, is the chance which requires no preceding cause
   to produce the event, is to contradict absolute demonstration, if ever
   there was a metaphysical demonstration of any subject: as our author
   has abundantly shown in his "Essay on the Freedom of the Will." 14. It
   is therefore inaccurate and unintelligible language to say, that either
   chance, liberty or indifference, or a self-determining power,
   independent of any antecedent cause, is adequate to account for the
   event of sin, or a deterioration of a moral system. God, therefore,
   permitting, there is an inherent adequate cause of failure, distinct
   from divine causation. What this cause is, and what is its nature, has
   been shown and proved in a former note. 15. Permission is an act of
   equity; or, it is the exercise of rectitude, to the exclusion of
   benevolent influence; whether we regard that influence as preventing
   the event of sin, or as delivering from its power. Sovereign
   benevolence prevents the fall of angels; and it delivers, restores, and
   eternally saves a goodly number of the human fallen race. Without the
   permission of sin, restoring benevolence, or the exercise of mercy,
   would have been impossible; and consequently, the glory of that
   perfection, which can be fully displayed only by its exercise towards
   the miserable, which would have be eternally concealed. 16. If,
   therefore, equity be a glorious attribute of God, its emanation and
   exercise must be glorious. But the exercise of equity, in the strict
   sense, includes the permission of sin, as before proved. And, here we
   may add, if not to hinder be an exercise of strict rectitude, the
   continued existence of sin is not inconsistent with it. 17. It will be
   allowed by everyone, that, as mercy itself is a glorious attribute, so
   is the exercise of it a glorious thing. But this would have been
   impossible, if sin had no existence; nor could sin have existence, if
   not permitted to exist; and sin could not have been permitted, if
   strict equity had not been exercised; nor could strict equity have been
   exercised, if the exercise of preventing sovereign benevolence had not
   been excluded, in those instances wherein moral defect actually took
   place. corollaries. 18. The ultimate and chief end of God in the
   creation and government of the moral part of the universe, is the glory
   of his moral perfections; which are virtually included in strict
   rectitude and sovereign benevolence. 19. If strict rectitude be
   exercised towards the degenerate part of the system, the restoration of
   those who are the objects of it is not possible; that is, to suppose it
   is possible involves a contradiction. Therefore, 20. If any degenerate
   moral agent be restored, it must be necessarily be by the exercise of
   that sovereign benevolence which we call mercy. 21. "Behold therefore
   the goodnesS and severity of God! on them who fell, severity; but
   toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou
   also shalt be cut off." Goodness and severity are but other words for
   sovereign benevolence and strict equity, the glory of which is
   abundantly conspicuous in the various divine dispensations towards the
   children of men, even in this life; but will appear still more
   transcendent in the day when God shall judge the world in
   righteousness, and in the day of eternity.--W.

   [225]
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

DISSERTATION

        CONCERNING

  THE NATURE OF TRUE VIRTUE.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. I.

   Showing wherein the essence of true virtue consists.

   Whatever controversies and variety of opinions there are about the
   nature of virtue, yet all excepting, some sceptics, who deny any real
   difference between virtue and vice, mean by it something beautiful, or
   rather some kind of beauty, or excellency. It is not all beauty that is
   called virtue; for instance, not the beauty of a building, of a flower,
   or of the rainbow; but some beauty belonging to beings that have
   perception and will. It is not all beauty of mankind that is called
   virtue; for instance, not the external beauty of the countenance, or
   shape, gracefulness of motion, or harmony of voice: but it is a beauty
   that has its original seat in the mind. But yet perhaps not every thing
   that may be called a beauty of mind, is properly called virtue. There
   is a beauty of understanding and speculation; there is something in the
   ideas and conceptions of great philosophers and statesmen, that may be
   called beautiful; which is a different thing from what is most commonly
   meant by virtue.

   But virtue is the beauty of those qualities and acts of the mind, that
   are of a moral nature, i.e. such as are attended with desert or
   worthiness of praise or blame. Things of this sort, it is generally
   agreed, so far as I know, do not belong merely to speculation; but to
   the disposition and will, or (to use a general word, I suppose commonly
   well understood) to the heart. Therefore, I suppose, I shall not depart
   from the common opinion, when I say, that virtue is the beauty of the
   qualities and exercises of the heart, or those actions which proceed
   from them. So that when it is inquired, what is the nature of true
   virtue? this is the same as to inquire, what that is, which renders any
   habit, disposition, or exercise of the heart truly beautiful?

   I use the phrase true virtue, and speak of things truly beautiful,
   because I suppose it will generally be allowed, that there is a
   distinction to be made between some things which are truly virtuous,
   and others which only seem to be so, through a partial and imperfect
   view of things: that some actions and dispositions appear beautiful, if
   considered partially and superficially, or with regard to some things
   belonging to them, and in some of their circumstances and tendencies,
   which would appear otherwise in a more extensive and comprehensive
   view, wherein they are seen clearly in their whole nature, and the
   extent of their connexions in the universality of things.

   There is a general and particular beauty. By a particular beauty, I
   mean that by which a thing appears beautiful when considered only with
   regard to its connexion with, and tendency to, some particular things
   within a limited, and as it were a private, sphere. And a general
   beauty is that by which a thing appears beautiful when viewed most
   perfectly, comprehensively, and universally, with regard to all its
   tendencies, and its connexions with every thing to which it stands
   related. The former may be without and against the latter. As a few
   notes in a tune, taken only by themselves, and in their relation to one
   another, may be harmonious; which, when considered with respect to all
   the notes in the tune, or the entire series of sounds they are
   connected with, may be very discordant, and disagreeable. That only,
   therefore, is what I mean by true virtue, which, belonging to the heart
   of an intelligent being, is beautiful by a general beauty, or beautiful
   in a comprehensive view, as it is in itself, and as related to every
   thing with which it stands connected. And therefore, when we are
   inquiring concerning the nature of true virtue--wherein this true and
   general beauty of the heart does most essentially consist--this is my
   answer to the inquiry:--

   True virtue most essentially consists in benevolence to being in
   general. Or perhaps, to speak more accurately, it is that consent,
   propensity, and union of heart to being in general, which is
   immediately exercised in a general good will.

   The things before observed respecting the nature of true virtue,
   naturally lead us to such a notion of it. If it has its seat in the
   heart, and is the general goodness and beauty of the disposition and
   its exercise, in the most comprehensive view, considered with regard to
   its universal tendency, and as related to every thing with which it
   stands connected; what can it consist in, but a consent and good will
   to being in general? Beauty does not consist in discord and dissent,
   but in consent and agreement. And if every intelligent being is some
   way related to being in general, and is a part of the universal system
   of existence; and so stands in connexion with the whole; what can its
   general and true beauty be, but its union and consent with the great
   whole?

   If any such thing can be supposed as a union of heart to some
   particular being, or number of beings, disposing it to benevolence to a
   private circle or system of beings, which are but a small part of the
   whole; not implying a tendency to an union with the great system, and
   not at all inconsistent with enmity towards being in general; this I
   suppose not to be of the nature of true virtue; although it may in some
   respects be good, and may appear beautiful in a confined and contracted
   view of things.--But of this more afterwards.

   It is abundantly plain by the Holy Scriptures, and generally allowed,
   not only by christian divines, but by the more considerable Deists,
   that virtue most essentially consists in love. And I suppose, it is
   owned by the most considerable writers, to consist in general love of
   benevolence, or kind affection: though it seems to me the meaning of
   some in this affair is not sufficiently explained; which perhaps
   occasions some error or confusion in discourses on this subject.

   When I say, true virtue consists in love to being in general, I shall
   not be likely to be understood, that no one act of the mind or exercise
   of love is of the nature of true virtue, but what has being in general,
   or the great system of universal existence, for its direct and
   immediate object: so that no exercise of love, or kind affection, to
   any one particular being, that is but a small part of this whole, has
   any thing of the nature of true virtue. But, that the nature of true
   virtue consists in a disposition to benevolence towards being in
   general; though from such a disposition may arise exercises of love to
   particular beings, as objects are presented, and occasions arise. No
   wonder, that he who is of a generally benevolent disposition, should be
   more disposed than another to have his heart moved with benevolent
   affection to particular persons, with whom he is acquainted and
   conversant, and from whom arise the greatest and most frequent
   occasions for exciting his benevolent temper. But my meaning is, that
   no affections towards particular persons or beings are of the nature of
   true virtue, but such as arise from a generally benevolent temper, or
   from that habit or frame of mind, wherein consists a disposition to
   love being in general.

   And perhaps it is needless for me to give notice to my readers, that
   when I speak of an intelligent being having a heart united and
   benevolently disposed to being in general, I thereby mean intelligent
   being in general. Not inanimate things, or beings that have no
   perception or will; which are not properly capable objects of
   benevolence.

   Love is commonly distinguished into love of benevolence, and love of
   complacence. Love of benevolence is that affection or propensity of the
   heart to any being, which causes it to incline to its well-being, or
   disposes it to desire and take pleasure in its happiness. And if I
   mistake not, it is agreeable to the common opinion, that beauty in the
   object is always the ground of this propensity; but that there may be a
   disposition to the welfare of those that are not considered as
   beautiful, unless mere existence be accounted a beauty. And benevolence
   or goodness in the Divine Being is generally supposed, not only to be
   prior to the beauty of many of its objects, but to their existence; so
   as to be the ground both of their existence and their beauty, rather
   than the foundation of God's benevolence; as it is supposed that it is
   God's goodness which moved him to give them both being and beauty. So
   that if all virtue primarily consists in that affection of heart to
   being, which is exercised in benevolence, or an inclination to its
   good, then God's virtue is so extended as to include a propensity not
   only to being actually existing, and actually beautiful, but to
   possible being, so as to incline him to give a being beauty and
   happiness.

   What is commonly called love of complacence, presupposes beauty. For it
   is no other than delight in beauty; or complacence in the person or
   being beloved for his beauty. If virtue be the beauty of an intelligent
   being, and virtue consists in love, then it is plain inconsistence, to
   suppose that virtue primarily consists in any love to its object for
   its beauty; either in a love of complacence, which is delight in a
   being for its beauty, or in a love of benevolence, that has the beauty
   of its object for its foundation. For that would be to suppose, that
   the beauty of intelligent beings primarily consists in love to beauty;
   or that their virtue first of all consists in their love to virtue.
   Which is an inconsistence, and going in a circle. Because it makes
   virtue, or beauty of mind, the foundation or first motive of that love
   wherein virtue originally consists, or wherein the very first virtue
   consists; or, it supposes the first virtue to be the consequence and
   effect of virtue. Which makes the first virtue both the ground and the
   consequence, both cause and effect of itself. Doubtless virtue
   primarily consists in something else besides any effect or consequence
   of virtue. If virtue consists primarily in love to virtue, then virtue,
   the thing loved, is the love of virtue: so that virtue must consist in
   the love of the love of virtue--and so on in infinitum. For there is no
   end of going back in a circle. We never come to any beginning or
   foundation; it is without beginning, and hangs on nothing.--Therefore,
   if the essence of virtue, or beauty of mind, lies in love, or a
   disposition to love, it must primarily consist in something different
   both from complacence, which is a delight in beauty, and also from any
   benevolence that has the beauty of its object for its foundation.
   Because it is absurd to say that virtue is primarily and first of all
   the consequence of itself; which makes virtue primarily prior to
   itself.

   Nor can virtue primarily consist in gratitude; or one being's
   benevolence to another for his benevolence to him. Because this implies
   the same inconsistence. For it supposes a benevolence prior to
   gratitude, which is the cause of gratitude. The first benevolence
   cannot be gratitude. Therefore there is room left for no other
   conclusion, than that the primary object of virtuous love is being,
   simply considered; or that true virtue primarily consists, not in love
   to any particular beings, because of their virtue or beauty, nor in
   gratitude, because they love us; but in a propensity and union of heart
   to being simply considered; exciting absolute benevolence, if I may so
   call it, to being in general. I say, true virtue primarily consists in
   this. For I am far from asserting, that there is no true virtue in any
   other love than this absolute benevolence. But I would express what
   appears to me to be the truth, on this subject, in the following
   particulars.

   The first object of a virtuous benevolence is being, simply considered:
   and if being, simply considered, be its object, then being in general
   is its object; and what it has an ultimate propensity to, is the
   highest good of being in general. And it will seek the good of every
   individual being unless it be conceived as not consistent with the
   highest good of being in general. In which case the good of a
   particular being, or some beings, may be given up for the sake of the
   highest good of being in general. And particularly, if there be any
   being statedly and irreclaimably opposite, and an enemy to being in
   general, then consent and adherence to being in general will induce the
   truly virtuous heart to forsake that enemy, and to oppose it.

   Further, if being, simply considered, be the first object of a truly
   virtuous benevolence, then that object who has most of being, or has
   the greatest share of existence, other things being equal, so far as
   such a being is exhibited to our faculties, will have the greatest
   share of the propensity and benevolent affections of the heart. I say,
   "other things being equal," especially because there is a secondary
   object of virtuous benevolence, that I shall take notice of presently,
   which must be considered as the ground or motive to a purely virtuous
   benevolence. Pure benevolence in its first exercise is nothing else but
   being's uniting consent, or propensity to being; and inclining to the
   general highest good, and to each being, whose welfare is consistent
   with the highest general good, in proportion to the degree of
   existence, [226] understand, "other things being equal."

   The second object of a virtuous propensity of heart is benevolent
   being. A secondary ground of pure benevolence is virtuous benevolence
   itself in its object. When any one under the influence of general
   benevolence, sees another being possessed of the like general
   benevolence, this attaches his heart to him, and draws forth greater
   love to him, than merely his having existence: because so far as the
   being beloved has love to the being in general, so far his own being
   is, as it were, enlarged; extends to, and in some sort comprehends,
   being in general: and therefore, he that is governed by love to being
   in general, must of necessity have complacence in him, and the greater
   degree of benevolence to him, as it were out of gratitude to him for
   his love to general existence, that his own heart is extended and
   united to, and so looks on its interest as its own. It is because his
   heart is thus united to being in general, that he looks on a benevolent
   propensity to being in general, wherever he sees it, as the beauty of
   the being in whom it is; an excellency that renders him worthy of
   esteem, complacence, and the greater good will.--But several things may
   be noted more particularly concerning this secondary ground of a truly
   virtuous love.

   1. That loving a being on this ground necessarily arises from pure
   benevolence to being in general, and comes to the same thing. For he
   that has a simple and pure good will to general existence, must love
   that temper in others, that agrees and conspires with itself. A spirit
   of consent to being must agree with consent to being. That which truly
   and sincerely seeks the good of others, must approve of and love that
   which joins with him in seeking the good of others.

   2. This secondary ground of virtuous love, is the thing wherein true
   moral or spiritual beauty primarily consists. Yea, spiritual beauty
   consists wholly in this, and in the various qualities and exercises of
   mind which proceed from it, and the external actions which proceed from
   these internal qualities and exercises. And in these things consists
   all true virtue, viz. in this love of being, and the qualities and acts
   which arise from it.

   3. As all the spiritual beauty lies in these virtuous principles and
   acts, so it is primarily on this account they are beautiful, viz. that
   they imply consent and union with being in general. This is the primary
   and most essential beauty of every thing that can justly be called by
   the name of virtue, or is any moral excellency in the eye of one that
   has a perfect view of things. I say, "the primary and most essential
   beauty," because there is a secondary and inferior sort of beauty;
   which I shall take notice of afterwards.

   4. This spiritual beauty, which is but a secondary ground of virtuous
   benevolence, is the ground, not only of benevolence, but complacence.
   and is the primary ground of the latter; that is, when the complacence
   is truly virtuous. Love to us in particular, and kindness received, may
   be a secondary ground: but this is the primary objective foundation of
   it.

   5. It must be noted, that the degree of the amiableness of true virtue,
   primarily consisting in consent, and a benevolent propensity of heart
   to being in general, is not in the simple proportion of the degree of
   benevolent affection seen, but in a proportion compounded of the
   greatness of the benevolent being, or the degree of being and the
   degree of benevolence. One that loves being in general, will
   necessarily value good will to being in general, wherever he sees it.
   But if he sees the same benevolence in two beings, he will value it
   more in two, than in one only. Because it is a greater thing, more
   favourable to being in general, to have two beings to favour it, than
   only one of them. For there is more being that favours being: both
   together having more being than one alone. So, if one being be as great
   as two, has as much existence as both together, and has the same degree
   of general benevolence, it is more favourable to being in general, than
   if there were general benevolence in a being that had but half that
   share of existence. As a large quantity of gold, with the same quality,
   is more valuable than a small quantity of the same metal.

   6. It is impossible that any one should truly relish this beauty,
   consisting in general benevolence, who has not that temper himself. I
   have observed, that if any being is possessed of such a temper, he will
   unavoidably be pleased with same temper in another. And it may in like
   manner be demonstrated, that it is such a spirit, and nothing else,
   which will relish such a spirit. For if a being, destitute of
   benevolence, should love benevolence to being in general, it would
   prize and seek that for which it had no value. For how should one love
   and value a disposition to a thing, or a tendency to promote it, and
   for that very reason, when the thing itself is what he is regardless
   of, and has no value for, nor desires to have promoted. [227]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [226] I say, "in proportion to the degree of existence," because one
   being may have more existence than another, as he may be greater than
   another. That which is great, has more existence, and is further from
   nothing, than that which is little. One being may have every thing
   positive belonging to it, or every thing which goes to its positive
   existence (in opposition to defect) in a higher degree than another; or
   a greater capacity and power, greater understanding, every faculty and
   every positive quality in a higher degree. An arch-angel must be
   supposed to have more existence, and to be every way further removed
   from non-entity, than a worm.

   [227] In this masterly Dissertation on the nature of virtue, our author
   enters at once on his own definition of the term, and explains very
   clearly what he means by true virtue. His views, in some respects, are
   considerably different from those which are most current among ethical
   writers; and, probably, for want of some explanations, whereby the
   different definitions adopted by others may be accounted for, his
   invaluable treatise has not only been underrated, but even, by some,
   unreasonably opposed. We shall here offer a few remarks, which,
   perhaps, may tend to cast some light on the subject in general, as well
   as to relieve our author's definition from unfair imputations. 1.
   Virtue, if we regard the use of the term (?????) among the NOT
   ENGLISHs, seems to have been appropriated as much to the idea of
   martial courage, as the English term is appropriated to that of female
   chastity. Not that it was used exclusively in the former case, any more
   than in the latter. It often signifies power, energy, efficacy, and
   excellence. But by moral writers both ancient and modern, it has been
   unanimously adopted to represent a very general moral idea.--It would
   be easy to produce a great number of definitions from moralists and
   divines; but this is neither necessary, nor does it comport with our
   present purpose. 2. If we mistake not, there is just definition of
   virtue, which is not reducible to this general one: virtue is a
   laudable mean of real happiness. Cicero, indeed, says of it, that it is
   "affectio animi constans, conveniensque, laudabiles efficiens eos. in
   quibus est, et ipsa per se, sua sponte, separatea etiam utilitate,
   laudabilis." (Tuscul. Quaest. Lib. iv. § 15.) But virtue being laudable
   from its very nature, independently of any advantageous result, does
   not hinder it from being "a laudable mean of real happiness." 3. Now
   happiness being the uniform and voluntary end of intellectual
   existence, a desire of it being inseparable from our nature; we become
   liable to err, not only by adopting wrong means for accomplishing the
   end we propose to ourselves, but also by forming a false estimate of
   the nature of happiness, or the end itself. If the happiness be not
   real but imaginery, in the contemplation of the agent, however well
   adapted the means may be in order to attain it, they deserve not the
   epithet virtuous. 4. To discover the nature of true happiness, the
   light of wisdom is requisite: and while desire is blind, false
   estimates will be made. But every one thinks himself wise and prudent
   enough to prescribe his own happiness, till much folly be shown him by
   the wisdom which is from above; and he who supposes himself adequate to
   fix the end, cannot be very diffident about the means to be employed.
   5. Hence there is room for as many representations of virtue, as there
   are kinds of happiness which men think to be real; in addition to as
   many means employed to accomplish their proposed end, as they judge to
   be laudable. 6. From these preliminary remarks, it appears, that the
   nature and real character of virtue, must arise from the nature of the
   end proposed, and of the means employed for securing it. We shall now
   attempt to illustrate the ground of numerous representations of virtue,
   by comparison. 7. Let the different kinds of happiness which we propose
   to ourselves, whether those which have been classified by moral
   writers, or any others, be represented by so many concentric circles.
   For instance, let happiness be considered as personal and relative,
   private and public, domestic and national, temporal and eternal, or the
   like: and for every species of happiness let there be a corresponding
   circle drawn. Let the filling up of that circle express the virtue
   requisite to attain the happiness thus represented. 8. Suppose, for
   example, that health, friendship, domestic unanimity, national
   prosperity, the welfare of the human race, and our individual
   conformity to God in his moral excellence through eternal ages, or the
   happiness implied in these respectively, be represented by the
   concentric circles above mentioned. Then, the happiness implied in
   health, a small circle, will be filled by corresponding virtues, when
   the end is sought by laudable means: such as temperance, moderation,
   chastity, government of the passions, &c. The circle representing the
   happiness implied in friendship will be filled by corresponding
   virtues, when the end is sought, as before, by laudable means: such as
   benevolence, fidelity, prudence, sympathy, &c. The circle of domestic
   happiness is filled with the virtues of kindness, meekness, patience,
   industry, economy, &c. That of national prosperity by diligence in
   business, honesty, justice, truth, liberality, conscientious
   submission, fortitude, real patriotism, &c. The circle representing the
   welfare of the human race, as the common offspring of one progenitor,
   and who are regarded by the Supreme Parent as the children of one
   family, is filled by the virtues of philanthropy, expansive benevolent
   zeal, self-denial, public spirit, passive courage, &c. And the circle
   of that happiness which is implied in our individual conformity to
   God's moral excellence; in other words, that happiness which is
   ultimate and supreme, is filled by nothing short of supreme love to
   God, or, in language more philosophically accurate, consent of will to
   BEING in general--benevolent attachment to universal being. 9. Now who
   can question whether temperance, fidelity, meekness, honesty and
   liberality, philanthropy and public spirit, should be ranked among the
   virtues? And who can doubt that they are calculated to secure the
   happiness implied in health, friendship, national prosperity, and the
   welfare of the human race, respectively? And yet, if we exclude the
   disposition which is required to fill the largest circle--benevolent
   attachment to universal being--which of these virtues may not an
   atheist actually possess? Nay, may not an atheist possess them all? For
   may he not promote his health by temperance, moderation, chastity, and
   the like? May he not exercise friendly benevolence, fidelity, prudence,
   sympathy, and similar virtues? Have not atheists been great patriots,
   if by patriotism we mean a supreme regard for the prosperity and glory
   of the nation to which they belonged, manifested by severe studies, by
   the lightning and thunder of their eloquence, the fatigues of war, and
   a willingness to shed the last drop of their blood in defence of their
   country? Nay more, may not an atheist possess the virtues of generous
   philanthropy, and, to a certain extent, of benevolent zeal for the
   welfare of mankind in general, expressed by an attempt to remove their
   ignominious chains, to promote the civilization of savage nations whom
   he has never seen, to alleviate the sufferings and to enhance the
   comforts of all mankind? 10. Far be it from us to suppose that atheists
   are favourable to virtue, even in these inferior acceptations of the
   term. The reverse is abundantly evident. But this is what we assert,
   that such virtues as those above mentioned, when exclusive of what our
   author contends for, are what an atheist may possess, without
   inconsistency; and that they have no moral worth, no direct connexion,
   either with the complacency of God in them, or with the ultimate
   happiness of the agent. However attentive a man may be to practise the
   virtues in subservience to his health, while he repels those of
   friendship; or however observant of the virtues of friendship, while he
   repels others which are conducive to domestic, national, and universal
   happiness; his virtues, if the name be retained, are those of a bad
   character. Some have been conspicuous and zealous patriots, while
   determined foes to philanthropy and general good will to mankind as
   such. And how many have fought with the most patriotic zeal and courage
   in the field of honour, though tyrants at home, and in private life
   trampling on those virtues which constitute a good husband, a good
   father, a good master, a good neighbour, a good friend, or a good any
   thing. In short, were a man to "give all his goods to feed the poor,
   and his body to be burned," out of zeal to promote some public good,
   yet without love to God, without benevolent attachment to universal
   being, he is morally nothing, or worse than nothing. 11. What are
   called virtues, without a disposition to embrace universal being and
   excellence, are, morally considered, but lifeless images. To compare
   them to a series of decimal figures, which, however increased, will
   never amount to an unit of moral worth, is to place them in too
   favourable a view; they are more like cyphers. But let these unmeaning
   cyphers be preceded by a figure, let these images have an informing and
   invigorating principle, let these dry bones have the spirit of life in
   them, and they will acquire a moral excellence; they will deserve the
   name of real virtues. 12. Some have defined virtue, by calling it, "a
   tendency to ultimate happiness." If the meaning of this definition be,
   "a tendency to God, in whom our ultimate happiness is found," it may be
   admitted; otherwise, it seems not admissible on many accounts. Tendency
   may be considered as either voluntary or involuntary. In the first
   place, let us suppose it to be voluntary. We then observe, that it is
   not rational, nor even compatible with common sense, to say, that
   virtue is a voluntary tendency to a quality of our own minds, as
   happiness evidently is. For happiness, from its very nature, is a
   relative state, or quality of mind, which is the result of enjoying an
   object suited to our wants. And to desire ultimate happiness, without
   including the object of choice from whence happiness results, is the
   same as to seek happiness in nothing. If it be said, that happiness
   itself is the object sought; then virtue consists in a voluntary
   tendency to seek happiness in happiness, which is absurd. 13. Ultimate
   happiness has been defined, "the durable possession of perfect good."
   If this be a just statement, which few or none will question, what is
   the perfect good possessed? If it be answered, The Supreme Being: to
   this there is no objection. But if it be said, the ultimate happiness
   itself is the perfect good enjoyed: then the happiness to which the
   choice is directed is both cause and effect at the same time. Both the
   thing enjoyed and the enjoyment itself are the same thing. Which is no
   less absurd than for a man to assert, that the stock of a tree and the
   fruit on its branches, are the same thing; or that his relish of food
   is the same as the food itself. A tendency to happiness resulting from
   no object of that tendency, is the same thing as a tendency to no
   happiness. In other words, according to this definition, supposing the
   tendency to be voluntary, virtue is a desire of ultimate happiness. And
   this will reduce it to another absurdity; for, as a desire of ultimate
   happiness is an inseparable property of intelligent beings, the most
   vicious being in existence is virtuous. These consequences, however
   just, will not be thought very extraordinary, when compared with the
   following declarations. "The following seems to be at present the true
   moral state of the world: In every moral agent the number of virtuous
   actions greatly exceed that of vicious ones.--In by far the greater
   number of moral agents, and even amongst those who are considered as
   most vicious and profligate, the number of virtuous affections and
   habits greatly preponderates over the vicious ones. A character in
   which there is a preponderance of vice, is very rarely, if ever, to be
   met with." (Belsham's Elements, p. 400.) And, to advance one step
   further in this hopeful way, as this desire belongs to all intelligent
   beings alike, all intelligent beings are alike virtuous! 14. In
   reality, a mere desire of ultimate happiness is no virtue, has nothing
   laudable in it, but is a mere instinct of intellectual nature, and
   belongs alike to the best and the worst of intelligent beings. But
   virtue consists in the choice of, or a disposition to choose, laudable
   means in order to arrive at this end. A bad man in his choice of
   objects, or a vicious choice itself, aims at ultimate happiness; but
   the means are not laudable, and this wrong choice of means constitutes
   the very essence of his vice. 15. If it be said, that virtue is a
   tendency to ultimate self-enjoyment, as constituting happiness; then it
   follows that self is the perfect good desired. And then every one is
   himself all-sufficient to constitute his own happiness. Let any
   rational person judge, whether this be not a definition of sordid vice,
   rather than of virtue; and whether such a disposition would not be a
   tendency to insubordination, anarchy, and confusion, rather than to
   happiness--the very temper of an apostate spirit. 16. If it be said,
   moreover, that "a tendency to ultimate happiness," does not refer to
   the will, desire, or choice; but expresses any thing which in fact
   tends to ultimate happiness. This leads us to suppose secondly, that
   the tendency is involuntary. It seems, then, on this supposition, that
   the means employed to acquire ultimate happiness need not be laudable.
   This is the genuine result of that account of virtue which is here
   animadverted upon; and which the abettors of it are forced to admit.
   The doctrine of "intrinsic merit or demerit of actions. Independent on
   their consequences." they call an "absurd supposition." (Belsham's
   Elements, p. 309, 372, 373.) 17. It seems, then, we are all bound to be
   virtuous at our peril, and yet we must wait the result of all our
   actions, before we can know what is virtuous and what is not. For if
   virtue and vice have no intrinsic character of good or evil, but
   actions, affections, habits, or characters, are either good or bad from
   their ultimate consequences; then we must wait for those consequences,
   as the only expositors of virtue and vice. 18. Can any thing more be
   necessary, in order to show the absurdity of such a notion of virtue?
   Happiness, it is allowed, is a consequent, of which virtue is the
   antecedent. But what is the moral nature of this antecedent? Is it any
   thing good, beautiful, or laudable per se? No, say they; it has no
   nature beside tendency; which has no intrinsic merit or demerit; and
   consequently, that which has no moral nature is a moral nothing; that
   is, virtue is a moral nothing, or nothing moral. And whether this
   character of virtue be not totally distinct from the distant of right
   reason, philosophic accuracy, common sense, and christian piety, let
   the reader judge.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. II.

   Showing how that love, wherein true virtue consists, respects the
   Divine Being and created beings.

   From what has been said, it is evident, that true virtue must chiefly
   consist in love to god; the Being of beings, infinitely the greatest
   and best. This appears, whether we consider the primary or secondary
   ground of virtuous love. It was observed, that the first objective
   ground of that love, wherein true virtue consists, is being simply
   considered: and, as a necessary consequence of this, that being who has
   the greatest share of universal existence has proportionably the
   greatest share of virtuous benevolence, so far as such a being is
   exhibited to the faculties of our minds, other things being equal. But
   God has infinitely the greatest share of existence. So that all other
   being, even the whole universe, is as nothing in comparison of the
   Divine Being.

   And if we consider the secondary ground of love, or moral excellency,
   the same thing will appear. For as God is infinitely the greatest
   Being, so he is allowed to be infinitely the most beautiful and
   excellent: and all the beauty to be found throughout the whole
   creation, is but the reflection of the diffused beams of that Being who
   hath an infinite fulness of brightness and glory. God's beauty is
   infinitely more valuable than that of all other beings upon both those
   accounts mentioned, viz. the degree of his virtue, and the greatness of
   his being, possessed of this virtue. And God has sufficiently exhibited
   himself, both in his being, and his infinite greatness and excellency:
   and has given us faculties, whereby we are capable of plainly
   discovering his immense superiority to all other beings, in these
   respects. Therefore, he that has true virtue, consisting in benevolence
   to being in general, and in benevolence to virtuous being, must
   necessarily have a supreme love to God, both of benevolence and
   complacence. And all true virtue must radically and essentially, and,
   as it were, summarily, consist in this. Because God is not only
   infinitely greater and more excellent than all other being, but he is
   the head of the universal system of existence; the foundation and
   fountain of all being and all beauty; from whom all is perfectly
   derived, and on whom all is most absolutely and perfectly dependent; of
   whom, and through whom, and to whom is all being and all perfection;
   and whose being and beauty are, as it were, the sum and comprehension
   of all existence and excellence: much more than the sun is the fountain
   and summary comprehension of all the light and brightness of the day.

   If it should be objected, that virtue consists primarily in
   benevolence, but that our fellow-creatures, and not God, seem to be the
   most proper objects of our benevolence; inasmuch as our goodness
   extendeth not to God, and we cannot be profitable to him.--To this I
   answer,

   1. A benevolent propensity of heart is exercised, not only in seeking
   to promote the happiness of the being towards whom it is exercised, but
   also in rejoicing in his happiness. Even as gratitude for benefits
   received will not only excite endeavours to requite the kindness we
   receive, by equally benefiting our benefactor, but also if he be above
   any need of us, or we have nothing to bestow, and are unable to repay
   his kindness, it will dispose us to rejoice in his prosperity.

   2. Though we are not able to give any thing to God, which we have of
   our own, independently; yet we may be the instruments of promoting his
   glory, in which he takes a true and proper delight. [228] --Whatever
   influence such an objection may seem to have on the minds of some, yet
   is there any that owns the being of a God, who will deny that any
   benevolent affection is due to God, and proper to be exercised towards
   him? If no benevolence is to be exercised towards God, because we
   cannot profit him, then, for the same reason, neither is gratitude to
   be exercised towards him for his benefits to us; because we cannot
   requite him. But where is the man, who believes a God and a providence,
   that will say this?

   There seems to be an inconsistence in some writers on morality, in this
   respect, that they do not wholly exclude a regard to the Deity out of
   their schemes of morality, but yet mention it so slightly, that they
   leave me room and reason to suspect they esteem it a less important and
   subordinate part of true morality; and insist on benevolence to the
   created system, in such a manner as would naturally lead one to suppose
   they look upon that as by far the most important and essential thing in
   their scheme. But why should this be? If true virtue consists partly in
   a respect to God, then doubtless it consists chiefly in it. If true
   morality requires that we should have some regard, some benevolent
   affection to our Creator, as well as to his creatures, then doubtless
   it requires the first regard to be paid to him; and that he be every
   way the supreme object of our benevolence. If his being above our
   reach, and beyond all capacity of being profited by us, does not
   hinder, but that nevertheless he is the proper object of our love, then
   it does not hinder that he should be loved according to his dignity, or
   according to the degree in which he has those things wherein worthiness
   of regard consists, so far as we are capable of it. But this
   worthiness, none will deny, consists in these two things, greatness and
   moral goodness. And those that own a God, do not deny that he
   infinitely exceeds all other beings in these. If the Deity is to be
   looked upon as within that system of beings which properly terminates
   our benevolence, or belonging to that whole, certainly he is to be
   regarded as the head of the system, and the chief part of it: if it be
   proper to call him a part, who is infinitely more than all the rest,
   and in comparison of whom, and without whom, all the rest are nothing,
   either as to beauty or existence. And therefore certainly, unless we
   will be atheists, we must allow that true virtue does primarily and
   most essentially consist in a supreme love to God; and that where this
   is wanting, there can be no true virtue.

   But this being a matter of the highest importance, I shall say
   something further to make it plain, that love to God is most essential
   to true virtue; and that no benevolence whatsoever to other beings can
   be of the nature of true virtue without it.

   And therefore, let it be supposed, that some beings, by natural
   instinct, or by some other means, have a determination of mind to union
   and benevolence to a particular person, or private system, [229] which
   is but a small part of the universal system of being: and that this
   disposition or determination of mind is independent on, or not
   subordinate to, benevolence to being in general. Such a determination,
   disposition, or affection of mind is not of the nature of true virtue.

   This is allowed by all with regard to self-love; in which good will is
   confined to one single person only. And there are the same reasons why
   any other private affection or good will, though extending to a society
   of persons independent of, and unsubordinate to, benevolence to the
   universality, should not be esteemed truly virtuous. For,
   notwithstanding it extends to a number of persons, which taken together
   are more than a single person, yet the whole falls infinitely short of
   the universality of existence; and if put in the scales with it, has no
   greater proportion to it than a single person.

   However, it may not be amiss more particularly to consider the reasons
   why private affections, or good will limited to a particular circle of
   beings, falling infinitely short of the whole existence, and not
   dependent upon it, nor subordinate to general benevolence, cannot be of
   the nature of true virtue.

   1. Such a private affection, detached from general benevolence, and
   independent on it, as the case may be, will be against general
   benevolence, or of a contrary tendency; and will set a person against
   general existence, and make him an enemy to it. As it is with
   selfishness, or when a man is governed by a regard to his own private
   interest, independent of regard to the public good, such a temper
   exposes a man to act the part of an enemy to the public. As, in every
   case wherein his private interest seems to clash with the public; or in
   all those cases wherein such things are presented to his view, that
   suit his personal appetites or private inclinations, but are
   inconsistent with the good of the public. On which account, a selfish,
   contracted, narrow spirit is generally abhorred, and is esteemed base
   and sordid. But if a man's affection takes in half a dozen more, and
   his regards extend so far beyond his own single person as to take in
   his children and family; or if it reaches further still to a larger
   circle, but falls infinitely short of the universal system, and is
   exclusive of being in general; his private affection exposes him to the
   same thing, viz. to pursue the interest of its particular object in
   opposition to general existence: which is certainly contrary to the
   tendency of true virtue; yea, directly contrary to the main and most
   essential thing in its nature, the thing on account of which chiefly
   its nature and tendency is good. For the chief and most essential good
   that is in virtue, is its favouring being in general. Now certainly, if
   private affection to a limited system had in itself the essential
   nature of virtue, it would be impossible that it should, in any
   circumstance whatsoever, have a tendency and inclination directly
   contrary to that wherein the essence of virtue chiefly consists.

   2. Private affection, if not subordinate to general affection, is not
   only liable, as the case may be, to issue an enmity to being in
   general, but has a tendency to it as the case certain is, and must
   necessarily be. For he that is influenced by private affection, not
   subordinate to a regard to being in general, sets up its particular or
   limited object above being in general; and this most naturally tends to
   enmity against the latter, which is by right the great supreme, ruling,
   and absolutely sovereign object of our regard. Even as the setting up
   another prince as supreme in any kingdom, distinct from the lawful
   sovereign, naturally tends to enmity against the lawful sovereign.
   Wherever it is sufficiently published, that the supreme, infinite, and
   all-comprehending Being requires a supreme regard to himself; and
   insists upon it, that our respect to him should universally rule in our
   hearts, and every other affection be subordinate to it, and this under
   the pain of his displeasure, (as we must suppose it is in the world of
   intelligent creatures, if God maintains a moral kingdom in the world,)
   then a consciousness of our having chosen and set up another prince to
   rule over us, and subjected our hearts to him, and continuing in such
   an act, must unavoidably excite enmity, and fix us in a stated
   opposition to the Supreme Being. This demonstrates, that affection to a
   private society or system, independent on general benevolence, cannot
   be of the nature of true virtue. For this would be absurd, that it has
   the nature and essence of true virtue, and yet at the same time has a
   tendency opposite to true virtue.

   3. Not only would affection to a private system, unsubordinate to a
   regard to being in general, have a tendency to oppose the supreme
   object of virtuous affection, as its effect and consequence, but would
   become itself an opposition to that object. Considered by itself in its
   nature, detached from its effects, it is an instance of great
   opposition to the rightful supreme object of our respect. For it exalts
   its private object above the other great and infinite object; and sets
   that up as supreme, in opposition to this. It puts down being in
   general, which is infinitely superior in itself, and infinitely more
   important, in an inferior place; yea, subjects the supreme general
   object to this private infinitely inferior object: which is to treat it
   with great contempt, and truly to act in opposition to it, and to act
   in opposition to the true order of things, and in opposition to that
   which is infinitely the supreme interest; making this supreme and
   infinitely important interest, as far as in us lies, to be subject to,
   and dependent on, an interest infinitely inferior. This is to act the
   part of an enemy to it. He that takes a subject, and exalts him above
   his prince, sets him as supreme instead of the prince, and treats his
   prince wholly as a subject, therein acts the part of an enemy to his
   prince.

   From these things, I think, it is manifest, that no affection limited
   to any private system, not depending on nor subordinate to being in
   general, can be of the nature of true virtue; and this, whatever the
   private system be, let it be more or less extensive, consisting of a
   greater or smaller number of individuals, so long as it contains an
   infinitely little part of universal existence, and so bears no
   proportion to the great all-comprehending system. And consequently,
   that no affection whatsoever to any creature, or any system of created
   beings, which is not dependent on, nor subordinate to, a propensity or
   union of the heart to God, the supreme and infinite Being, can be of
   the nature of true virtue.

   From hence also it is evident, that the divine virtue, or the virtue of
   the divine mind, must consist primarily in love to himself, or in the
   mutual love and friendship which subsists eternally and necessarily
   between the several persons in the Godhead, or that infinitely strong
   propensity there is in these divine persons one to another. There is no
   need of multiplying words, to prove that it must be thus, on a
   supposition that virtue, in its most essential nature, consists in
   benevolent affection or propensity of heart towards being in general;
   and so flowing out to particular beings, in a greater or lesser degree,
   according to the measure of existence and beauty which they are
   possessed of. It will also follow, from the foregoing things, that
   God's goodness and love to created beings, is derived from and
   subordinate to his love to himself. [230]

   With respect to the manner in which a virtuous love in created beings,
   one to another, is dependent on, and derived from love to God, this
   will appear by a proper consideration of what has been said; that it is
   sufficient to render love to any created being, virtuous, if it arise
   from the temper of mind wherein consists a disposition to love God
   supremely. Because it appears from what has been already observed, all
   that love to particular beings, which is the fruit of a benevolent
   propensity of heart to being in general, is virtuous love. But, as has
   been remarked, a benevolent propensity of heart to being in general,
   and a temper or disposition to love God supremely, are in effect the
   same thing. Therefore, if love to a created being comes from that
   temper, or propensity of the heart, it is virtuous. However, every
   particular exercise of love to a creature may not sensibly arise from
   any exercise of love to God, or an explicit consideration of any
   similitude, conformity, union, or relation to God, in the creature
   beloved.

   The most proper evidence of love to a created being, arising from that
   temper of mind wherein consists a supreme propensity of heart to God,
   seems to be the agreeableness of the kind and degree of our love to
   God's end in our creation, and in the creation of all things, and the
   coincidence of the exercise of our love, in their manner, order, and
   measure, with the manner in which God himself exercises love to the
   creature in the creation and government of the world, and the way in
   which God, as the first cause and supreme disposer of all things, has
   respect to the creature's happiness, in subordination to himself as his
   own supreme end. For the true virtue of created beings is doubtless
   their highest excellency, and their true goodness, and that by which
   they are especially agreeable to the mind of their Creator. But the
   true goodness of a thing, must be its agreeableness to its end, or its
   fitness to answer the design for which it was made. Therefore, they are
   good moral agents, whose temper of mind, or propensity of heart, is
   agreeable to the end for which God made moral agents. But, as has been
   shown, the last end for which God has made moral agents, must be the
   last end for which God has made all things: it being evident, that the
   moral world is the end of the rest of the world; the inanimate and
   unintelligent world being made for the rational and moral world, as
   much as a house is prepared for the inhabitants.

   By these things, it appears, that truly virtuous mind, being as it were
   under the sovereign dominion of love to God, above all things, seeks
   the glory of God, and makes this his supreme, governing, and ultimate
   end. This consists in the expression of God's perfections in their
   proper effects,--the manifestation of God's glory to created
   understandings,--the communications of the infinite fulness of God to
   the creature,--the creature's highest esteem of God, love to, and joy
   in him,--and in the proper exercises and expressions of these. And so
   far as a virtuous mind exercises true virtue in benevolence to created
   beings, it chiefly seeks the good of the creature; consisting in its
   knowledge or view of God's glory and beauty, its union with God,
   conformity and love to him, and joy in him. And that disposition of
   heart, that consent, union, or propensity of mind to being in general,
   which appears chiefly in such exercises, is virtue, truly so called; or
   in other words, true grace and real holiness. And no other disposition
   or affection but this is of the nature of true virtue.

   Corollary. Hence it appears, that those schemes of religion or moral
   philosophy, which--however well in some respects they may treat of
   benevolence to mankind, and other virtues depending on it, yet--have
   not a supreme regard to God, and love to him, laid as the foundation,
   and all other virtues handled in a connexion with this, and in
   subordination to it, are not true schemes of philosophy, but are
   fundamentally and essentially defective. And whatever other benevolence
   or generosity towards mankind, and other virtues, or moral
   qualifications which go by that name, any are possessed of, that are
   not attended with a love to God, which is altogether above them, and to
   which they are subordinate, and on which they are dependent, there is
   nothing of the nature of true virtue or religion in them. And it may be
   asserted in general, that nothing is of the nature of true virtue, in
   which God is not the first and the last; or which, with regard to their
   exercises in general, have not their first foundation and source in
   apprehensions of God's supreme dignity and glory, and in answerable
   esteem and love of him, and have not respect to God as the supreme end.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [228] As was shown at large in the former treatise, on God's end in
   creating the world, Chap. 1. sect. 4. whither I must refer the reader
   for a more full answer to this objection.

   [229] It may be here noted, that when hereafter, I use such a phrase as
   private system of being, or others similar, I thereby intend any system
   or society of beings that contains but a small part of the great
   system, comprehending the universality of existence. I think that may
   well be called a private system, which is but an infinitely small part
   of this great whole we stand related to. I therefore also call that
   affection private affection, which is limited to so narrow a circle:
   and that general affection or benevolence, which has being in general
   for its object.

   [230] In what manner it is so, I have endeavoured in some measure to
   explain in the preceding discourse of God's end in creating the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. III.

   Concerning the secondary and inferior kind of beauty.

   Though what has been spoken of is, alone, justly esteemed the true
   beauty of moral agents, or spiritual beings; this alone being what
   would appear beautiful in them upon a clear and comprehensive view of
   things; and therefore alone is the moral amiableness of beings that
   have understanding and will, in the eyes of him that perfectly sees all
   things as they are; yet there are other qualities, other sensations,
   propensities, and affections of mind, and principles of action, that
   often obtain the epithet of virtuous, and by many are supposed to have
   the nature of true virtue; which are entirely of a distinct nature from
   this, and have nothing of that kind; and therefore are erroneously
   confounded with real virtue.

   That consent, agreement, or union of being to being, which has been
   spoken of, viz. the union or propensity of minds to mental or spiritual
   existence, may be called the highest and primary beauty; being the
   proper and peculiar beauty of spiritual and moral beings, which are the
   highest and first part of the universal system, for whose sake all the
   rest has existence. Yet there is another, inferior, secondary beauty,
   which is some image of this, and which is not peculiar to spiritual
   beings, but is found even in inanimate things; which consists in a
   mutual consent and agreement of different things, in form, manner,
   quantity, and visible end or design; called by the various names of
   regularity, order, uniformity, symmetry, proportion, harmony, &c. Such
   is the mutual agreement of the various sides of a square, or
   equilateral triangle, or of a regular polygon. Such is, as it were, the
   mutual consent of the different parts of the periphery of a circle, or
   surface of a sphere, and of the corresponding parts of an ellipsis.
   Such is the agreement of the colours, figures, dimensions, and
   distances of the different spots on a chess board. Such is the beauty
   of the figures on a piece of chintz or brocade. Such is the beautiful
   proportion of the various parts of a human body, or countenance. And
   such is the sweet mutual consent and agreement of the various notes of
   a melodious tune. This is the same that Mr. Hutchinson, in his Treatise
   on Beauty, expresses by uniformity in the midst of variety. Which is no
   other than the consent or agreement of different things, in form,
   quantity, &c. He observes, that the greater the variety is in equal
   uniformity the greater the beauty. Which is no more than to say, the
   more there are of different mutually agreeing things, the greater is
   the beauty. And the reason of that is, because it is more considerable
   to have many things consent one with another, than a few only.

   The beauty which consists in the visible fitness of a thing to its use,
   and unity of design, is not a distinct sort of beauty from this. For it
   is to be observed, that one thing which contributes to the beauty of
   the agreement and proportion of various things, is their relation one
   to another; which connects them, and introduces them together into view
   and consideration, and whereby one suggests the other to the mind, and
   the mind is led to compare them, and so to expect and desire agreement.
   Thus the uniformity of two or more pillars, as they may happen to be
   found in different places, is not an equal degree of beauty, as that
   uniformity in so many pillars in the corresponding parts of the same
   building. So means and intended effect are related one to another. The
   answerableness of a thing to its use is only the proportion and fitness
   of a cause, or means, to a visibly designed effect, and so an effect
   suggested to the mind by the idea of the means. This kind of beauty is
   not entirely different from that beauty which there is in fitting a
   mortise to its tenon. Only when the beauty consists in unity of design,
   or the adaptedness of a variety of things to promote one intended
   effect, in which all conspire, as the various parts of an ingenious
   complicated machine, there is a double beauty, as there is a twofold
   agreement and conformity. First, there is the agreement of the various
   parts to the designed end. Secondly, through this designed end or
   effect, all the various particulars agree one with another as the
   general medium of their union, whereby they, being united in this
   third, are all united one to another.

   The reason, or at least one reason, why God has made this kind of
   mutual agreement of things beautiful and grateful to those intelligent
   beings that perceive it, probably is, that there is in it some image of
   the true, spiritual, original beauty, which has been spoken of;
   consisting in being's consent to being, or the union of spiritual
   beings in a mutual propensity and affection of heart. The other is an
   image of this, because by that uniformity diverse things become as it
   were one, as it is in this cordial union. And it pleases God to observe
   analogy in his works, as is manifest in fact, in innumerable instances;
   and especially to establish inferior things with analogy to superior.
   Thus, in how many instances has he formed brutes in analogy to the
   nature of mankind: and plants, in analogy to animals, with respect to
   the manner of their generation, nutrition, &c. And so he has
   constituted the external world in analogy to the spiritual world, in
   numberless instances; as might be shown, if it were necessary, and here
   were a proper place for it.--Why such analogy in God's works pleases
   him, it is not needful now to inquire. It is sufficient that he makes
   an agreement of different things, in their form, manner, measure, &c.
   to appear beautiful, because here is some image of a higher kind of
   agreement and consent of spiritual beings. It has pleased him to
   establish a law of nature, by virtue of which the uniformity and mutual
   correspondence of a beautiful plant, and the respect which the various
   parts of a regular building seem to have one to another, and their
   agreement and union, and the consent or concord of the various notes of
   a melodious tune, should appear beautiful; because therein is some
   image of the consent of mind, of the different members of a society or
   system of intelligent beings, sweetly united in a benevolent agreement
   of heart.

   And here by the way, I would further observe, probably it is with
   regard to this image or resemblance, which secondary beauty has of true
   spiritual beauty, that God has so constituted nature, that the
   presenting of this inferior beauty, especially in those kinds of it
   which have the greatest resemblance of the primary beauty, as the
   harmony of sounds, and the beauties of nature, have a tendency to
   assist those whose hearts are under the influence of a truly virtuous
   temper, to dispose them to the exercises of divine love, and enliven in
   them a sense of spiritual beauty.

   From what has been said we may see, that there are two sorts of
   agreement or consent of one thing to another. (1.) There is a cordial
   agreement; that consists in concord and union of mind and heart: which,
   if not attended (viewing things in general) with more discord than
   concord, is true virtue, and the original or primary beauty, which is
   the only true moral beauty. (2.) There is a natural union or agreement;
   which, though some image of the other, is entirely a distinct thing;
   the will, disposition, or affection of the heart having no concern in
   it, but consisting only in uniformity and consent of nature, form,
   quantity, &c. (as before described,) wherein lies an inferior secondary
   sort of beauty, which may in distinction from the other, be called
   natural beauty. This may be sufficient to let the reader know how I
   shall hereafter use the phrases cordial and natural agreement; and
   moral, spiritual, divine, and primary original beauty, and secondary or
   natural beauty. Concerning this latter, the inferior kind of beauty,
   the following things may be observed:

   1. The cause why secondary beauty is grateful to men, is only a law of
   nature, which God has fixed, or an instinct he has given to mankind;
   and not their perception of the same thing which God is pleased to
   regard as the ground or rule by which he has established such a law of
   nature. This appears in two things.

   (1.) That which God respects, as the ground of this law of nature,
   whereby things having a secondary beauty are made grateful to men, is
   their mutual agreement and proportion, in measure, form, &c. But, in
   many instances, persons that are gratified and affected with this
   beauty, do not reflect on that particular agreement and proportion,
   which, according to the law of nature, is the ground and rule of beauty
   in the case, yea, are ignorant of it. Thus, a man may be pleased with
   the harmony of the notes in a tune, and yet know nothing of that
   proportion or adjustment of the notes, which, by the law of nature, is
   the ground of the melody. He knows not, that the vibrations in one note
   regularly coincide with the vibrations in another; that the vibrations
   of a note coincide in time with two vibrations of its octave; and that
   two vibrations of a note coincide with three of its fifth, &c.--Yea, he
   may not know, that there are vibrations of the air in the case, or any
   corresponding motions in the organs of hearing, in the auditory nerve,
   or animal spirits.--So a man may be affected and pleased with a
   beautiful proportion of the features in a face, and yet not know what
   that proportion is, or in what measures, quantities, and distances it
   consists. In this, therefore, a sensation of secondary beauty,
   consisting in a spiritual union and agreement. What makes the latter
   grateful, is perceiving the union itself. It is the immediate view of
   that wherein the beauty fundamentally lies, that is pleasing to the
   virtuous mind.

   (2.) God, in establishing such a law--that mutual natural agreement of
   different things, in form, quantity, &c. should appear beautiful or
   grateful to men--seems to have had regard to the resemblance there is
   in such a natural agreement, to that spiritual, cordial agreement,
   wherein original beauty consists. But it is not any reflection upon, or
   perception of, such a resemblance, that is the reason why such a form
   or state of objects appear beautiful to men: but their sensation of
   pleasure, on a view of this secondary beauty, is immediately owing to
   the law God has established, or the instinct he has given.

   2. Another thing observable concerning this kind of beauty, is, that it
   affects the mind more (other things being equal) when taken notice of
   in objects which are of considerable importance, then in little trivial
   matters. Thus, the symmetry of the parts of a human body, or
   countenance, affects the mind more than the beauty of a flower. So the
   beauty of the solar system, more than as great and as manifold an order
   and uniformity in a tree. And the proportions of the parts of a church,
   or a palace, more than the same proportions in some little slight
   compositions, made to please children.

   3. Not only uniformity and proportion, &c. of different things, is
   requisite, in order to this inferior beauty; but also some relation or
   connexion of the things thus agreeing one with another. As the
   uniformity or likeness of a number of pillars, scattered hither and
   thither, does not constitute beauty, or at least by no means in an
   equal degree, as uniformity in pillars connected in the same building,
   in parts that have relation one to another. So, if we see things
   unlike, and very disproportioned, in distant places, which have no
   relation to each other, this excites no such idea of deformity, as
   disagreement, inequality, or disproportion in things related and
   connected; and the nearer the relation, and the stricter the connexion,
   so much the greater and more disgustful is the deformity, consisting in
   their disagreement.

   4. This secondary kind of beauty, consisting in uniformity and
   proportion, not only takes place in material and external things, but
   also in things immaterial; and is, in very many things, plain and
   sensible in the latter, as well as the former. And when it is so, there
   is no reason why it should not be grateful to them that behold it, in
   these as well as the other, by virtue of the same sense, or the same
   determination of mind, to be gratified with uniformity and proportion.
   If uniformity and proportion be the things that affect and appear
   agreeable to this sense of beauty, then why should not uniformity and
   proportion affect the same sense in immaterial things as well as
   material, if there be equal capacity of discerning it in both? and
   indeed more in spiritual things (cateris paribus) as these are more
   important than things merely external and material?

   This is not only reasonable to be supposed, but is evident in fact, in
   numberless instances. There is a beauty of order in society, besides
   what consists in benevolence, or can be referred to it, which is of the
   secondary kind. As, when the different members of society have all
   their appointed office, place, and station, according to their several
   capacities and talents, and every one keeps his place, and continues in
   his proper business. In this there is a beauty, not of a different kind
   from the regularity of a beautiful building, or piece of skilful
   architecture, where the strong pillars are set in their proper place,
   the pilasters in a place fit for them, the square pieces of marble in
   the pavement, the pannels, partitions, and cornices, &c. in places
   proper for them. As the agreement of a variety of things in one common
   design,--as of the parts of a building, or complicated machine,--is one
   instance of that regularity which belongs to the secondary kind of
   beauty, so there is the same kind of beauty in what is called wisdom,
   consisting in the united tendency of thoughts, ideas, and particular
   volitions, to one general purpose: which is a distinct thing from the
   goodness of that general purpose, as being useful and benevolent.

   There is a beauty in the virtue called justice, which consists in the
   agreement of different things, that have relation to one another, in
   nature, manner, and measure; and therefore is the very same sort of
   beauty with that uniformity and proportion, which is observable in
   those external and material things that are esteemed beautiful. There
   is a natural agreement and adaptedness of things that have relation one
   to another, and an harmonious corresponding of one thing with another.
   He who from his will does evil to others, should receive evil from the
   will of him or them whose business it is to take care of the injured,
   and to act in their behalf, in proportion to the evil of his doings.
   Things are in natural regularity and mutual agreement, in a literal
   sense, when he whose heart opposes the general system, should have the
   hearts of that system, or the heart of the ruler of the system, against
   him; and, in consequence, should receive evil, in proportion to the
   evil tendency of the opposition of his heart. So, there is an agreement
   in nature and measure, when he that loves has the proper returns of
   love; when he that from his heart promotes the good of another, has his
   good promoted by the other; for there is a kind of justice in becoming
   gratitude.

   Indeed most of the duties incumbent on us, if well considered, will be
   found to partake of the nature of justice. There is some natural
   agreement of one thing to another; some adaptedness of the agent to the
   object; some answerableness of the act to the occasion; some equality
   and proportion in things of a similar nature, and of a direct relation
   one to another. So it is in relative duties; duties of children to
   parents, and of parents to children; duties of husbands and wives;
   duties of rulers and subjects; duties of friendship and good
   neighbourhood; and all duties that we owe to God, our creator,
   preserver, and benefactor; and all duties whatsoever, considered as
   required by God, and as what are to be performed with a regard to
   Christ.

   It is this secondary kind of beauty, which Mr. Wollaston seems to have
   had in his eye, when he resolved all virtue into an agreement of
   inclinations, volitions, and actions with truth. He evidently has
   respect to the justice there is in virtues and duties; which consists
   in one being expressing such affections, and using such a conduct,
   towards another, as hath a natural agreement and proportion to what is
   in them, and what we receive from them: which is as much a natural
   conformity of affection and action with its ground, object, and
   occasion, as that which is between a true proposition and the thing
   spoken of in it.

   But there is another and higher beauty in true virtue, and in all truly
   virtuous dispositions and exercises, than what consists in any
   uniformity or similarity of various things; viz. the union of heart to
   being in general, or to god, the Being of beings, which appears in
   those virtues; and of which those virtues, when true, are the various
   expressions or effects. Benevolence to being in general, or to being
   simply considered, is entirely a distinct thing from uniformity in the
   midst of variety, and is a superior kind of beauty.

   It is true, that benevolence to being in general, will naturally
   incline to justice, or proportion in the exercises of it. He that loves
   being, simply considered, will naturally, other things being equal,
   love particular beings, in a proportion compounded of the degree of
   being, and the degree of virtue, or benevolence to being, which they
   have. And that is to love beings in proportion to their dignity. For
   the dignity of any being consists in those two things. Respect to
   being, in this proportion, is the first and most general kind of
   justice; which will produce all the subordinate kinds. So that, after
   benevolence to being in general exists, the proportion which is
   observed in objects may be the cause of the proportion of benevolence
   to those objects: but no proportion is the cause or ground of the
   existence of such a thing as benevolence to being. The tendency of
   objects to excite that degree of benevolence, which is proportionable
   to the degree of being, &c. is the consequence of the existence of
   benevolence, and not the ground of it. Even as a tendency of bodies one
   to another, by mutual attraction, in proportion to the quantity of
   matter, is the consequence of the being of such a thing as mutual
   attraction; and not attraction the effect of proportion.

   By this it appears, that just affections and acts have a beauty in
   them, distinct from and superior to the uniformity and equality there
   is in them: for which, he that has a truly virtuous temper, relishes
   and delights in them. And that is the expression and manifestation
   there is in them of benevolence to being in general. And besides this,
   there is the agreement of justice to the will and command of God; and
   also something in the tendency and consequences of justice, agreeable
   to general benevolence, as the glory of God, and the general good.
   Which tendency also makes it beautiful to a truly virtuous mind. So
   that the tendency of general benevolence to produce justice, also the
   tendency of justice to produce effects agreeable to general
   benevolence, both render justice pleasing to a virtuous mind. And it is
   on these accounts chiefly, that justice is grateful to a virtuous
   taste, or a truly benevolent heart. But though it be true, that the
   uniformity and proportion there is in justice, is grateful to a
   benevolent heart, as this uniformity and proportion tends to the
   general good; yet that is no argument that there is no other beauty in
   it but its agreeing with benevolence. For so the external regularity
   and order of the natural world gratifies benevolence, as it is
   profitable, and tends to the general good; but that is no argument that
   there is no other sort of beauty in external uniformity and proportion,
   but only its suiting benevolence, by tending to the general good.

   5. From all that has been observed concerning this secondary kind of
   beauty, it appears, that the disposition, which consists in a
   determination of mind to approve and be pleased with this beauty,
   considered simply and by itself, has nothing of the nature of true
   virtue, and is entirely a different thing from a truly virtuous taste.
   For it has been shown, that this kind of beauty is entirely diverse
   from the beauty of true virtue, whether it takes place in material or
   immaterial things; and therefore it will follow, that a taste of this
   kind of beauty is entirely a different thing from a taste of true
   virtue. Who will affirm, that a disposition to approve of the harmony
   of good music, or the beauty of a square, or equilateral triangle, is
   the same with true holiness, or a truly virtuous disposition of mind?
   It is a relish of uniformity and proportion that determines the mind to
   approve these things. And there is no need of any thing higher, or of
   any thing in any respect diverse, to determine the mind to approve and
   be pleased with equal uniformity and proportion among spiritual things
   which are equally discerned. It is virtuous to love true virtue, as
   that denotes an agreement of the heart with virtue. But it argues no
   virtue for the heart to be pleased with that which is entirely distinct
   from it.

   Though it be true, that there is some analogy in it to spiritual and
   virtuous beauty--as far as material things can have analogy to things
   spiritual, of which they can have no more than a shadow--yet, as has
   been observed, men do not approve it because of any such analogy
   perceived. And not only reason but experience plainly shows, that men's
   approbation of this sort of beauty does not spring from any virtuous
   temper, and has no connexion with virtue. For otherwise their delight
   in the beauty of squares, and cubes, and regular polygons, in the
   regularity of buildings, and the beautiful figures in a piece of
   embroidery, would increase in proportion to men's virtue; and would be
   raised to a great height in some eminently virtuous or holy men; but
   would be almost wholly lost in some others that are very vicious and
   lewd. It is evident in fact, that a relish of these things does not
   depend on general benevolence, or any benevolence at all to any being
   whatsoever, any more than a man's loving the taste of honey, or his
   being pleased with the smell of a rose. A taste of this inferior beauty
   in things immaterial, is one thing which has been mistaken by some
   moralists, for a true virtuous principle, supposed to be implanted
   naturally in the hearts of all mankind.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. IV.

   Of self-love, and its various influence, to cause love to others, or
   the contrary.

   Many assert, that all love arises from self-love. In order to determine
   this point, it should be clearly determined what is meant by self-love.
   Self-love, I think, is generally defined "a man's love of his own
   happiness;" which is short, and may be thought very plain: but in
   reality is an ambiguous definition, as the expression his own, is
   equivocal, and liable to be taken in two very different senses. For a
   man's own happiness may either be taken universally, for all the
   happiness or pleasure of which the mind is in any regard the subject,
   or whatever is grateful and pleasing to men; or it may be taken for the
   pleasure a man takes in his own proper, private, and separate good. And
   so self-love may be taken two ways.

   1. It may be taken for the same as his loving whatsoever is pleasing to
   him. Which comes only to this, that self-love is a man's liking, and
   being suited and pleased in that which he likes, and which pleases him;
   or, that it is a man's loving what he loves. For whatever a man loves,
   that thing is grateful and pleasing to him, whether that be his own
   peculiar happiness, or the happiness of others. And if this be all that
   they mean by self-love, no wonder they suppose that all love may be
   resolved into self-love. For it is undoubtedly true, that whatever a
   man loves, his love may be resolved into his loving what he loves.--If
   by self-love is meant nothing else but a man's loving what is grateful
   or pleasing to him, and being averse to what is disagreeable, this is
   calling that self-love, which is only a general capacity of loving or
   hating; or a capacity of being either pleased or displeased; which is
   the same thing as a man's having a faculty of will. For if nothing
   could be either pleasing or displeasing, agreeable or disagreeable, to
   a man, then he could incline to nothing, and will nothing. But if he is
   capable of having inclination, will and choice, then what he inclines
   to, and chooses, is grateful to him, whatever that be; whether it be
   his own private good, the good of his neighbors, or the glory of God.
   And so far as it is grateful or pleasing to him, so far it is a part of
   his pleasure, good, or happiness.

   But if this be what is meant by self-love, there is an impropriety and
   absurdity even in the putting of the question, Whether all our love, or
   our love to each particular object of our love, does not arise from
   self-love? For that would be the same as to inquire, Whether the reason
   why our love is fixed on such and such particular objects, is not, that
   we have a capacity of loving some things? This may be a general reason
   why men love or hate any thing at all; and therein differ from stones
   and trees, which love nothing, and hate nothing. But it can never be a
   reason why men's love is placed on such and such objects. That a man in
   general loves, and is pleased with happiness, or has a capacity of
   enjoying happiness, cannot be the reason why such and such things
   become his happiness: as for instance, why the good of his neighbour,
   or the happiness and glory of God, is grateful and pleasing to him, and
   so becomes a part of his happiness.

   Or if what they mean, who say that all love comes from self-love, be
   not, that our loving such and such particular persons and things arises
   from our love to happiness in general, but from a love to our own
   happiness, which consists in these objects; so, the reason why we love
   benevolence to our friends, or neighbors, is, because we love our
   happiness, consisting in their happiness, which we take pleasure
   in:--still the notion is absurd. For here the effect is made the cause
   of that of which it is the effect: our happiness, consisting in the
   happiness of the person beloved, is made the cause of our love to that
   person. Whereas the truth plainly is, that our love to the person is
   the cause of our delighting or being happy in his happiness. How comes
   our happiness to consist in the happiness of such as we love, but by
   our hearts being first united to them in affection, so that we as it
   were look on them as ourselves, and so on their happiness as our own?
   Men who have benevolence to others have pleasure when they see others'
   happiness, because seeing their happiness gratifies some inclination
   that was in their hearts before. They before inclined to their
   happiness; which was by benevolence or good-will; and therefore, when
   they see their happiness, their inclination is suited, and they are
   pleased. But the being of inclinations and appetites is prior to any
   pleasure in gratifying these appetites.

   2. Self-love, as the phrase is used in common speech, most commonly
   signifies a man's regard to his confined private self, or love to
   himself with respect to his private interest.

   By private interest I mean that which most immediately consists in
   those pleasures, or pains, that are personal. For there is a comfort,
   and a grief, that some have in others' pleasures, or pains; which are
   in others originally, but are derived to them, or in some measure
   become theirs, by virtue of a benevolent union of heart with others.
   And there are other pleasures and pains that are originally our own,
   and not what we have by such a participation with others. Which consist
   in perceptions agreeable, or contrary, to certain personal inclinations
   implanted in our nature; such as the sensitive appetites and aversions.
   Such also is the disposition or the determination of the mind to be
   pleased with external beauty, and with all inferior, secondary beauty,
   consisting in uniformity, proportion, &c. whether in things external or
   internal, and to dislike the contrary deformity. Such also is the
   natural disposition in men to be pleased in a perception of their being
   the objects of the honour and love of others, and displeased with
   others' hatred and contempt. For pleasures and uneasiness of this kind
   are doubtless as much owing to an immediate determination of the mind
   by a fixed law of our nature, as any of the pleasures or pains of
   external sense. And these pleasures are properly of the private and
   personal kind; being not by any participation of the happiness or
   sorrow of others, through benevolence. It is evidently mere self-love
   that appears in this disposition. It is easy to see, that a man's love
   to himself will make him love love to himself, and hate hatred to
   himself. And as God has constituted our nature, self-love is exercised
   in no one disposition more than in this. Men, probably, are capable of
   much more pleasure and pain through this determination of the mind,
   than by any other personal inclination or aversion whatsoever. Though
   perhaps we do not so very often see instances of extreme suffering by
   this means, as by some others, yet we often see evidences of men's
   dreading the contempt of others more than death; and by such instances
   may conceive something what men would suffer, if universally hated and
   despised; and may reasonably infer something of the greatness of the
   misery, that would arise under a sense of universal abhorrence, in a
   great view of intelligent being in general, or in a clear view of the
   Deity, as incomprehensibly and immensely great, so that all other
   beings are as nothing and vanity--together with a sense of his
   immediate continual presence, and an infinite concern with him and
   dependence upon him--and living constantly in the midst of most clear
   and strong evidences and manifestations of his hatred and contempt.
   These things may be sufficient to explain what I mean by private
   interest; in regard to which, self-love, most properly so called, is
   immediately exercised.

   And here I would observe, that if we take self-love in this sense, so
   love to some others may truly be the effect of self-love; i.e.
   according to the common method and order which is maintained in the
   laws of nature. For no created thing has power to produce an effect any
   otherwise than by virtue of the laws of nature. Thus, that a man should
   love those who are of his party, and who are warmly engaged on his
   side, and promote his interest, is the natural consequence of a private
   self-love. Indeed there is no metaphysical necessity, in the nature of
   things, that because a man loves himself, and regards his own interest,
   he therefore should love those that love him, and promote his interest,
   i.e. to suppose it to be otherwise implies no contradiction. It will
   not follow from any absolute metaphysical necessity, that because
   bodies have solidity, cohesion, and gravitation towards the centre of
   the earth, therefore a weight suspended on the beam of a balance should
   have greater power to counterbalance a weight on the other side, when
   at a distance from the fulcrum, than when it is near. It implies no
   contradiction that it should be otherwise; but only as it contradicts
   that beautiful proportion and harmony, which the Author of nature
   observes in the laws of nature he has established. Neither is there any
   absolute necessity, that because there is an internal mutual attraction
   of the parts of the earth, or any other sphere, whereby the whole
   becomes one solid coherent body, therefore other bodies that are around
   it, should also be attracted by it, and those that are nearest, be
   attracted most. But according to the order and proportion generally
   observed in the laws of nature, one of these effects is connected with
   the other, so that it is justly looked upon as the same power of
   attraction in the globe of the earth, which draws bodies about the
   earth towards its centre, with that which attracts the parts of the
   earth themselves one to another; only exerted under different
   circumstances. By a like order of nature, a man's love to those that
   love him, is no more than a certain expression or effect of self-love.
   No other principle is needful in order to the effect, if nothing
   intervenes to countervail the natural tendency of self-love. Therefore
   there is no more true virtue in a man thus loving his friends merely
   from self-love, than there is in self-love itself, the principle from
   whence it proceeds. So, a man being disposed to hate those that hate
   him, or to resent injuries done him, arises from self-love, in like
   manner as loving those that love us, and being thankful for kindness
   shown us.

   But it is said by some, that it is apparent there is some other
   principle concerned in exciting the passions of gratitude and anger
   besides self-love, viz. moral sense, or sense of moral beauty and
   deformity, determining the minds of all mankind to approve of, and be
   pleased with virtue, and to disapprove of vice, and behold it with
   displicence; and that their seeing or supposing this moral beauty or
   deformity, in the kindness of a benefactor, or opposition of an
   adversary, is the occasion of these affections of gratitude or anger.
   Otherwise, why are not these affections excited in us towards inanimate
   things that do us good or hurt? Why do not we experience gratitude to a
   garden, or fruitful field? And why are we not angry with a tempest, or
   blasting mildew, or an overflowing stream? We are very differently
   affected towards those that do us good from the virtue of generosity,
   or hurt us from the vice of envy and malice, than towards things that
   hurt or help us, which are destitute of reason and will. Concerning
   this, I would make several remarks.

   1. Those who thus argue, that gratitude and anger cannot proceed from
   self-love, might argue in the same way, and with equal reason, that
   neither can these affections arise from love to others: which is
   contrary to their own scheme. They say, that the reason why we are
   affected with gratitude and anger towards men, rather than things
   without life, is moral sense: which they say is the effect of that
   principle of benevolence or love to others, or love to the public,
   which is naturally in the hearts of all mankind. But now I might say,
   according to their own way of arguing, gratitude and anger cannot arise
   from love to others, or love to the public, or any sense of mind that
   is the fruit of public affection. For how differently are we affected
   towards those that do good or hurt to the public from understanding and
   will, and public motive, from what we are towards such inanimate things
   as the sun and the clouds, that do good to the public, by enlightening
   and enlivening beams and refreshing showers; or mildew, and an
   overflowing stream, that does hurt to the public, by destroying the
   fruits of the earth! Yea, if such a kind of argument be good, it will
   prove that gratitude and anger cannot arise from the united influence
   of self-love, and public love, or moral sense arising from public
   affection. For, if so, why are we not affected towards inanimate
   things, that are beneficial or injurious both to us and the public, in
   the same manner as to them that are profitable or hurtful to both on
   choice and design, and from benevolence or malice?

   2. On the supposition, that men love those who love them, and are angry
   with those who hate them, from the natural influence of self-love; it
   is not at all strange that the Author of nature, who observes order,
   uniformity, and harmony in establishing its laws, should so order, that
   it should be natural for self-love to cause the mind to be affected
   differently towards exceedingly different objects; and that it should
   cause our heart to extend itself in one manner towards inanimate
   things, which gratify self-love, without sense or will, and in another
   manner towards beings which we look upon as having understanding and
   will, like ourselves, and exerting these faculties in our favour, and
   promoting our interest from love to us. No wonder, seeing we love
   ourselves, that it should be natural to us to extend something of that
   same kind of love which we have for ourselves, to them who are the same
   kind of beings as ourselves, and comply with the inclinations of our
   self-love, by expressing the same sort of love towards us.

   3. If we should allow that to be universal, that in gratitude and anger
   there is the exercise of some kind of moral sense--as it is granted
   there is something that may be so called--all the moral sense that is
   essential to those affections, is a sense of desert--; which is to be
   referred to that sense of justice, before spoken of, consisting in an
   apprehension of that secondary kind of beauty that lies in uniformity
   and proportion; which solves all the difficulty in the objection.
   Others' love and kindness to us, or their ill-will and injuriousness,
   appear to us to deserve our love or our resentment. Or, in other words,
   it seems to us no other than just, that as they love us and do us good,
   we also should love them and do them good. And so it seems just, that
   when others' hearts oppose us, and they from their hearts do us hurt,
   our hearts should oppose them, and that we should desire themselves may
   suffer in like manner as we have suffered, i.e. there appears to us to
   be a natural agreement, proportion, and adjustment between these
   things; which is indeed a kind of moral sense, or sense of beauty in
   moral things. But, as was before shown, it is a moral sense of a
   secondary kind, and is entirely different from a sense or relish of the
   original essential beauty of true virtue; and may be without any
   principle of true virtue in the heart. Therefore, doubtless, it is a
   great mistake in any to suppose, that the moral sense which appears and
   is exercised in a sense of desert, is the same thing as a love of
   virtue, or a disposition and determination of mind to be pleased with
   true virtuous beauty, consisting in public benevolence. Which may be
   further confirmed, if it be considered, that even with respect to a
   sense of justice or desert, consisting in uniformity, and agreement
   between others' actions, towards us, and our actions towards them, in a
   way of well-doing, or of ill-doing, it is not absolutely necessary to
   the being of these passions of gratitude and anger, that there should
   be any notion of justice in them, in any public or general view of
   things: as will appear by what shall be next observed.

   4. Those authors who hold, that the moral sense, which is natural to
   all mankind, consists in a natural relish of the beauty of virtue, and
   so arises from a principle of true virtue implanted by nature in the
   hearts of all, hold that true virtue consists in public benevolence.
   Therefore, if the affections of gratitude and anger necessarily imply
   such a moral sense as they suppose, then these affections imply some
   delight in the public good, and an aversion of the mind to public evil.
   And if so, then every time a man feels anger for opposition, or
   gratitude for any favour, there must be at least a supposition of a
   tendency to public injury in that opposition, and a tendency to public
   benefit in the favour that excites his gratitude. But how far is this
   from being true! For instance; a ship's crew enter into a conspiracy
   against the master, to murder him, and run away with the ship, and turn
   pirates: but before they bring their matters to ripeness of execution,
   one of them repents, and opens the whole design; whereupon the rest are
   apprehended and brought to justice. The crew are enraged with him that
   has betrayed them, and earnestly seek opportunity to revenge themselves
   upon him. And for an instance of gratitude: a gang of robbers that have
   long infested the neighboring country, have a particular house whither
   they resort, and where they meet from time to time, to divide their
   booty, and hold their consultations for carrying on their pernicious
   designs. The magistrates and officers of the country, after many
   fruitless endeavours to discover their secret place of resort, at
   length are well-informed where it is, and are prepared with sufficient
   force to surprise them, and seize them all, at the place of rendezvous,
   at an hour appointed, when they understand they will all be there. A
   little before the arrival of the appointed hour, while the officers
   with their bands are approaching, some person is so kind to these
   robbers, as to give them notice of their danger, so as just to give
   them opportunity to escape. They are thankful to him, and give him a
   handful of money for his kindness. Now, in such instances, I think it
   is plain, that there is no supposition of a public injury in that which
   is the occasion of their anger; yea, they know the contrary. Nor is
   there any supposition of public good in that which excites their
   gratitude; neither has public benevolence, or moral sense, consisting
   in a determination to approve of what is for the public good, any
   influence at all in the affair. And though there be some affection,
   besides a sense of uniformity and proportion, that has influence in
   such anger and gratitude, it is not public affection or benevolence,
   but private affection; yea, that affection which is to the highest
   degree private, consisting in a man's love of his own person.

   5. The passion of anger, in particular, seems to have been unluckily
   chosen as a medium to prove a sense and determination to delight in
   virtue, consisting in benevolence natural to all mankind. For if that
   moral sense which is exercised in anger, were that which arose from a
   benevolent temper of heart, being no other than a sense or relish of
   the beauty of benevolence, one would think, a disposition to anger
   should increase, at least in some proportion, as a man had more of a
   sweet, benign, and benevolent temper: which seems contrary to
   experience, which shows that the less men have of benevolence, and the
   more they have of a contrary temper, the more are they disposed to
   anger and deep resentment of injuries.

   And though gratitude be that which many speak of as a certain noble
   principle of virtue, which God has implanted in the hearts of all
   mankind; and though it be true there is a gratitude that is truly
   virtuous; and the want of gratitude, or an ungrateful temper, is truly
   vicious, and argues an abominable depravity of heart; yet I think, what
   has been observed may serve to convince such as impartially consider
   it, not only that not all anger, or hating those which hate us, but
   also that not all gratitude, or loving those which love us, arises from
   a truly virtuous benevolence of heart.

   Another sort of affections, which may be properly referred to
   self-love, as its source, and which might be expected to be the fruit
   of it, according to the general analogy of nature's laws, is that of
   affections to such as are near to us by the ties of nature. Such are
   those of whose beings we have been the occasion, in whom we have a very
   peculiar propriety, and whose circumstances, even from the beginning of
   their existence, many ways lead them to a high esteem of us, and to
   treat us with great dependence, submission, and compliance. These the
   constitution of the world makes to be united in interest, and
   accordingly to act as one, in innumerable affairs, with a communion in
   each other's affections, desires, cares, friendships, enmities, and
   pursuits. As to the opinion of those who ascribe the natural affection
   there is between parents and children to a particular instinct of
   nature, I shall take notice of it afterwards.

   And as men may love persons and things from self-love, so may their
   love to qualities and characters arise from the same source. Some
   represent this, as though there were need of a great degree of
   metaphysical refining to make it out, that men approve of others from
   self-love, whom they hear of at a distance, or read of in history, or
   see represented on the stage, from whom they expect no profit or
   advantage. But perhaps it is not considered, that what we approve of in
   the first place is the character; and from the character we approve the
   person. And is it a strange thing, that men should from self-love like
   a temper or character, which, in its nature and tendency, falls in with
   the nature and tendency of self-love; and which we know by experience
   and self-evidence, without metaphysical refining, in the general tends
   to men's pleasure and benefit? And on the contrary, is it strange that
   any should dislike what they see tends to men's pain and misery? Is
   there need of a great degree of subtilty and abstraction, to make it
   out, that a child, who has heard and seen much of what is calculated
   strongly to fix an idea of the pernicious, deadly nature of the
   rattlesnake, should have an aversion to that species from self-love; so
   as to have a degree of this aversion and disgust excited by seeing even
   the picture of that animal? And that from the same self-love it should
   be pleased with a lively representation of some pleasant fruit of which
   it has often tasted the sweetness? Or, with the image of some bird,
   which it has always been told is innocent, and with whose pleasant
   singing it has often been entertained? Yet the child neither fears
   being bitten by the picture of the snake, nor expects to eat of the
   painted fruit, or to hear the figure of the bird sing. I suppose none
   will think it difficult to allow, that such an approbation or disgust
   of a child may be accounted for from its natural delight in the
   pleasures of taste and hearing, and its aversion to pain and death,
   through self-love, together with the habitual connexion of these
   agreeable or terrible ideas with the form and qualities of these
   objects, the ideas of which are impressed on the mind of the child by
   their images.

   And where is the difficulty of allowing, that a person may hate the
   general character of a spiteful and malicious man, for the like reason
   as he hates the general nature of a serpent; knowing, from reasoning,
   instruction, and experience, that malice in men is pernicious to
   mankind, as well as spite or poison in a serpent? And if a man may from
   self-love disapprove the vices of malice, envy, and others of that
   sort, which naturally tend to the hurt of mankind, why may he not from
   the same principle approve the contrary virtues of meekness,
   peaceableness, benevolence, charity, generosity, justice, and the
   social virtues in general; which, he as easily and clearly knows,
   naturally tend to the good of mankind?--It is undoubtedly true, that
   some have a love to these virtues from a higher principle. But yet I
   think it as certainly true, that there is generally in mankind a sort
   of approbation of them, which arises from self-love.

   Besides what has been already said, the same thing further appears from
   this; that men commonly are most affected towards, and most highly
   approve, those virtues which agree with their interest most, according
   to their various conditions in life. We see that persons of low
   condition are especially enamoured with a condescending, accessible,
   affable temper in the great; not only in those whose condescension has
   been exercised towards themselves; but they will be peculiarly taken
   with such a character when they have accounts of it from others, or
   when they meet with it in history, or even in romance. The poor will
   most highly approve and commend liberality. The weaker sex, who
   especially need assistance and protection, will peculiarly esteem and
   applaud fortitude and generosity in those of the other sex, of whom
   they read or hear, or which they have represented to them on a stage.

   I think it plain from what has been observed, that as men may approve,
   and be disposed to commend, a benevolent temper from self-love; so the
   higher the degree of benevolence is, the more may they approve of it.
   This will account for some kind approbation, from this principle, even
   of love to enemies, viz. as a man loving his enemies is an evidence of
   a high degree of benevolence of temper; the degree of it appearing from
   the obstacles it overcomes. And it may be here observed, that the
   consideration of the tendency and influence of self-love may show, how
   men in general may approve of justice from another ground, besides that
   approbation of the secondary beauty there is in uniformity and
   proportion, which is natural to all. Men, from their infancy, see the
   necessity of it, not only that it is necessary for others, or for human
   society; but they find the necessity of it for themselves, in instances
   that continually occur; which tends to prejudice them in its favour,
   and to fix an habitual approbation of it from self-love.

   Again, that forementioned approbation of justice and desert, arising
   from a sense of the beauty of natural agreement and proportion, will
   have a kind of reflex and indirect influence to cause men to approve
   benevolence, and disapprove malice; as men see that he who hates and
   injures others deserves to be hated and punished, and that he who is
   benevolent and loves others, and does them good, deserves himself also
   to be loved and rewarded by others, as they see the natural congruity
   or agreement, and mutual adaptedness, of these things. And having
   always seen this, malevolence becomes habitually connected in the mind
   with the idea of being hated and punished, which is disagreeable to
   self-love; and the idea of benevolence is habitually connected and
   associated with the idea of being loved and rewarded by others, which
   is grateful to self-love. And by virtue of this association of ideas,
   benevolence itself becomes grateful, and the contrary displeasing.

   Some vices may become in a degree odious by the influence of self-love,
   through an habitual connexion of ideas of contempt with it; contempt
   being what self-love abhors. So it may often be with drunkenness,
   gluttony, sottishness, cowardice, sloth, niggardliness. The idea of
   contempt becomes associated with the idea of such vices, both because
   we are used to observe, that these things are commonly objects of
   contempt, and also find, that they excite contempt in ourselves. Some
   of them appear marks of littleness, i.e. of small abilities, and
   weakness of mind, and insufficiency for any considerable effects among
   mankind. By others, men's influence is contracted into a narrow sphere,
   and by such means persons become of less importance, and more
   insignificant. And things of little importance are naturally little
   accounted of. And some of these ill qualities are such as mankind find
   it their interest to treat with contempt, as they are very hurtful to
   human society.--There are no particular moral virtues whatsoever, but
   what in some or other of these ways, and most of them in several, come
   to have some kind of approbation from self-love, without the influence
   of a truly virtuous principle; nor any particular vices, but what, by
   the same means, meet with some disapprobation.

   This kind of approbation and dislike, through the joint influence of
   self-love and association of ideas, is in many vastly heightened by
   education. This is the means of a strong, close, and almost
   irrefragable association, in innumerable instances of ideas, which have
   no connexion any other way than by education; and is the means of
   greatly strengthening that association, or connexion, which persons are
   led into by other means: as any one would be convinced, perhaps more
   effectually than in most other ways, if they had opportunity of any
   considerable acquaintance with American savages and their children.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. V.

   Of natural conscience, and the moral sense.

   There is yet another disposition or principle, of great importance,
   natural to mankind; which, if we consider the consistence and harmony
   of nature's laws, may also be looked upon as, in some sort, arising
   from self-love, or self-union; and that is, a disposition in man to be
   uneasy in a consciousness of being inconsistent with himself, and as it
   were against himself in his own actions. This appears particularly in
   the inclination of the mind to be uneasy in the consciousness of doing
   that to others, which he should be angry with them for doing to him, if
   they were in his case, and he in theirs; or of forbearing to do that to
   them, which he would be displeased with them for neglecting to do to
   him.

   I have observed, from time to time, that in pure love to others, i.e.
   love not arising from self-love, there is an union of the heart with
   others; a kind of enlargement of the mind, whereby it so extends itself
   as to take others into a man's self: and therefore it implies a
   disposition to feel, to desire, and to act as though others were one
   with ourselves. So, self-love implies an inclination to feel and act as
   one with ourselves; which naturally renders a sensible inconsistence
   with ourselves, and self-opposition in what we ourselves choose and do,
   to be uneasy to the mind: which will cause uneasiness of mind to be the
   consequence of a malevolent and unjust behaviour towards others, and a
   kind of disapprobation of acts of this nature, and an approbation of
   the contrary. To do that to another, which we should be angry with him
   for doing to us, and to hate a person for doing that to us, which we
   should incline to and insist on doing to him, if we were exactly in the
   same case, is to disagree with ourselves, and contradict ourselves. It
   would be for ourselves both to choose and adhere to, and yet to refuse
   and utterly reject, the very same thing. No wonder this is contrary to
   nature. No wonder, that such a self-opposition, and inward war with a
   man's self, naturally begets unquietness, and raises disturbance in his
   mind.

   Thus approving of actions, because we therein act as in agreement with
   ourselves; and thus disapproving, and being uneasy in the consciousness
   of disagreeing with ourselves, in what we do, is quite a different
   thing from approving or disapproving actions because in them we are
   united with being in general: which is loving or hating actions from a
   sense of the primary beauty of true virtue, and of the odiousness of
   sin. The former of these principles is private; the latter is public,
   and truly benevolent in the highest sense. The former--an inclination
   to agree with ourselves--is a natural principle: but the latter--an
   agreement or union of heart to the great system, and to God the head of
   it, who is all and all in it--is a divine principle.

   In that uneasiness now mentioned, consists very much of that inward
   trouble men have from reflections of conscience: and when they are free
   from this uneasiness, and are conscious to themselves, that in what
   they have acted towards others, they have done the same which they
   should have expected from them in the same case, then they have what is
   called peace of conscience, with respect to these actions. And there is
   also an approbation of conscience, respecting the conduct of others
   towards ourselves. As when we are blamed, condemned, or punished by
   them, and are conscious to ourselves that if we were in their case, and
   they in ours, we should in like manner blame, condemn, and punish them.
   And thus men's consciences may justify God's anger and condemnation.
   When they have the ideas of God's greatness, their relation to him, the
   benefits they have received from him, the manifestations he has made of
   his will to them, &c. strongly impressed on their minds, a
   consciousness is excited within them of those resentments, which would
   be occasioned in themselves by an injurious treatment in any wise
   parallel.

   There certainly is such a consciousness as this oftentimes within men,
   implied in the thoughts and views of the mind, of which, perhaps on
   reflection, they could hardly give an account. Unless men's consciences
   are greatly stupified, it is naturally and necessarily suggested; and
   habitually, spontaneously, instantaneously, and, as it were,
   insensibly, arises in the mind. And the more so for this reason, that
   we have no other way to conceive of any thing which other persons act
   or suffer, but by recalling and exciting the ideas of what we ourselves
   are conscious we have found in our own minds; and by putting the ideas
   which we obtain by this means in the place of another; or, as it were,
   substituting ourselves in their place. Thus we have no conception, what
   understanding, perception, love, pleasure, pain, or desire are in
   others; but by putting ourselves as it were in their stead, or
   transferring the ideas we obtain of such things in our own minds by
   consciousness in their place; making such an alteration, as to degree
   and circumstances, as what we observe of them requires. It is thus in
   all moral things that we conceive of in others; and indeed in every
   thing we conceive of, belonging to others, more than shape, size,
   complexion, situation, and motion of their bodies. And this is the only
   way that we come to be capable of having ideas of any perception or act
   even of the Godhead. We never could have any notion what understanding
   or volition, love or hatred are, either in created spirits or in God,
   if we had never experienced what understanding and volition, love and
   hatred, are in our own minds. Knowing what they are by consciousness,
   we can deny limits, and remove changeableness and other imperfections,
   and ascribe them to God.

   But though men in thinking of others do as it were put themselves in
   their place, they do it so habitually, instantaneously, and without set
   purpose, that they can scarce give any account of it, and many would
   think it strange if they were told of it. In all a man's thoughts of
   another person, in whatever he apprehends of his moral conduct to
   others or to himself, if it be in loving or hating him, approving or
   condemning him, rewarding or punishing him, he necessarily, as it were,
   puts himself in his stead; and therefore the more naturally, easily,
   and quietly sees whether he, being in his place, should approve or
   condemn, be angry or pleased as he is.

   Natural conscience consists in these two things.

   1. In that disposition to approve or disapprove the moral treatment
   which passes between us and others, from a determination of the mind to
   be easy or uneasy, in a consciousness of our being consistent or
   inconsistent with ourselves. Hereby we have a disposition to approve
   our own treatment of another, when we are conscious to ourselves that
   we treat him so as we should expect to be treated by him, were he in
   our case and we in his; and to disapprove of our own treatment of
   another, when we are conscious that we should be displeased with the
   like treatment from him, if we were in his case. So we in our
   consciences approve of another's treatment of us, if we are conscious
   to ourselves, that if we were in his case, and he in ours, we should
   think it just to treat him as he treats us; and disapprove his
   treatment of us, when we are conscious that we should think it unjust,
   if we were in his case. Thus men's consciences approve or disapprove
   the sentence of their judge, by which they are acquitted or condemned.
   But this is not all that is in natural conscience. Besides this
   approving or disapproving from uneasiness as being inconsistent with
   ourselves, there is another thing that must precede it, and be the
   foundation of it. As for instance, when my conscience disapproves my
   own treatment of another, being conscious to myself, that were I in his
   case, I should be displeased and angry with him for so treating me; the
   question might be asked, What would be the ground of that supposed
   disapprobation, displeasure, and anger, which I am conscious would be
   in me in that case? Therefore,

   2. The other thing which belongs to the approbation or disapprobation
   of natural conscience, is the sense of desert which was spoken of
   before; consisting, as was observed, in a natural agreement,
   proportion, and harmony, between malevolence or injury, and resentment
   and punishment; or between loving and being loved, between showing
   kindness and being rewarded, &c. Both these kinds of approving or
   disapproving, concur in the approbation or disapprobation of
   conscience: the one founded on the other. Thus, when a man's conscience
   disapproves of his treatment of his neighbour, in the first place, he
   is conscious, that if he were in his neighbour's stead, he should
   resent such treatment from a sense of justice, or from a sense of
   uniformity and equality between such treatment, and resentment, and
   punishment; as before explained. And then, in the next place, he
   perceives, that therefore he is not consistent with himself, in doing
   what he himself should resent in that case; and hence disapproves it,
   as being naturally averse to opposition to himself.

   Approbation and disapprobation of conscience, in the sense now
   explained, will extend to all virtue and vice; to every thing
   whatsoever that is morally good or evil, in a mind which does not
   confine its view to a private sphere, but will take things in general
   into its consideration, and is free from speculative error. For, as all
   virtue or moral good may be resolved into love to others, either God or
   creatures; so, men easily see the uniformity and natural agreement
   there is between loving others, and being accepted and favoured by
   others. And all vice, sin, or moral evil summarily consisting in the
   want of this love to others, or in malevolence; so, men easily see the
   natural agreement there is between hating and doing ill to others, and
   being hated by them, and suffering ill from them, or from him that acts
   for all, and has the care of the whole system. And as this sense of
   equality and natural agreement extends to all moral good and evil; so,
   this lays a foundation of an equal extent with the other kind of
   approbation and disapprobation which is grounded upon it, arising from
   an aversion to self-inconsistence and opposition. For in all cases of
   benevolence, or the contrary, towards others, we are capable of putting
   ourselves in the place of others, and are naturally led to do it; and
   so of being conscious to ourselves, how we should like or dislike such
   treatment from others. Thus natural conscience, if the understanding be
   properly enlightened, and stupifying prejudices are removed, concurs
   with the law of God, is of equal extent with it, and joins its voice
   with it in every article.

   And thus, in particular, we may see in what respect this natural
   conscience extends to true virtue, consisting in union of heart to
   being in general, and supreme love to God. For, although it sees not,
   or rather does not taste, its primary and essential beauty, i.e. it
   tastes no sweetness in benevolence to being in general, simply
   considered, for nothing but general benevolence itself can do that,
   yet, this natural conscience, common to mankind, may approve of it from
   that uniformity, equality, and justice, which there is in it; and the
   demerit which is seen in the contrary, consisting in the natural
   agreement between the contrary, and being hated of being in general.
   Men, by natural conscience, may see the justice, or natural agreement,
   there is in yielding all to God, as we receive all from him; and the
   justice there is in being his that made us, and willingly so, which is
   the same as being dependent on his will, and conformed to it in the
   manner of our being; as we are for our being itself, and in the
   conformity of our will to his, on whose will we are universally and
   most perfectly dependent. There is also justice in our supreme love to
   God; a natural agreement in our having a supreme respect to him who
   exercises infinite goodness to us, and from whom we receive all
   well-being. Besides, disagreement and discord appears worse to natural
   sense in things nearly related, and of great importance: and therefore
   it must appear very ill, as it respects the infinite Being, and that
   infinitely great relation which there is between the Creator and his
   creatures. And it is easy to conceive how natural conscience should see
   the desert of punishment, in the contrary of true virtue, viz.
   opposition and enmity to being in general. For, this is only to see the
   natural agreement there is between opposing being in general, and being
   opposed by being in general; with a consciousness how, if we were
   infinitely great, we should expect to be regarded according to our
   greatness, and should proportionably resent contempt. This natural
   conscience, if well-informed, will approve of true virtue, and will
   disapprove and condemn the want of it, and opposition to it; and yet
   without seeing the true beauty of it. Yea, if men's consciences were
   fully enlightened, if they were delivered from being confined to a
   private sphere, and brought to view, and consider things in general,
   and delivered from being stupified by sensual objects and appetites, as
   they will be at the day of judgment, they would approve nothing but
   true virtue, nothing but general benevolence, and those affections and
   actions that are consistent with it, and subordinate to it. For they
   must see, that consent to being in general, and supreme respect to the
   Being of beings, is most just; and that every thing which is
   inconsistent with it, and interferes with it, or flows from the want of
   it, is unjust, and deserves the opposition of universal existence.

   Thus has God established and ordered that this principle of natural
   conscience, which, though it implies no such thing as actual
   benevolence to being in general, nor any delight in such a principle,
   simply considered, and so implies no truly spiritual sense or virtuous
   taste, yet should approve and condemn the same things that are approved
   and condemned by a spiritual sense or virtuous taste. And that moral
   sense which is natural to mankind, so far as it is disinterested, and
   not founded in association of ideas, is the same with this natural
   conscience.

   The sense of moral good and evil, and that disposition to approve
   virtue, and disapprove vice, which men have by natural conscience, is
   that moral sense so much insisted on in the writings of many of late. A
   misunderstanding of this, seems to have misled those moralists who have
   insisted on a disinterested moral sense, universal in the world of
   mankind, as an evidence of a disposition to true virtue, consisting in
   a benevolent temper, naturally implanted in the minds of all men. Some
   of the arguments used by these writers, indeed prove, that there is a
   moral sense or taste, universal among men, distinct from what arises
   from self-love. Though I humbly conceive, there is some confusion in
   their discourses on the subject, and not a proper distinction observed
   in the instances of men's approbation of virtue, which they produce.
   Some of which are not to their purpose, being instances of that
   approbation of virtue which arises from self-love. But other instances
   prove, that there is a moral taste, or sense of moral good and evil,
   natural to all, which do not properly arise from self-love. Yet I
   conceive there are no instances of this kind which may not be referred
   to natural conscience, and particularly to that which I have observed
   to be primary in the approbation of natural conscience, viz. a sense of
   desert, and approbation of that natural agreement there is, in manner
   and measure, in justice. But I think it is plain from what has been
   said, that neither this, nor any thing else wherein consists the sense
   of moral good and evil, which there is in natural conscience, is of the
   nature of a truly virtuous taste, or determination of mind to relish
   and delight in the essential beauty of true virtue, arising from a
   virtuous benevolence of heart.

   But it further appears from this; if the approbation of conscience were
   the same with the approbation of the inclination of the heart, or the
   natural disposition and determination of the mind to love and be
   pleased with virtue, then approbation and condemnation of conscience
   would always be in proportion to the virtuous temper of the mind; or
   rather, the degree would be just the same. In that person who had a
   high degree of a virtuous temper, therefore, the testimony of
   conscience in favour of virtue would be equally full: But he who had
   but little, would have as little a degree of the testimony of
   conscience for virtue, and against vice. But I think the case is
   evidently otherwise. Some men, through the strength of vice in their
   hearts, will go on and sin against clearer light and stronger
   convictions of conscience than others. If conscience, approving duty
   and disapproving sin, were the same thing as the exercise of a virtuous
   principle of the heart, in loving duty and hating sin, then remorse of
   conscience will be the same thing as repentance; and just in the same
   degree as the sinner feels remorse of conscience for sin, in the same
   degree is the heart turned from the love of sin to the hatred of it,
   inasmuch as they are the very same thing.

   Christians have the greatest reason to believe, from the Scriptures,
   that in the future day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of
   God, when sinners shall be called to answer before their judge, and all
   their wickedness, in all its aggravations, brought forth, and clearly
   manifested in the perfect light of that day, and God will reprove them
   and set their sins in order before them, their consciences will be
   greatly awakened and convinced, their mouths will be stopped, all
   stupidity of conscience will be at an end, and conscience will have its
   full exercise; and therefore their consciences will approve the
   dreadful sentence of the judge against them; and seeing that they have
   deserved so great a punishment, will join with the judge in condemning
   them. And this, according to the notion I am opposing, would be the
   same thing as their being brought to the fullest repentance; their
   hearts being perfectly changed to hate sin and love holiness; and
   virtue or holiness of heart in them will be brought to the most full
   and perfect exercise. But how much otherwise have we reason to suppose
   it will then be! Then the sin and wickedness of their heart will come
   to its highest dominion and completest exercise; they shall be wholly
   left of God, and given up to their wickedness, even as the devils are!
   When God has done waiting on sinners, and his Spirit done striving with
   them, he will not restrain their wickedness, as he does now. But sin
   shall then rage in their hearts, as a fire no longer restrained or kept
   under. It is proper for a judge when he condemns a criminal, to
   endeavour so to set his guilt before him as to convince his conscience
   of the justice of the sentence. This the Almighty will do effectually,
   and do to perfection, so as most thoroughly to awaken and convince the
   conscience. But if natural conscience, and the disposition of the heart
   to be pleased with virtue, were the same, then at the same time that
   the conscience was brought to its perfect exercise, the heart would be
   made perfectly holy; or, would have the exercise of true virtue and
   holiness in perfect benevolence of temper. But instead of this, their
   wickedness will then be brought to perfection, and wicked men will
   become very devils, and accordingly will be sent away as cursed into
   everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

   But supposing natural conscience to be what has been described, all
   these difficulties and absurdities are wholly avoided. Sinners when
   they see the greatness of the Being in contempt of whom they have lived
   with rebellion and opposition, and have clearly set before them their
   obligations to him, as their Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, &c.
   together with the degree in which they have acted as enemies to him,
   may have a clear sense of the desert of their sin, consisting in the
   natural agreement there is between such contempt and opposition of such
   a Being, and his despising and opposing them; between their being and
   acting as so great enemies to such a God, and their suffering the
   dreadful consequences of his being and acting as their great enemy; and
   their being conscious within themselves of the degree of anger, which
   would naturally arise in their own hearts in such a case, if they were
   in the place and state of their judge. In order to these things, there
   is no need of a virtuous benevolent temper, relishing and delighting in
   benevolence, and loathing the contrary. The conscience may see the
   natural agreement between opposing and being opposed, between hating
   and being hated, without abhorring malevolence from a benevolent temper
   of mind, or without loving God from a view of the beauty of his
   holiness. These things have no necessary dependence one on the other.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. VI.

   Of particular instincts of nature, which in some respects resemble
   virtue.

   There are various dispositions and inclinations natural to men, which
   depend on particular laws of nature, determining their minds to certain
   affections and actions towards particular objects; which laws seem to
   be established chiefly for the preservation of mankind, and their
   comfortably subsisting in the world. These dispositions may be called
   instincts.

   Some of these instincts respect only ourselves personally: such are
   many of our natural appetites and aversions. Some of them are more
   social, and extend to others: such are the mutual inclinations between
   the sexes, &c.--some of these dispositions are more external and
   sensitive: such are those that relate to meat and drink, and the more
   sensitive inclinations of the sexes towards each other. Others are more
   internal and mental: consisting in affections which mankind naturally
   exercise towards some of their fellow-creatures, and in some cases
   towards men in general. Some of these may be called kind affections; as
   having something in them of benevolence, or a resemblance of it: and
   others are of an angry appearance; such as the passion of jealousy
   between the sexes, especially in the male towards the female.

   It is only the former of these two last mentioned sorts that it is to
   my purpose to consider in this place, viz. those natural instincts
   which have the appearance of benevolence, and so in some respects
   resemble virtue. These I shall therefore consider; and shall endeavour
   to show, that none of them can be of the nature of true virtue.

   That kind affection which is exercised one towards another in natural
   relation, particularly the love of parents to their children, called
   natural affection, is by many referred to instinct. I have already
   considered this sort of love as an affection that arises from
   self-love; and in that view, have shown it cannot be of the nature of
   true virtue. But if any think, that natural affection is more properly
   to be referred to a particular instinct of nature than to self-love, as
   its cause, I shall not think it a point worthy of any controversy or
   dispute. In my opinion both are true; viz. that natural affection is
   owing to natural instinct, and also that it arises from self-love. It
   may be said to arise from instinct, as it depends on a law of nature.
   But yet it may be truly reckoned as an affection arising from
   self-love; because, though it arises from a law of nature, yet that is
   such a law as according to the order and harmony every where observed
   among the laws of nature, is connected with and follows from self-love;
   as was shown before. However, it is not necessary to my present purpose
   to insist on this. For if natural affection to a man's children, or
   near relations, is an affection arising from a particular independent
   instinct of nature--which the Creator in his wisdom has implanted in
   men for the preservation and well-being of the world of mankind: yet it
   cannot be of the nature of true virtue. For it has been observed, and,
   I humbly conceive, proved before, (Chap. 2.) that if any being or
   beings have by natural instinct, or any other means, a determination of
   mind to benevolence, extending only to some particular persons or
   private system, however large that system may be--or however great a
   number of individuals it may contain, so long as it contains but an
   infinitely small part of universal existence, and so bears no
   proportion to this great and universal system--such limited private
   benevolence, not arising from, not being subordinate to, benevolence to
   being in general, cannot have the nature of true virtue. However, it
   may not be amiss briefly to observe now, that it is evident to a
   demonstration, those affections cannot be of the nature of true virtue,
   from these two things.

   First, That they do not arise from a principle of virtue. A principle
   of virtue, I think, is owned by the most considerable of late writers
   on morality to be general benevolence or public affection: and I think
   it has been proved to be union of heart to being simply considered;
   which implies a disposition to benevolence to being in general. Now, by
   the supposition, the affections we are speaking of do not arise from
   this principle; and that, whether we suppose they arise from self-love,
   or from particular instincts: because either of those sources is
   diverse from a principle of general benevolence. And,

   Secondly, These private affections, if they do not arise from general
   benevolence, and they are not connected with it in their first
   existence, have no tendency to produce it. This appears from what has
   been observed: for being not dependent on it, their detached and
   unsubordinate operation rather implies opposition to being in general,
   than general benevolence; as every one sees and owns with respect to
   self-love. And there are the very same reasons why any other private
   affection, confined to limits infinitely short of universal existence,
   should have that influence, as well as love that is confined to a
   single person. Now upon the whole, nothing can be plainer than that
   affections which do not arise from a virtuous principle, and have no
   tendency to true virtue, as their effect, cannot be of the nature of
   true virtue.

   For the reasons which have been given, it is undeniably true, that if
   persons have a benevolent affection limited to a party, or to the
   nation in general, of which they are a part, or the public community to
   which they belong, though it be as large as the Roman empire was of
   old; yea, if there could be cause determining a person to benevolence
   towards the whole world of mankind, or even all created sensible
   natures throughout the universe, exclusive of union of heart to general
   existence and of love to God--not derived from that temper of mind
   which disposes to a supreme regard to him nor subordinate to such
   divine love--it cannot be of the nature of true virtue.

   If what is called natural affection, arises from a particular natural
   instinct, much more indisputably does that mutual affection which
   naturally arises between the sexes. I agree with Hutchison and Hume in
   this, that there is a foundation laid in nature for kind affections
   between the sexes, diverse from all inclinations to sensitive pleasure,
   and which do not properly arise from any such inclination. There is
   doubtless a disposition both to a mutual benevolence and mutual
   complacence, that are not naturally and necessarily connected with any
   sensitive desires. But yet it is manifest such affections as are
   limited to opposite sexes, are from a particular instinct thus
   directing and limiting them; and not arising from a principle of
   general benevolence; for this has no tendency to any such limitation.
   And though these affections do not properly arise from the sensitive
   desires which are between the sexes, yet they are implanted by the
   Author of nature chiefly for the same purpose, viz. the preservation or
   continuation of the world of mankind. Hereby persons become willing to
   forsake father and mother, and all their natural relations in the
   families where they were born and brought up; for the sake of a stated
   union with a companion of the other sex, in bearing and going through
   that series of labours, anxieties, and pains, requisite to the being,
   support, and education of a family of children; and partly also for the
   comfort of mankind as united in a marriage-relation. But I suppose few,
   if any, will deny, that the peculiar natural dispositions there are to
   mutual affection between the sexes, arise from an instinct or
   particular law of nature. And therefore it is manifest, from what has
   been said already, that those natural dispositions cannot be of the
   nature of true virtue.

   Another affection which is owing to a particular instinct, is that pity
   which is natural to mankind when they see others in great distress. It
   is acknowledged, that such an affection is natural to mankind. But I
   think it evident, that the pity which is general and natural, is owing
   to a particular instinct, and is not of the nature of true virtue. I am
   far from saying, that there is no such thing as a truly virtuous pity
   among mankind; or, that none is to be found, which arises from that
   truly virtuous divine principle of general benevolence to sensitive
   beings. Yet at the same time I think, this is not the case with ALL
   pity, or with that disposition to pity which is natural to mankind in
   common. I think I may be bold to say, this does not arise from
   benevolence, nor is it properly called by that name.

   If all that uneasiness on the sight of others' extreme distress, which
   we call pity, were properly of the nature of benevolence, then they who
   are the subjects of this passion, must needs be in a degree of
   uneasiness in being sensible of the total want of happiness, of all
   such as they would be disposed to pity in extreme distress. For that
   certainly is the most direct tendency and operation of benevolence or
   good will, to desire the happiness of its object. But now this is not
   the case universally, where men are disposed to exercise pity. There
   are many who would not be sensibly affected with any uneasiness to know
   that others were dead--yea men, who are not influenced by the
   consideration of a future state, but view death as only a cessation of
   all sensibility, and consequently an end of all happiness--who yet
   would have been moved with pity towards the same persons, if they had
   seen them under some very extreme anguish. Some would be moved with
   pity by seeing a brute-creature under extreme and long torments, who
   yet suffer no uneasiness in knowing that many thousands of them every
   day cease to live, and so have an end put to all their pleasure. It is
   the nature of true benevolence to desire and rejoice in the prosperity
   and pleasure of its object; and that, in some proportion to its degree
   of prevalence. But persons may greatly pity those that are in extreme
   pain, whose positive pleasure they may still be very indifferent about.
   In this case, a man may be much moved and affected with uneasiness, who
   yet would be affected with no sensible joy in seeing signs of the same
   person's enjoyment of very high degrees of pleasure.

   Yea, pity may not only be without benevolence, but may consist with
   true malevolence, or with such ill will as shall cause men not only not
   to desire the positive happiness of another, but even to desire his
   calamity. They may pity such an one when his calamity goes beyond their
   hatred. A man may have true malevolence towards another, desiring no
   positive good for him, but evil; and yet his hatred not be infinite,
   but only to a certain degree. And when he sees the person whom he thus
   hates in misery far beyond his ill will, he may then pity him: because
   then the natural instinct begins to operate. For malevolence will not
   overcome the natural instinct, inclining to pity others in extreme
   calamity, any further than it goes, or to the limits of the degree of
   misery it wishes to its object. Men may pity others under exquisite
   torment, when yet they would have been grieved if they had seen their
   prosperity. And some have such a grudge against another, that they
   would be far from uneasy at their very death, nay, would even be glad
   of it. And when this is the case, it is manifest that their heart is
   void of benevolence towards such persons, and under the power of
   malevolence. Yet at the same time, they are capable of pitying even
   these very persons, if they should see them under a degree of misery
   very much disproportioned to their ill will.

   These things may convince us, that natural pity is of a nature very
   different from true virtue, and not arising from a disposition of heart
   to general benevolence; but is owing to a particular instinct, which
   the Creator has implanted, chiefly for the preservation of mankind,
   though not exclusive of their well being. The giving of this instinct
   is the fruit of God's mercy, and an instance of his love to the world
   of mankind, and an evidence, that though the world be so sinful, it is
   not God's design to make it a world of punishment; and therefore has
   many ways made a merciful provision of relief in extreme calamities.
   The natural exercises of pity extend beyond those with whom we are
   nearly connected, especially in cases of great calamity; because,
   commonly in such cases, men stand in need of the help of others besides
   their near friends, and because commonly those calamities which are
   extreme, without relief, tend to their destruction. This may be given
   as the reason why men are so made by the Author of nature, that they
   have no instinct inclining as much to rejoice at the sight of others'
   great prosperity and pleasure, as to be grieved at their extreme
   calamity, viz. because they do not stand in equal necessity of such an
   instinct as that in order to their preservation. But if pure
   benevolence were the source of natural pity, doubtless it would operate
   to as great a degree in congratulation, in cases of others' great
   prosperity, as in compassion towards them in great misery.

   The instincts which in some respects resemble a virtuous benevolence,
   are agreeable to the state that God designed mankind for here, where he
   intends their preservation and comfortable subsistence. But in the
   world of punishment--where the state of the wicked inhabitants will be
   exceeding different, and God will have none of these merciful designs
   to answer--we have great reason to think, there will be no such thing
   as a disposition to pity, in any case; as also no natural affection
   toward near relations, and no mutual affection between opposite sexes.

   To conclude, natural instinct, disposing men to pity others in misery,
   is also a source of a kind of abhorrence in men of some vices, as
   cruelty and oppression; and so of a sort of approbation of the contrary
   virtues, humanity, mercy, &c. which aversion and approbation, however,
   so far as they arise from this cause only, are not from a principle of
   true virtue.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. VII.

   The reasons why those things that have been mentioned, which have not
   the essence of virtue, have yet by many been mistaken for true virtue.

   The first reason may be this, that although they have not the specific
   and distinguishing nature and essence of virtue, yet they have
   something that belongs to the general nature of virtue. The general
   nature of true virtue is love. It is expressed both in love of
   benevolence and complacence; but primarily in benevolence to persons
   and beings, and consequently and secondarily in complacence in virtue,
   as has been shown. There is something of the general nature of virtue
   in those natural affections and principles that have been mentioned, in
   both those respects.

   In many of these natural affections there appears the tendency and
   effect of benevolence, in part. Others have truly a sort of private
   benevolence, but which in several respects falls short of the extent of
   true virtuous benevolence, both in its nature and object. Pity to
   others in distress, though not properly of the nature of love, as has
   been demonstrated, yet has partly the same influence and effect with
   benevolence. One effect of true benevolence is for persons to be uneasy
   when the objects of it are in distress, and to desire their relief. And
   natural pity has the same effect.

   Natural gratitude, though not properly called love--because persons may
   be moved with a degree of gratitude towards others on certain occasions
   for whom they have no real and proper friendship as in the instance of
   Saul towards David, once and again, after David's sparing his life,
   when he had so fair opportunity to kill him--yet has the like operation
   and effect with friendship, in part, for a season, and with regard to
   so much of the welfare of its object, as appears a deserved requital of
   kindness received. And in other instances, it may have a more general
   and abiding influence, so as more properly to be called by the name of
   love. So that many times men, from natural gratitude, do really with a
   sort of benevolence, love those who love them. From this, together with
   some other natural principles, men may love their near friends, their
   own party, their country, &c. The natural disposition there is to
   mutual affection between the sexes, often operates by what may properly
   be called love. There is oftentimes truly a kind both of benevolence
   and complacence. As there also is between parent and children.

   Thus these things have something of the general nature of virtue. What
   they are essentially defective in, is, that they are private in their
   nature; they do not arise from any temper of benevolence to being in
   general, nor have they a tendency to any such effect in their
   operation. But yet agreeing with virtue in its general nature, they are
   beautiful within their own private sphere, i.e. they appear beautiful
   if we confine our views to that private system, and while we shut out
   all other things to which they stand related from our consideration. If
   that private system contained the sum of universal existence, their
   benevolence would have true beauty; or, in other words, would be
   beautiful, all things considered; but now it is not so. These private
   systems are so far from containing the sum of universal being, or
   comprehending all existence to which we stand related, that it contains
   but an infinitely small part of it. The reason why men are so ready to
   take these private affections for true virtue, is the narrowness of
   their views; and above all, that they are so ready to leave the Divine
   Being out of their view, and to neglect him in their consideration, or
   to regard him in their thoughts, as though he did not properly belong
   to the system of real existence, but was a kind of shadowy, imaginary
   being. And though most men allow that there is a God, yet, in their
   ordinary view of things, his being is not apt to come into the account,
   and to have the influence and effect of real existence, as it is with
   other beings which they see, and are conversant with, by their external
   senses. In their views of beauty and deformity, and in their inward
   sensations of displicence and approbation, it is not natural to them to
   view the Deity as part of the system, and as the head of it, in
   comparison of whom all other things are to be viewed with corresponding
   impressions.

   Yea, we are apt, through the narrowness of our views, in judging of the
   beauty of affections and actions, to limit our consideration to only a
   small part of the created system. When private affections extend
   themselves to a considerable number, we are ready to look upon them as
   truly virtuous, and accordingly to applaud them highly. Thus it is with
   respect to a man's love to a large party, or a country. For though his
   private system contains but a small part even of the world of mankind,
   yet, being a considerable number, they--through the contracted limits
   of his mind, and the narrowness of his views--are ready to engross his
   sight, and to seem as if they were all. Hence, among the Romans, love
   to their country was the highest virtue; though this affection of
   theirs, so much extolled, was employed as it were for the destruction
   of the rest of mankind. The larger the number is, to which that private
   affection extends, the more apt men are, through the narrowness of
   their sight, to mistake it for true virtue; because then the private
   system appears to have more of the image of the universal.

   And this is the reason why self-love is not mistaken for true virtue.
   For though there be something of the general nature of virtue in it, as
   love and good will, yet the object is so private, the limits so narrow,
   that it by no means engrosses the view; unless it be of the person
   himself, who through the greatness of his pride may imagine himself as
   it were all. The minds of men are large enough to take in a vastly
   greater extent. And though self-love is far from being useless in the
   world, yea, it is exceeding necessary to society; yet every body sees
   that if it be not subordinate to, and regulated by, another more
   extensive principle, it may make a man a common enemy to the general
   system. And this is as true of any other private affection,
   notwithstanding its extent may be to a system that contains millions of
   individuals. And though private systems bear no greater proportion to
   the whole of universal existence, than one alone; yet, they bear a
   greater proportion to the view and comprehension of men's minds, and
   are more apt to be regarded as if they were all, or at least as some
   resemblance of the universal system.

   Thus I have observed how many of these natural principles resemble
   virtue in its primary operation, which is benevolence. Many of them
   also have a resemblance of it in its secondary operation, which is its
   approbation of and complacence in virtue itself. Several kinds of
   approbation of virtue, are not of the nature of a truly virtuous
   approbation, consisting in a sense and relish of the essential beauty
   of virtue. As particularly, the approbation of conscience, from a sense
   of the inferior and secondary beauty which there is in virtue,
   consisting in uniformity; and from a sense of desert, consisting in a
   sense of the natural agreement of loving and being beloved, showing
   kindness and receiving kindness. So, from the same principle, there is
   a disapprobation of vice, from a natural opposition to deformity and
   disproportion; and a sense of evil desert, or the natural agreement
   there is between hating and being hated, opposing and being opposed,
   &c. together with a painful sensation naturally arising from a sense of
   self-opposition and inconsistence. Approbation of conscience is the
   more readily mistaken for a truly virtuous approbation, because by the
   wise constitution of the great Governor of the world, when conscience
   is well informed, and thoroughly awakened, it agrees with him fully and
   exactly, as to the object approved, though not as to the ground and
   reason of approving. It approves all virtue, and condemns all vice. It
   approves true virtue, and indeed approves nothing that is against it,
   or that falls short of it; as was shown before. Natural conscience is
   implanted in all mankind, to be as it were in God's stead, as internal
   judge or rule, whereby to distinguish right and wrong.

   It has also been observed, how that virtue, consisting in benevolence,
   is approved; and vice, consisting in ill will, is disliked; from the
   influence of self-love, together with the association of ideas. In the
   same manner, men dislike those qualities in things without life or
   reason, with which they have always connected the ideas of hurtfulness,
   malignancy, perniciousness; but approve those things with which they
   habitually connect the ideas of profit, pleasantness, &c. This
   approbation of virtue, and dislike of vice, is easily mistaken for true
   virtue, not only because those things are approved by it that have the
   nature of virtue, and the things disliked have the nature of vice; but
   because here is a great resemblance of virtuous approbation, it being
   complacence from love; the difference only lying in this, that it is
   not from love to being in general, but from self-love.

   There is also, as before shown, a liking of some virtues, and a dislike
   of some vices, from the influence of the natural instinct of pity. This
   we are apt to mistake for the exercise of true virtue on many accounts.
   Here is not only a kind of complacence, and the objects of complacence
   have the nature of virtue, and the virtues themselves are very amiable,
   such as humanity, mercy, tenderness of heart, &c. and the contrary very
   odious; but besides, the approbation is not merely from self-love, but
   from compassion; an affection that respects others, and resembles
   benevolence, as before explained.

   Another reason why the things mentioned are mistaken for true virtue,
   is, that there is indeed a true negative moral goodness in them. By a
   negative moral goodness, I mean the negation or absence of true moral
   evil. They have this negative moral goodness, because being without
   them would be an evidence of a much greater moral evil. Thus the
   exercise of natural conscience in such and such degrees, wherein
   appears such a measure of sensibility, though it be not of the nature
   of real positive virtue, or true moral goodness, yet has a negative
   moral goodness; because in the present state of things, it is an
   evidence of the absence of that higher degree of wickedness, which
   causes great insensibility, or stupidity of conscience. For sin is not
   only against a spiritual and divine sense of virtue, but is also
   against the dictates of that moral sense which is in natural
   conscience. No wonder, that this sense, being long opposed and often
   conquered, grows weaker. All sin has its source from selfishness, or
   from self-love, not subordinate to a regard to being in general. And
   natural conscience chiefly consists in a sense of desert, or the
   natural agreement between sin and misery. But if self were indeed all,
   and so more considerable than all the world besides, there would be no
   ill desert in a man regarding himself above all, and making all other
   interests give place to private interest. And no wonder that men, by
   long acting from the selfish principle, and by being habituated to
   treat themselves as if they were all, increase in pride, and come to
   look on themselves as all, and so to lose entirely the sense of ill
   desert in their making all other interests give place to their own. And
   no wonder that any, by often repeating acts of sin without punishment,
   or visible appearance of approaching punishment, have less and less
   present sense of the connexion of sin with punishment.

   That sense which an awakened conscience has of the desert of sin,
   consists chiefly in a sense of its desert of resentment from the Deity,
   the fountain and head of universal existence. But no wonder that, by a
   long continued worldly and sensual life, men more and more lose all
   sense of the Deity, who is a spiritual and invisible Being. The mind
   being long involved in, and engrossed by, sensitive objects, becomes
   sensual in all its operations, and excludes all views and impressions
   of spiritual objects, and is unfit for their contemplation. Thus
   conscience and general benevolence, are entirely different principles;
   and thus a sense of conscience differs from the holy complacence of a
   benevolent and truly virtuous heart. Yet wickedness may by long
   habitual exercise greatly diminish a sense of conscience. so that there
   may be negative moral goodness, in sensibility of conscience, as it may
   be an argument of the absence of that higher degree of wickedness,
   which causeth stupidity of conscience.

   So with respect to natural gratitude; though there may be no virtue
   merely in loving them that love us, yet the contrary may be an evidence
   of a great degree of depravity, as it may argue a higher degree of
   selfishness, so that a man is come to look upon himself as all, and
   others as nothing, and so their respect and kindness as nothing. Thus
   an increase of pride diminishes gratitude. So doth sensuality, or the
   increase of sensual appetites; which, coming more and more under the
   power and impression of sensible objects, tends by degrees to make the
   mind insensible to any thing else. Those appetites take up the whole
   soul; and, through habit and custom, the water is all drawn out of
   other channels, in which it naturally flows, and is all carried as it
   were into one channel.

   In like manner, natural affection, and natural pity, though not of the
   nature of virtue, may be diminished greatly by the increase of pride
   and sensuality; and, as the consequence of this, be habitually disposed
   to envy, malice, &c. These lusts, when they prevail to a high degree,
   may overcome and diminish the exercise of those natural principles;
   even as they often overcome and diminish common prudence in a man, who
   seeks his own private interest in point of health, wealth, or honour;
   and yet no one will think it proves that a man being cunning in seeking
   his own personal and temporal interest, has any thing of the nature and
   essence of true virtue.

   Another reason why these natural principles and affections are mistaken
   for true virtue, is, that in several respects they have the same effect
   which true virtue tends to; especially in these two ways:

   1. The present state of the world is so constituted by the wisdom and
   goodness of its supreme Ruler, that these natural principles, for the
   most part, tend to the good of mankind. So do natural pity, gratitude,
   parental affection, &c. Herein they agree with the tendency of general
   benevolence, which seeks and tends to the general good. But this is no
   proof that these natural principles have the nature of true virtue. For
   self-love is exceeding useful and necessary; and so are the natural
   appetites of hunger, thirst, &c. Yet nobody will assert that these have
   nature of true virtue.

   2. These principles have a like effect with true virtue in this
   respect, that they tend several ways to restrain vice, and prevent many
   acts of wickedness. So natural affection, love to our party, or to
   particular friends, tends to keep us from acts of injustice towards
   these persons; which would be real wickedness. Pity preserves from
   cruelty, which would be real and great moral evil. Natural conscience
   tends to restrain sin in general. But this cannot prove these
   principles themselves to be of the nature of true virtue. For so is
   this present state ordered by a merciful God, that even self-love often
   restrains from acts of true wickedness; and not only so, but puts men
   upon seeking true virtue; yet is not itself true virtue, but is the
   source of all the wickedness that is in the world.

   Another reason why these inferior affections, especially some of them,
   are accounted virtuous, is, that there are affections of the same
   denomination which are truly virtuous. Thus, for instance, there is a
   truly virtuous pity, or a compassion to others, under affliction or
   misery, from general benevolence. Pure benevolence would be sufficient
   to excite pity to another in calamity, if there were no particular
   instinct, or any other principle determining the mind thereto. It is
   easy to see how benevolence, which seeks another's good, should cause
   us to desire his deliverance from evil. And this is a source of pity
   far more extensive than the other. It excites compassion in cases that
   are overlooked by natural instinct; and even in those cases to which
   instinct extends, it mixes its influence with the natural principle,
   and guides and regulates its operations. And when this is the case, the
   pity which is exercised, may be called a virtuous compassion. So there
   is a virtuous gratitude; or a gratitude that arises not only from
   self-love, but from a superior principle of disinterested general
   benevolence. As, when we receive kindness from such as we love already,
   we are more disposed to gratitude, and disposed to greater degrees of
   it, than when the mind is destitute of any such friendly prepossession.
   Therefore, when the superior principle of virtuous love has a governing
   hand, and regulates the affair, it may be called a virtuous gratitude.
   There is also a virtuous love of justice, arising from pure benevolence
   to being in general; as that naturally and necessarily inclines the
   heart, that every particular being should have such a share of
   benevolence as is proportioned to its dignity, consisting in the degree
   of its being, and the degree of its virtue. And thus it is easy to see,
   how there may be a virtuous sense of desert different from what is
   natural and common; and a virtuous conscientiousness, or a sanctified
   conscience. And as, when natural affections have their operations mixed
   with the influence of virtuous benevolence, and are directed and
   determined thereby, they may be called virtuous; so there may be a
   virtuous love of parents to children, and between other near relatives;
   a virtuous love of our town, or country, or nation. Yea, and a virtuous
   love between the sexes, as there may be the influence of virtue mingled
   with instinct; and virtue may govern with regard to the particular
   manner of its operation, and may guide it to such ends as are agreeable
   to the great purposes of true virtue.

   Genuine virtue prevents that increase of the habits of pride and
   sensuality, which tend to diminish the exercises of the useful and
   necessary principles of nature. And a principle of general benevolence
   softens and sweetens the mind, makes it more susceptible of the proper
   influence of the gentler natural instincts, directs every one into its
   proper channel, determines the exercise to the proper manner and
   measure, and guides all to the best purposes. [231]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [231] In this chapter our very ingenious and judicious author has
   assigned several reasons why many things are commonly thought to be
   virtuous which in reality are not so, or have no claim to moral
   goodness in the proper acceptation of these words. It is with some
   reluctance that we notice in this place a writer, who by his masterly
   attack on modern infidelity and atheism, has rendered such important
   service to the cause of truth and virtue: but who seems either to have
   been dissatisfied with these reasons, or to have omitted a strict
   examination of them when duty required it. We shall not here inquire
   into the candour of Mr. Robert Hall's remarks, in associating President
   Edwards with modern infidels on the subject of virtue: nor on the
   congruity of the business, whereby a definition implying, and an
   explication declaring, the love of God to be essential to true virtue,
   is made to coincide with a definition adopted by infidels, and
   consistent with atheism itself. These are his words: "It is somewhat
   singular, that many of the fashionable infidels have hit upon a
   definition of virtue which perfectly coincides with that of certain
   metaphysical divines in America, first invented and defended by that
   most acute reasoner, Jonathan Edwards. They both place virtue
   exclusively in a passion for the general good; or, as Mr. Edwards
   expresses it, love to being in general: so that our love is always to
   be proportioned to the magnitude of its object in the scale of being:
   which is liable to the objections I have already stated, as well as to
   many others which the limits of this note will not permit me to
   enumerate. Let it suffice to remark, (1) That virtue, on these
   principles, is an utter impossibility: for the system of being,
   comprehending the great Supreme, is infinite: and therefore, to
   maintain the proper proportion, the force of particular attachment must
   be infinitely less than the passion for the general good: but the
   limits of the human mind are not capable of any emotions so infinitely
   different in degree. (2) since our views of the extent of the universe
   are capable of perpetual enlargement, admitting the sum of existence is
   ever the same, we must return back at each step to diminish the
   strength of particular affections, or they will become
   disproportionate: and consequently, on these principles, vicious: so
   that the balance must be continually fluctuating, by the weights being
   taken out of one scale and put one into the other. (3) If virtue
   consist exclusively in love to being in general, or attachment to the
   general good, the particular affections are, to every purpose of
   virtue, useless, and even pernicious: for their immediate, nay, their
   necessary tendency is to attract to their objects a proportion of
   attention which far exceeds their comparative value in the general
   scale. To allege that the general good is promoted by them, will be of
   no advantage to the defence of this system, but the contrary, by
   confessing that a greater sum of happiness is attained by a deviation
   from, than an adherence to, its principles: unless its advocates mean
   by the love of being in general, the same thing as the private
   affections, which is to confound all the distinctions of language, as
   well as all the operations of mind. Let it be remembered we have no
   dispute respecting what is the ultimate end of virtue, which is allowed
   on both sides to be the greatest sum of happiness in the universe. The
   question is merely what is virtue itself; or, in other words, what are
   the means appointed for the attainment of that end? There is little
   doubt, from some parts of Mr. Godwin's work, entitled Political
   Justice,' as well as from his early habits of reading, that he was
   indebted to Mr. Edwards for his principal arguments against the private
   affections; though, with a daring consistence, he has pursued his
   principles to an extreme from which that most excellent man would have
   revolted with horror.--The fundamental error of the whole system arose,
   as I conceive, from a mistaken pursuit of simplicity: from a wish to
   construct a moral system, without leaving sufficient scope for the
   infinite variety of moral phenomena and mental combination; in
   consequence of which its advocates were induced to place virtue
   exclusively in some one disposition of mind; and, since the passion for
   the general good is undeniably the noblest and most extensive of all
   others, when it was once resolved to place virtue in any one thing,
   there remained little room to hesitate which should be preferred. It
   might have been worth while to reflect, that in the natural world there
   are two kinds of attraction; one, which holds several parts of
   individual bodies in contact; another, which maintains the union of
   bodies themselves with the general system; and that, though the union
   in the former case is much more intimate than in the latter, each is
   equally essential to the order of the world. Similar to this is the
   relation which the public and private affections bear to each other,
   and their use in the moral system." (Modern Infidelity considered, p.
   62, &c. Note, sixth edition.) On this note, so very uncongenial with
   the body of the work we were going to say, as unseemly, when connected
   with the discourse, as a deforming wart on a fair countenance, justice
   constrains us to make a few remarks. 1. "Singular" indeed would it be
   to find an Atheist, or an infidel, who should even approve of Edwards's
   definition, and still more "singular" to find them maintaining, in
   conformity with his explanation of that definition, that supreme love
   to God is of the essence of true virtue. But so far are their
   definitions from "coinciding," that they differ toto caelo. A passionate
   attachment for the welfare of a country, or "a passion for the general
   good," in any sense wherein this expression can be ascribed to
   infidels, is a representation not more different from that of President
   Edwards, than Mr. Hall is different from Voltaire or D'Alembert. Our
   author's meaning, as explained by himself, is as truly sublime as
   theirs is truly selfish and contracted. For their definition had no
   regard to the Being of beings; but this adorable Being is necessarily
   included in Mr. E's definition, and essential to it. We say, is
   "included," because the Supreme Being, together with every derived
   existence, is contained in "being in general." 2. If by "a metaphysical
   divine" be meant "a most acute reasoner," we feel no objection having
   the term "metaphysical" applied to our author, for few, if any, have
   deserved it better. If error and absurdity appeal to metaphysical
   discussions, and involve the truth in a labyrinth of sophisms, surely
   hard would be the case of a man who should be called by an opprobrious
   name, for venturing into that labyrinth by the light of essential
   principles, in order to detect and expose false reasoning. 3. Mr. H.
   objects to the sentiment, "that our love is always to be proportioned
   to the magnitude of its object in the scale of being." We presume,
   however, he will allow, that the whole system of being is in itself the
   most worthy of being prized, other things being equal. But if so, the
   nature of true virtue requires this regard to the whole system of
   being, compared with its parts. Nor does it follow from this, that the
   same principle in the progress of its operations, disregards the
   smaller circle of attachments. Surely a virtuous person, loving God
   supremely, is not, on that account, less qualified for personal and
   domestic duties. Besides, Mr. E. does not maintain that our love is
   always to be proportioned to the magnitude of its object in the scale
   of being, except where other things are equal. This he expressly and
   repeatedly mentions--"other things being equal." To this important
   distinction Mr. H. does not appear to have adverted; his representation
   of the case, therefore, is defective, and calculated to mislead the
   unwary. 4. Mr. H's statement in the first objection, does not
   distinguish between the nature of the attachment and its force or
   degree. A little reflection will fully show, that these are entirely
   distinct considerations. The greatest force, or the highest degree of
   attachment, may exist, when the nature of it is not at all virtuous.
   If, indeed, attachment be made to include accurate knowledge, a divine
   relish, and deliberate esteem in appreciating the worth of any object,
   then the degree of attachment may be justly considered as proportionate
   to the "magnitude of the object in the scale of being," but not
   otherwise. A truly virtuous mother, for instance, may have a great
   force of affection for her child, or husband, and be more conscious of
   it than of her love to God: but let her be put to the test of
   deliberate esteem, and she would sooner part with child, husband, or
   life itself, than renounce her supreme love to God. 5. Our author's
   representation of true virtue, by no means implies, as Mr. H. supposes,
   that the degree or force of attachment, in its operation, should bear
   an exact proportion to the magnitude of its object. The nature of
   virtue indeed is to be denominated according to its object, but its
   degree must necessarily be measured pro captu agentis. The nature of
   love to God may be the same in the heart of a child, as in that of an
   angel, because the object of it is the same: but the degree of it will
   be as differently varied as the views and capacities of the subjects.
   It is not a little surprising how Mr. H. came to imagine, that our
   author held the sentiment he is pleased to ascribe to him, a sentiment
   so absurd as to be held, we apprehend, by no person in the world: a
   sentiment which requires an infinite force of affection from a finite
   being, an affection equal in degree to that of his Maker. 6. So far is
   the exercise of virtue, according to Mr. E's definition, from being an
   impossibility, that we think he has fully proved, there can be no true
   virtue on any other principle. To illustrate this, suppose a man has
   strong attachment to himself, but none to his family: will that force
   of affection constitute him virtuous? Again, suppose his affection,
   with any assignable force, be extended to his family, but repels the
   well-founded claims of a whole nation, can that be virtuous? Or if he
   extend his force of affection to a whole nation, if it repels all the
   human race beside, can it be virtuous? Moreover, suppose his ardent
   affection embrace the whole human kind, can it be virtuous while it
   repels all other created beings? Or if, together with himself, he feels
   an affectionate attachment, in different and proportionate degrees, to
   every created being, but repels the Creator of all, can that forcible
   and orderly affection be denominated truly virtuous? If the reply be in
   the affirmative, then an atheist may be virtuous, which is absurd.
   Therefore, attachment to the Supreme Being. or to being in general, is
   essential to the very nature of true virtue. 7. No one yet denied,
   except those who deny the being of a God, that supreme love to him is
   virtuous, if any thing be so. The great Supreme is infinite, and if he
   ought not to be loved according to his greatness, what constitutes the
   crime of Idolatry? And if supreme love to an infinite being were
   inconsistent with subordinate attachments, we ought to extinguish the
   supremacy of our love to God, before we could discharge our duty to our
   fellow-creatures, which every one must allow to be preposterous. 8. As
   the second objection is founded on the same principle which was assumed
   in the first, it has been already virtually answered. But it may be
   controverted on another account. That "extended views" diminish the
   strength of particular affections, does not appear consonant with
   experience. Is it consistent with experience, that the acquisition of a
   second friend must rob the first of a moiety of his friendly affection?
   Does a parent experience any diminution of affection to a first child,
   in proportion to a subsequent increase of number? Has a tenth child but
   a tenth part of a mother's former affection to her first? Does a man
   love his neighbour the less because his views are extended to an
   infinite object? Or when the heart, or supremacy of affection, is fixed
   on God, is virtuous affection to man diminished? 9. Besides, this
   objection proceeds on another gratuitous principle, viz. that there may
   be true virtue, or virtuous affection, when our views of existence do
   not include God. For if we view him, we view an object infinite and
   unchangeable, who is all in all, and the sum of existence. That our
   views of the extent of the created universe are capable of perpetual
   enlargement, is no good reason why "particular affections" should
   fluctuate, become disproportionate, or vicious: any more than the love
   of God should constitute the love of our neighbour criminal. So that
   there is no necessity for "the balance to be continually fluctuating by
   the weights being taken out of one scale and put into the other:"
   except it be by correcting past mistakes, as those do, who, when grown
   up to manhood, put away childish things. 10. Virtuous love, however
   forcible to oneself, to relatives, to a nation, to mankind, or to the
   whole created universe, is not virtuous because of this particular,
   private, or limited attachment, but because of its tendency to God,
   except we prostitute the term virtue to signify something claimed
   equally by the worst and the best of men. And this general attachment,
   or love to God and universal being, does not at all counteract, or even
   lessen, the commendable force of private ones, any more than the force
   of general gravity tends to destroy the force of cohesion. 11. Mr. H's
   third and last objection, like the preceding ones, rests on a mistaken
   apprehension of Mr. E's real sentiment. Mr. H. still confounds the
   nature of attachment with its degree. If virtue, according to Mr. E.
   consists exclusively in love to being in general, his meaning is, that
   no force of affection which has not universal being for its ultimate
   object, can be virtuous, in the most proper sense of the word. He
   cannot mean that there is no virtuous love to particular beings: for,
   in perfect consistency with his views, even a love of ourselves may be
   virtuous, as well as a love of our neighbour. What he maintains, then,
   is, that the love of ourselves, of our neighbour, our nation, or any
   private system whatever, if detached from a tendency of affection to
   universal being, is not truly virtuous. And what is this, more or less,
   than what all judicious divines have maintained, that he who does not
   really love god, does not truly love his neighbour? If Mr. E. uses
   language more philosophically exact, and investigates the principle on
   which a commonly received truth is founded, he certainly deserves
   commendation, rather than blame. 12. On Mr. E's principles, the
   particular affections are so far from being "useless," that their
   operations are not at all affected by those principles, except in being
   more exalted and refined. When the heart is enlarged to the love of
   being in general, it includes all particular objects: and then the
   attachment to them is for the sake of the whole system of being. Thus a
   truly virtuous love of our neighbour, springs from our love to God: or
   without a supreme regard to God, there is no genuine, or, in the
   highest sense, praiseworthy, love to our neighbour. And so far are
   particular affections from being "pernicious," on Mr. E's principles,
   that they are highly useful. Those objects which contain, or are
   apprehended to contain, only a secondary beauty, attract a particular
   affection which is useful in various respects, as explained by our
   author; and those which contain the primary beauty, attract affections
   still more useful. For governors, and subjects, and friends, and
   relatives to feel attachment to their subjects, governors, friends, and
   relatives, must be useful, even when not virtuous; but when these
   attachments are animated, regulated, and ennobled by the love of God,
   or benevolence to universal being, they must be still more so.
   Benevolent affections are like a pleasant flame; a flame which is not
   lessened by an addition of fuel. Zeal at home is not found in fact to
   be weakened by the extension of zealous and benevolent affections
   abroad. National reform, and religious revival, will not be impeded by
   a truly benevolent missionary spirit. Neither will the love of God, or
   of universal being, prove detrimental to "particular affections." 13.
   Respecting the "particular affections," Mr. H. remarks, that "their
   immediate, nay their necessary tendency is, to attract to their object
   a proportion of attention, which far exceeds their comparative value in
   the general scale." But surely "attention" is a very different thing
   from "attachment." A man who is about to buy a horse, has his attention
   attracted very forcibly to the size, the shape, the age, and the action
   of the animal; but does this imply attachment. The word Satan may
   attract our "attention" to the malevolent being signified by it; but
   does this prove that the "immediate, nay the necessary tendency" of the
   word is to attract to this object any degree of "attachment?" It would
   be difficult to find either man, woman, or child, but has much
   "attention attracted' to what he does not esteem, and to which he feels
   no attachment. If a person feels an attachment to any object not
   founded on the "comparative value" of that object, let the "particular
   affection" be denominated as we please, but let us not attach to it the
   idea of true virtue. For why should we be tempted to call that truly
   virtuous which has no relation to God, the object and fountain of all
   excellence? 14. It is but justice to our author to say, that his
   definition of virtue, against which Mr. H. objects, by no means
   countenances that perversion of our powers which is but too justly
   ascribed to modern infidels. No one acting on the principles of this
   Dissertation, will be less amiable in private life, than when acting on
   any others which Mr. H. might point out. This hypothesis, which we
   believe is the scriptural one, and which, in substance, has been
   maintained by theological writers and holy men of every age, pours no
   chilling influence on the affections, encourages no unscriptural
   disregards or antipathies in society, nor does it countenance any
   neglect of private duties under pretence of public utility. We are
   assured, by an authority from which, in the views of Christians, there
   lies no appeal, that "to love God with all our heart," is the first and
   great commandment. We would fain know, if knowable, wherein this
   requisition differs from that which is implied in Mr. E's notion of
   true virtue? Moreover, whether loving God with ALL our heart is
   calculated to render "the particular affections, to every purpose of
   virtue, useless, and even pernicious?" And, once more, whether that act
   of the mind which is compatible with a rejection of what the divine
   oracle thus requires, can in any propriety of language, among
   Christians, be termed virtuous? 15. "To allege," Mr. H. observes, "that
   the general good is promoted by them will be no advantage to the
   defence of this system." We apprehend he means, that some may be
   disposed to allow, that the private affections, though not virtuous,
   may yet promote the general good, on some other account. But the
   objector is under a mistake, if he suppose, as he apparently does, that
   Mr. E. held any notion of true virtue which will admit no private or
   "particular affections" to be virtuous. In fact, the system explained
   in this Dissertation excludes no particular affection: but fully admits
   that any, yea, that all of them may be virtuous, by a proper direction.
   Supreme love to God, or attachment to universal being, is virtue per
   se; but any other affection, however public or private, particular or
   general, is a virtue only relatively; that is, only so far as it is a
   tendency to universal being. When the affection terminates on any
   particular object, without any relation in its tendency to universal
   existence, it is not a mean of ultimate happiness in itself
   commendable, and therefore is not virtuous. 16. "We have no dispute,"
   says Mr. H. "respecting what is the ultimate end of virtue--the
   question is, What is virtue itself?" Very true; what is it? We say, a
   love, an attachment, or a tendency of mind, to general or universal
   existence; whatever be the immediate object of the will or affections.
   If the affection be, for instance, that of parent to a child, however
   strong in its operation, it is no further truly virtuous, than there is
   a regard to God in it: or, a tendency to general being. But what is
   virtue itself, according to Mr. H.? The answer is not given. Had Mr. H.
   thought proper to give us a definition of virtue, we might compare
   notes, and form an estimate. It is much easier to find fault than to
   amend it; but this we feel disposed to promise, that if the objector
   produce what he thinks a better definition than what he opposes, we
   will endeavour too examine it with impartiality. 17. Mr. H. supposes
   that the author of the work entitled "Political Justice" was "indebted
   to Mr. Edwards for his principal arguments against the private
   affections." Surely that author must possess a most perverse kind of
   ingenuity, who could deduce any thing from the works of President
   Edwards against the private affections. Such ingenuity as an infidel
   some times employs, when he is indebted to the writers of the Old or
   New Testament for his principal arguments against religion, and in
   favour of infidelity. 18. "A mistaken pursuit of simplicity," Mr. H.
   supposes, attaches to this system, whereby its advocates "place virtue
   exclusively in some one disposition of mind." We conceive, there is
   just as much propriety in this remark, as in the following: A mistaken
   pursuit of simplicity led a certain writer to place conformity to law
   "exclusively" in some one disposition of mind, where he says, that the
   law is fulfilled in one word, love. We are not aware that it is a
   matter of doubt, whether moral acts, and consequently virtue, proceed
   from the will, or the heart? and, as every exercise of will or
   affection is not virtuous, it requires no long "pursuit of simplicity"
   to determine that the virtuous character of the affection must arise
   from its nature, rather than its degree; and from its being directed to
   a worthy, rather than an unworthy object. 19. Mr. H. illustrates his
   meaning by two kinds of attraction; and so does Mr. E. illustrate his.
   Private affections, or instincts, irrespective of their virtuous
   quality, may be represented by the attraction of cohesion, whereby the
   several parts of individual bodies are held in contact. A truly
   virtuous affection may be represented by the attraction of gravitation,
   which maintains the union of bodies themselves with the general system.
   And, "though the union in the former case is much more intimate, than
   in the latter," and "each is equally essential to the order of the
   world:" yet, private affections, irrespective of their tendency to God,
   can with no more propriety be respected as virtues, than cohesion can
   be termed gravitation.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. VIII.

   In what respects virtue or moral good is founded in sentiment; and how
   far it is founded in the reason and nature of things.

   Virtue is a certain kind of beautiful nature, form or quality. That
   form or quality is called beautiful, which appears in itself agreeable
   or comely, or the view of which is immediately pleasant to the mind. I
   say, agreeable in itself, and immediately pleasant, to distinguish it
   from things which in themselves are not so, but either indifferent or
   disagreeable; which yet appear eligible, and agreeable indirectly, for
   something else with which they are connected. Such indirect
   agreeableness, or eligibleness in things not for themselves, but for
   something else, is not beauty. But when a form or quality appears
   lovely, pleasing, and delightful in itself, then it is called
   beautiful; and this agreeableness or gratefulness of the idea is
   beauty. It is evident, that the way we come by the idea of beauty, is
   by immediate sensation of the gratefulness of the idea called
   beautiful; and not by finding out by argumentation any consequences, or
   other things with which it stands connected; any more than tasting the
   sweetness of honey, or perceiving the harmony of a tune, is by
   argumentation on connexions and consequences. The manner of being
   affected with the immediate presence of the beautiful idea depends not
   on any reasonings about the idea, after we have it, before we can find
   out whether it be beautiful or not; but on the frame of our minds,
   whereby they are so made, that such an idea, as soon as we have it, is
   grateful, or appears beautiful.

   Therefore, if this be all that is meant by them who affirm that virtue
   is founded in sentiment, and not in reason, that they who see the
   beauty of true virtue do not perceive it by argumentation on its
   connexions and consequences, but by the frame of their own minds, or a
   certain spiritual sense given them of God--whereby they immediately
   perceive pleasure in the presence of the idea of true virtue in their
   minds, or are directly gratified in the view or contemplation of this
   object--this is certainly true. But if thereby be meant, that the frame
   of mind, or inward sense given them by God, whereby the mind is
   disposed to delight in the idea of true virtue, is given arbitrarily,
   so that if he had pleased he might have given a contrary sense and
   determination of mind, which would have agreed as well with the
   necessary nature of things, this I think is not true.

   Virtue, as I have observed, consists in the cordial consent or union of
   being to being in general. And that frame of mind, whereby it is
   disposed to relish and be pleased with view of this, is benevolence, or
   union of heart, to being in general; or it is an universally benevolent
   frame of mind. Because, he whose temper is to love being in general,
   must therein have a disposition to approve and be pleased with love to
   being in general. Therefore, now the question is, whether God, in
   giving this temper to a created mind, acts so arbitrarily, that there
   is nothing in the necessary nature of things to hinder, but that a
   contrary temper might have agreed or consisted as well with that nature
   of things as this?

   And in the first place, to assert this would be a plain absurdity, and
   contrary to the very supposition. For here it is supposed, that virtue
   in its very essence consists in agreement or consent of being to being.
   Now certainly agreement itself to being in general must necessarily
   agree better with general existence, than opposition and contrariety to
   it.

   I observe, secondly, that God in giving to the creature such a temper
   of mind, gives that which is agreeable to what is by absolute necessity
   his own temper and nature. For, as observed, God himself is in effect
   being in general; and without all doubt it is in itself necessary, that
   God should agree with himself, be united with himself, or love himself:
   and therefore, when he gives the same temper to his creatures, this is
   more agreeable to his necessary nature, than the opposite temper: yea,
   the latter would be infinitely contrary to his nature.

   Let it be noted, thirdly, that by this temper only can created beings
   be united to and agree with one another. This appears, because it
   consists in consent and union to being in general: which implies
   agreement and union with every particular being, except in such cases
   wherein union with them is by some means inconsistent with union to
   general existence. But certainly, if any particular created being were
   of a temper to oppose being in general, that would infer the most
   universal and greatest possible discord, not only of creatures with
   their Creator, but of created beings one with another.

   Fourthly, There is no other temper but this, whereby a man can agree
   with himself, or be without self-inconsistence, i.e. without having
   some inclinations and relishes repugnant to others; and that for these
   reasons. Every being that has understanding and will necessarily loves
   happiness. For, to suppose any being not to love happiness, would be to
   suppose he did not love what was agreeable to him; which is a
   contradiction: or at least would imply, that nothing was agreeable or
   eligible to him, which is the same as to say that he has no such thing
   as choice, or any faculty of will. So that every being who has a
   faculty of will, must of necessity have an inclination to happiness.
   And therefore, if he be consistent with himself, and has not some
   inclinations repugnant to others, he must approve of those inclinations
   whereby beings desire the happiness of being in general, and must be
   against a disposition to the misery of being in general: because
   otherwise he would approve of opposition to his own happiness. For if a
   temper inclined to the misery of being in general prevailed
   universally, it is apparent, it would tend to universal misery. But he
   that loves a tendency to universal misery, in effect loves a tendency
   to his own misery: and as he necessarily hates his own misery, he has
   then one inclination repugnant to another. And besides, it necessarily
   follows from self-love, that men love to be loved by others; because in
   this others' love agrees with their own love. But if men love hatred to
   being in general, they would in effect love the hatred of themselves;
   and so would be inconsistent with themselves, having one natural
   inclination contrary to another.

   These things may help us to understand why that spiritual and divine
   sense, by which those who are truly virtuous and holy perceive the
   excellency of true virtue, is in the sacred Scriptures called by the
   name of light, knowledge, understanding, &c. If this divine sense were
   a thing arbitrarily given, without any foundation in the nature of
   things, it would not properly be called by such names. For if there
   were no correspondence, or agreement, in such a sense with the nature
   of things, any more than there would have been in a contrary sense, the
   idea we obtain by this spiritual sense could in no respect be said to
   be a knowledge or perception of any thing besides what was in our own
   minds. For this idea would be no representation of any thing without.
   But since it is agreeable, in the respects above mentioned, to the
   nature of things; and especially since it is the representation of the
   moral perfection and excellency of the Divine Being; hereby we have a
   perception of that moral excellency, of which we could have no true
   idea without it. And hereby persons have that true knowledge of God,
   which greatly enlightens the mind in the knowledge of divine things in
   general, and which, as might be shown, if it were necessary to the main
   purpose of this discourse, in many respects, assists persons to a right
   understanding of things in general; viz. to see the nature and truth of
   them, in their proper evidence. Whereas, the want of this spiritual
   sense, and the prevalence of those dispositions which are contrary to
   it, tends to darken and distract the mind, and dreadfully to delude and
   confound men's understandings.

   Nor can that moral sense, common to mankind, which there is in natural
   conscience, be truly said to be no more than a sentiment arbitrarily
   given by the Creator, without any relation to the necessary nature of
   things: but rather, this is established in agreement with the nature of
   things; so established, as no sense of mind that can be supposed of a
   contrary nature and tendency could be. This will appear by these two
   things:

   1. This moral sense--if the understanding be well informed, exercised
   at liberty, and in an extensive manner, without being restrained to a
   private sphere--approves the very same things which a spiritual and
   divine sense approves; and those things only; though not on the same
   grounds, nor with the same kind of approbation. Therefore, as that
   divine sense is agreeable to the necessary nature of things, as already
   shown; so this inferior moral sense, being so far correspondent to
   that, must also so far agree with the nature of things.

   2. It has been shown, that this moral sense consists in approving the
   uniformity and natural agreement there is between one thing and
   another. So that, by the supposition, it is agreeable to the nature of
   things. For therein it consists, viz. a disposition of mind to consent
   to, or like, the agreement of the nature of things, or the agreement of
   the nature and form of one thing with another. And certainly, such a
   temper of mind is more agreeable to the nature of things than an
   opposite temper.

   The use of language is to express our sentiments, or ideas, to each
   other; so that those terms by which things of a moral nature are
   signified, express those moral sentiments which are common to mankind.
   Therefore, that moral sense which is in natural conscience, chiefly
   governs the use of language, and is the mind's rule of language in
   these matters. It is indeed the general natural rule which God has
   given to all men, whereby to judge of moral good and evil. By such
   words, right and wrong, good and evil, when used in a moral sense, is
   meant in common speech, that which deserves praise or blame, respect or
   resentment; and mankind in general have a sense of desert, by this
   natural moral sense.

   Therefore, here is a question which may deserve to be considered:
   seeing sentiment is the rule of language, as to what is called good and
   evil, worthy and unworthy; and it is apparent that sentiment, at least
   as to many particulars, is different, in different persons, especially
   in different nations--that being thought to deserve praise by one,
   which by others is thought to be worthy of blame--how therefore can
   virtue and vice be any other than arbitrary; not at all determined by
   the nature of things, but by the sentiments of men with relation to the
   nature of things?

   In order to the answering of this question with clearness, it may be
   divided into two: viz. Whether men's sentiments of moral good and evil
   are casual and accidental? And, whether their way of using words in
   what they call good and evil, is not arbitrary, without respect to any
   common sentiment conformed to the nature of things?

   As to the first, I would observe, that the general disposition or sense
   of mind, exercised in a sense of desert of esteem or resentment, may be
   the same in all: though as to particular objects and occasions with
   regard to which it is exercised, it may be very various in different
   men, or bodies of men, through the partiality or error that may attend
   the view or attention of the mind. In all, a notion of desert of love
   or resentment, may consist in the same thing, in general--a
   suitableness, or natural uniformity and agreement, between the
   affections and acts of the agent, and the affections and treatment of
   others some way concerned--and yet occasions and objects, through a
   variety of apprehensions about them, and the various manner in which
   they are viewed, by reason of the partial attention of the mind, may be
   extremely various. Besides, example, custom, education, and
   association, may contribute to this, in ways innumerable. But it is
   needless to enlarge here, since what has been said by others, Mr.
   Hutchison in particular, may abundantly show, that the differences
   which are to be found among different persons and nations, concerning
   moral good and evil, are not inconsistent with a general moral sense,
   common to all mankind.

   Nor, secondly, is the use of the words, good and evil, right and wrong,
   when used in a moral sense, altogether unfixed and arbitrary, according
   to the variety of notions, opinions, and views, that occasion the
   forementioned variety of sentiment. For though the signification of
   words is determined by particular use, yet that which governs in the
   use of terms, is general or common use. And mankind, in what they would
   signify by terms, are obliged to aim at a consistent use: because it is
   easily found that the end of language, which is to be a common medium
   of manifesting ideas and sentiments, cannot be obtained any other way
   than by a consistent use of words; both that men should be consistent
   with themselves, and one with another, in the use of them. But men
   cannot call any thing right or wrong, worthy or ill-deserving,
   consistently, any other way than by calling things so, which truly
   deserve praise or blame, i.e. things, wherein all things considered
   there is most uniformity in connecting with them praise or blame. There
   is no other way in which they can use these terms consistently with
   themselves. Thus if thieves or traitors may be angry with informers
   that bring them to justice, and call their behaviour by odious names;
   yet herein they are inconsistent with themselves; because, when they
   put themselves in the place of those who have injured them, they
   approve the same things they condemn. And therefore, such are capable
   of being convinced, that they apply these odious terms in an abusive
   manner. So, a nation that prosecutes an ambitious design of universal
   empire, by subduing other nations with fire and sword, may affix terms,
   that signify the highest degrees of virtue, to the conduct of such as
   show the most engaged, stable, resolute spirit in this affair, and do
   most of this bloody work. But yet they are capable of being convinced,
   that they use these terms inconsistently, and abuse language in it, and
   so having their mouths stopped. And not only will men use such words
   inconsistently with themselves, but also with one another, by using
   them any otherwise than to signify true merit or ill deserving, as
   before explained. For there is no way else wherein men have any notion
   of good or ill desert, in which mankind in general can agree. Mankind
   in general seem to suppose some general standard, or foundation in
   nature, for an universal consistence in the use of the terms whereby
   they express moral good and evil; which none can depart from but
   through error and mistake. This is evidently supposed in all their
   disputes about right and wrong; and in all endeavours used to prove
   that any thing is either good or evil, in a moral sense.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      THE

GREAT CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE

        OF

                                  ORIGINAL SIN

      DEFENDED;

  EVIDENCES OF ITS TRUTH PRODUCED

        AND

    ARGUMENTS TO THE CONTRARY ANSWERED,

        CONTAINING, IN PARTICULAR,

    A REPLY TO THE OBJECTIONS OF DR. JOHN TAYLOR,

        IN HIS BOOK, ENTITLED,

      "THE SCRIPTURE-DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN PROPOSED TO FREE AND CANDID
      EXAMINATION, &C."

   Matt. ix. 12. They that be whole, need not a physician; but they that
   are sick.

   --Et haec non tantum ad peccatores referenda est; quia in omnibus
   maledictionibus primi hominis, omnes ejus generationes conveniunt.-- R.
   Sal. Jarchi.

   Propter concupiscentiam, innatam cordi humano, dicitur. In iniquitate
   genitus sum; atque sensu est, quod â  nativitate implantatum cordi sit
   humano Jetzer harang, figmentum malum.--

   Aben-Ezra.

   --Ad mores natura recurrit Damnatos, fixa et mutari nescia.--

   --Dociles imitandis Turpibus et pravis omnes sumus. Juv.
     __________________________________________________________________

ADVERTISEMENT.

        CONTAINING A

  BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THIS BOOK AND ITS AUTHOR,

    BY THE FIRST EDITOR.

   The Reverend Author of the following piece, was removed by death before
   its publication. But, ere his decease, the copy was finished and
   brought to the press; and a number of sheets passed his own review.
   They who were acquainted with the author, or know his just character,
   and have any taste for the serious theme, will want nothing to be said
   in recommendation of the ensuing tract, but only that Mr. Edwards wrote
   it.

   Several valuable pieces on this subject have lately been published,
   upon the same side of the question. But he had no notice of so much as
   the very first of them, till he had wholly concluded what he had in
   view: nor has it been thought, that any thing already printed should
   supersede this work; being designed on a more extensive
   plan--comprising a variety of arguments, and answers to many
   objections, that fell not in the way of the other worthy writers--and
   the whole done with a care of familiar method and language, as well as
   clear reasoning, accommodated very much to common capacities. It must
   be a sensible pleasure to every friend of truth, that so masterly a
   hand undertook a reply to Dr. Taylor; notwithstanding the various
   answers already given him, both at home and abroad.

   Since it has been thought unfit, that this posthumous book should go
   unattended with a respectful memorial of the author, it is hoped, the
   reader will candidly accept the following [232] :

   As he lived cheerfully resigned in all things to the will of Heaven, so
   he died, or rather, as the Scripture emphatically expresses it, in
   relation to the saint in Christ Jesus, he fell asleep, without the
   least appearance of pain, and with great calm of mind. Indeed, when he
   first perceived the symptoms upon him to be mortal, he is said to have
   been a little perplexed for a while, about the meaning of this
   mysterious conduct of Providence, in calling him out from his beloved
   privacy, to a public scene of action and influence; and then so
   suddenly, just upon his entrance into it, translating him from thence,
   in such a way, by mortality! However, he quickly got believing and
   composing views of the wisdom and goodness of God in this surprising
   event: and readily yielded to the sovereign disposal of Heaven, with
   the most placid submission. Amidst the joy of faith, he departed this
   world, to go and see Jesus, whom his soul loved; to be with him, to
   behold his glory, and rejoice in his kingdom.

   In person, he was tall of stature, and of a slender make. There was
   something extremely delicate in his constitution; which always obliged
   him to observe the exactest rules of temperance, and every method of
   cautious and prudent living. By such means he was helped to go through
   incessant labours, and to bear up under much study, which, Solomon
   observes, is a weariness to the flesh. Perhaps, never was a man more
   constantly retired from the world; giving himself to reading, and
   contemplation. And a wonder it was, that his feeble frame could subsist
   under such fatigues, daily repeated and so long continued. Yet upon
   occasion of some remark upon it by a friend, which was only a few
   months before his death, he told him, "He did not find but he was then
   as well able to bear the closest study, as he was thirty years before;
   and could go through the exercises of the pulpit with as little
   weariness of difficulty." In his youth he appeared healthy, and with a
   good degree of vivacity; but was never robust. In middle life, he
   appeared very much emaciated (I had almost said, mortified) by severe
   studies, and intense applications of thought. Hence his voice was a
   little languid, and too low for a large assembly; though much relieved
   and advantaged by a proper emphasis, just cadence, well-placed pauses,
   and great distinctness in pronunciation.

   He had a piercing eye, the truest index of the mind. His aspect and
   mien had a mixture of severity and pleasantry. He had a natural turn
   for gravity and sedateness; ever contemplative; and in conversation
   usually reserved, but always observant of a genuine decorum in his
   deportment; free from sullen, supercilious, and contemptuous airs, and
   without any appearance of ostentation, levity, or vanity. As to
   imagination, he had enough of it for a great and good man: but the
   gaieties of a luxuriant fancy, so captivating to many, were what he
   neither affected himself, nor was much delighted with in others. He had
   a natural steadiness of temper, and fortitude of mind; which being
   sanctified by the Spirit of God, was ever of vast advantage to him, to
   carry him through difficult services, and support him under trying
   afflictions, in the course of his life. Personal injuries he bore with
   a becoming meekness and patience, and a disposition to forgiveness. The
   humility, modesty, and serenity of his behavior, much endeared him to
   his acquaintance; and made him appear amiable in the eyes of such as
   had the privilege of conversing with him. He was a true and faithful
   friend; and showed much of a disinterested benevolence to his
   neighbour. The several relations sustained by him, he adorned with an
   exemplary conduct; and was solicitous to fill every station with its
   proper duty. He kept up an extensive correspondence, with ministers and
   others, in various parts; and his letters always contained some
   significant and valuable communications. In his private walk, as a
   Christian, he appeared an example of truly rational, consistent,
   uniform religion and virtue: a shining instance of the power and
   efficacy of that holy faith, to which he was so firmly attached, and of
   which he was so strenuous a defender. He exhibited much of
   spirituality, and a heavenly bent of soul. In him one saw the loveliest
   appearance, a rare assemblage of christian graces, united with the
   richest gifts, and mutually subserving and recommending one another.

   As a scholar, his intellectual furniture exceeded what is common,
   considering the disadvantages we labour under in this remote corner of
   the world. He very early discovered a genius above the ordinary size;
   which gradually ripened and expanded, by daily exertion and
   application. He was remarkable for the penetration and extent of his
   understanding, for his powers of criticism and accurate distinction,
   quickness of thought, solidity of judgment, and force of reasoning;
   which made him an acute and strong disputant. By nature he was formed
   for a logician, and a metaphysician; but by speculation, observation,
   and converse, greatly improved. He had a good insight into the whole
   circle of liberal arts and sciences; possessed a very valuable stock of
   classic learning, philosophy, mathematics, history, chronology, &c. By
   the blessing of God on his indefatigable studiousness, to the last, he
   was constantly treasuring up useful knowledge, both human and divine.

   Thus he appears uncommonly accomplished for the arduous and momentous
   province to which he was finally called. And had Heaven indulged us
   with the continuance of his precious life, we have reason to think, he
   would have graced his new station, and been a signal blessing to the
   college, and therein extensively served his generation, according to
   the will of God.

   After all, it must be owned, divinity was his favourite study; and the
   ministry, his most delightful employment. Among the luminaries of the
   church, in these American regions, he was justly reputed a star of the
   first magnitude; thoroughly versed in all the branches of theology,
   didactic, polemic, casuistic, experimental, and practical. In point of
   divine knowledge and skill, he had few equals, and perhaps no superior,
   at least in these parts. On the maturest examination of the different
   schemes of principles, obtaining in the world, and on comparing them
   with the sacred Scriptures, the oracles of God and the great standard
   of truth, he was a Protestant and a Calvinist in judgment; adhering to
   the main articles of the reformed religion with an unshaken firmness,
   and with a fervent zeal, but tempered with charity and candor, and
   governed by discretion. He seemed as little as most men under the bias
   of education, or the influence of bigotry. As to practical and vital
   Christianity, no man appeared to have a better acquaintance with its
   nature and importance; or to understand true religion, and feel its
   power, more than he; which made him an excellently fit guide to
   inquiring souls, and qualified him to guard them against all false
   religion. His internal sense of the intercourse between God and souls,
   being brought by him to the severe test of reason and revelation,
   preserved him, both in sentiment and conduct, from the least tincture
   of enthusiasm. The accomplished divine enters deep into his character.

   As a preacher, he was judicious, solid, and instructive. Seldom was he
   known to bring controversy into the pulpit; or to handle any subject in
   the nicer modes and forms of scholastic dissertation. His sermons, in
   general, seemed to vary exceedingly from his controversial
   compositions. In his preaching, usually, all was plain, familiar,
   sententious, practical; and very distant from any affectation of
   appearing the great man, or displaying his extraordinary abilities as a
   scholar. But still he ever preserved the character of a skilful and
   thorough divine. The common themes of his ministry were the most
   weighty and profitable; and especially, the great truths of the gospel
   of Christ, in which he himself lived by faith. His method in preaching
   was, first to apply to the understanding and judgment, labouring to
   enlighten and convince them; and then to persuade the will, engage the
   affections, and excite the active powers of the soul. His language was
   with propriety and purity, but with a noble negligence; nothing
   ornamented. Florid diction was not the beauty he preferred. His talents
   were of a superior kind. He regarded thoughts, rather than words.
   Precision of sentiment and clearness of expression are the principal
   characteristics of his pulpit style. Neither quick nor slow of speech,
   there was a certain pathos in his utterance, and such skill of address,
   as seldom failed to draw the attention, warm the hearts, and stimulate
   the consciences of the auditory. He studied to show himself approved
   unto God, a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
   word of truth. And he was one who gave himself to prayer, as well as to
   the ministry of the word. Agreeably it pleased God to put great honour
   upon him, by crowning his labours with surprising successes, in the
   conversion of sinners, and the edification of saints, to the
   advancement of the kingdom and glory of God our Savior Jesus Christ.

   As a writer, Mr. Edwards distinguished himself in controversy, to which
   he was called on a variety of occasions. Here the superiority of his
   genius eminently appeared. He knew to arrange his ideas in an exact
   method: and close application of mind, with the uncommon strength of
   his intellectual powers, enabled him in a manner to exhaust every
   subject he took under consideration. He diligently employed the latter
   part of his life in defending Christianity, both in its doctrinal and
   practical views, against the errors of the times. Besides his excellent
   writings in behalf of the power of godliness, which some years ago
   happily prevailed in many parts of the British America, he made a noble
   stand against enthusiasm and false religion, when it threatened to
   spread, by his incomparable treatise upon religious affections. And
   more lately in opposition to Pelagian, Arminian, and other false
   principles, he published a very elaborate Treatise upon the Liberty of
   the human Will. A volume, that has procured him the eulogy of eminent
   divines abroad. Several professors of divinity in the Dutch
   universities very lately sent him their thanks, for the assistance he
   had given them in their inquiry into some controverted points; having
   carried his own further than any author they had ever seen. And now
   this volume of his, on the great christian doctrine of original sin, is
   presented to public view; which, though studiously adapted to lower
   capacities, yet carries in it the evident traces of his great genius,
   and seems with superior force of argument to have entirely baffled the
   opponent.

   His writings will perpetuate his memory, and make his name blossom in
   the dust. The blessing of Heaven attending the perusal of them, will
   make them effectually conducive to the glory of God, and the good of
   souls; which will brighten the author's crown, and add to his joy, in
   the day of future retribution.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [232] As we have given a full Memoir in the first volume, those
   particulars which were contained in this brief account, and which are
   more fully and accurately narrated there, are omitted, in order to
   avoid needless repetition.
     __________________________________________________________________

        THE

  AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

   The following Discourse in intended, not merely as an answer to any
   particular book written against the doctrine of Original Sin, but as a
   general defence of that great important doctrine. Nevertheless, I have
   in this defence taken notice of the main things said against this
   doctrine, by such of the more noted opposers of it as I have had
   opportunity to read: particularly those two late writers, Dr. Turnbull
   and Dr. Taylor, of Norwich; but especially the latter, in what he has
   published in those two books of his, the first entitled, The
   Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin proposed to free and candid
   Examination; the other, his Key to the Apostolic Writings, with a
   Paraphrase and Notes on the Epistle to the Romans. I have closely
   attended to Dr. Taylor's Piece on Original Sin, in all its parts, and
   have endeavored that no one thing there said, of any consequence in
   this controversy, should pass unnoticed, or that any thing which has
   the appearance of an argument, in opposition to this doctrine, should
   be left unanswered. I look on the doctrine as of great importance;
   which every body will doubtless own it is, if it be true. For, if the
   case be such indeed, that all mankind are by nature in a state of total
   ruin, both with respect to the moral evil of which they are the
   subjects, and the afflictive evil to which they are exposed, the one as
   the consequence and punishment of the other; then, doubtless, the great
   salvation by christ stands in direct relation to this ruin, as the
   remedy to the disease; and the whole gospel, or doctrine of salvation,
   must suppose it; and all real belief, or true notion of that gospel,
   must be built upon it. Therefore, as I think the doctrine is most
   certainly both true and important, I hope, my attempting a vindication
   of it, will be candidly interpreted; and that what I have done towards
   its defence, will be impartially considered, by all that will give
   themselves the trouble to read the ensuing discourse; in which it is
   designed to examine every thing material throughout the Doctor's whole
   book, and many things in that other book, containing his Key and
   Exposition on Romans; as also many things written in opposition to this
   doctrine by some other modern authors. Moreover, my discourse being not
   only intended for an answer to Dr. Taylor, and other opposers of the
   doctrine of original sin, but for a general defence of that doctrine;
   producing the evidence of the truth of the doctrine, as well as
   answering objections made against it; I hope this attempt of mine will
   not be thought needless, nor be altogether useless, notwithstanding
   other publications on the subject.

   I would also hope, that the extensiveness of the plan of the following
   treatise will excuse the length of it. And that when it is considered,
   how much was absolutely requisite to the full executing of a design
   formed on such a plan; how much has been written against the doctrine
   of original sin, and with what plausibility; how strong the prejudices
   of many are in favour of what is said in opposition to this
   doctrine--and that it cannot be expected, any thing short of a full
   consideration of almost every argument advanced by the main opposers,
   especially by this late and specious writer, Dr. Taylor, will satisfy
   many readers--how much must unavoidably be said in order to a full
   handling of the arguments in defence of the doctrine; and how important
   the doctrine must be, if true; I trust, the length of the following
   discourse will not be thought to exceed what the case really required.
   However, this must be left to the judgment of the intelligent and
   candid reader.

   Stockbridge, May 26, 1757.

   Note:--When the page is referred to in this manner, p. 40. p. 50.
   without mentioning the book, thereby is to be understood such a page in
   Dr. Taylor's Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin. S. intends the
   Supplement. When the word Key is used to signify the book referred to,
   thereby is to be understood Dr. Taylor's KEY to the Apostolic Writings.
   This mark [§] with figures or a number annexed, signifies such a
   section or paragraph in his Key. When after mentioning Preface to Par.
   on Epist. to Romans, there is subjoined p. 145. 47. or the like,
   thereby is intended page and paragraph, page 145, paragraph 47. The
   letter T. alone, is used to signify Dr. Taylor's name, and no other.

        THE

GREAT CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE

        OF

  ORIGINAL SIN DEFENDED.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART I.

   wherein are considered some evidences of original sin from facts and
   events, as founded by observation and experience, together with
   representations and testimonies of holy scripture, and the confession
   and assertion of opposers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. I.

   THE EVIDENCE OF ORIGINAL SIN FROM WHAT APPEARS IN FACT OF THE
   SINFULNESS OF MANKIND.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   All mankind constantly, in all ages, without fail in any one instance,
   run into that moral evil, which is in effect their own utter and
   eternal perdition in a total privation of god's favour, and suffering
   of his vengeance and wrath.

   By Original Sin, as the phrase has been most commonly used by divines,
   is meant the innate sinful depravity of the heart. But yet when the
   doctrine of original sin is spoken of, it is vulgarly understood in
   that latitude, which includes not only the depravity of nature, but the
   imputation of Adam's first sin; or, in other words, the liableness or
   exposedness of Adam's posterity, in the divine judgment, to partake of
   the punishment of that sin. So far as I know, most of those who have
   held one of these, have maintained the other; and most of those who
   have opposed one, have opposed the other; both are opposed by the
   author chiefly attended to in the following discourse, in his book
   against original sin: and it may perhaps appear in our future
   consideration of the subject, that they are closely connected; that the
   arguments which prove the one establish the other, and that there are
   no more difficulties attending the allowing of one, than the other.

   I shall, in the first place, consider this doctrine more especially
   with regard to the corruption of nature; and as we treat of this, the
   other will naturally come into consideration, in the prosecution of the
   discourse, as connected with it. As all moral qualities, all principles
   either of virtue or vice, lie in the disposition of the heart, I shall
   consider whether we have any evidence, that the heart of man is
   naturally of a corrupt and evil disposition. This is strenuously denied
   by many late writers, who are enemies to the doctrine of original sin;
   and particularly by Dr. Taylor.

   The way we come by the idea of any such thing as disposition or
   tendency, is by observing what is constant or general in event;
   especially under a great variety of circumstances; and above all, when
   the effect or event continues the same through great and various
   opposition, much and manifold force and means used to the contrary not
   prevailing to hinder the effect. I do not know, that such a prevalence
   of effects is denied to be an evidence of prevailing tendency in causes
   and agents; or that it is expressly denied by the opposers of the
   doctrine of original sin, that if, in the course of events, it
   universally or generally proves that mankind are actually corrupt, this
   would be an evidence of a prior corrupt propensity in the world of
   mankind; whatever may be said by some, which, if taken with its plain
   consequences, may seem to imply a denial of this; which may be
   considered afterwards. But by many the fact is denied; that is, it is
   denied, that corruption and moral evil are commonly prevalent in the
   world: on the contrary, it is insisted on, that good preponderates, and
   that virtue has the ascendant.

   To this purpose, Dr. Turnbull says, [233] "With regard to the
   prevalence of vice in the world, men are apt to let their imagination
   run out upon all the robberies, piracies, murders, perjuries, frauds,
   massacres, assassinations they have either heard of, or read in
   history; thence concluding all mankind to be very wicked. As if a court
   of justice were a proper place to make an estimate of the morals of
   mankind, or an hospital of the healthfulness of a climate. But ought
   they not to consider, that the number of honest citizens and farmers
   far surpasses that of all sorts of criminals in any state, and that the
   innocent and kind actions of even criminals themselves surpass their
   crimes in numbers; that it is the rarity of crimes, in comparison of
   innocent or good actions, which engages our attention to them, and
   makes them to be recorded in history, while honest, generous domestic
   actions are overlooked, only because they are so common? as one great
   danger, or one month's sickness, shall become a frequently repeated
   story during a long life of health and safety.--Let not the vices of
   mankind be multiplied or magnified. Let us make a fair estimate of
   human life, and set over against the shocking, the astonishing
   instances of barbarity and wickedness that have been perpetrated in any
   age, not only the exceeding generous and brave actions with which
   history shines, but the prevailing innocency, good-nature, industry,
   felicity, and cheerfulness of the greater part of mankind at all times;
   and we shall not find reason to cry out, as objectors against
   Providence do on this occasion, that all men are vastly corrupt, and
   that there is hardly any such thing as virtue in the world. Upon a fair
   computation, the fact does indeed come out, that very great villanies
   have been very uncommon in all ages, and looked upon as monstrous; so
   general is the sense and esteem of virtue."--It seems to be with a like
   view that Dr. Taylor says, "We must not take the measure of our health
   and enjoyments from a lazar-house, nor of our understanding from
   Bedlam, nor of our morals from a gaol." (P. 77. S.)

   With respect to the propriety and pertinence of such a representation
   of things, and its force as to the consequence designed, I hope we
   shall be better able to judge, and in some measure to determine,
   whether the natural disposition of the hearts of mankind be corrupt or
   not, when the things which follow have been considered. But for the
   greater clearness, it may be proper here to premise one consideration,
   that is of great importance in this controversy, and is very much
   overlooked by the opposers of the doctrine of original sin in their
   disputing against it.

   That it is to be looked upon as the true tendency of the innate
   disposition of man's heart, which appears to be its tendency, when we
   consider things as they are in themselves, or in their own nature,
   without the interposition of divine grace. Thus, that state of man's
   nature, that disposition of the mind, is to be looked upon as evil and
   pernicious, which, as it is in itself, tends to extremely pernicious
   consequences, and would certainly end therein, were it not that the
   free mercy and kindness of God interposes to prevent that issue. It
   would be very strange if any should argue, that there is no evil
   tendency in the case, because the mere favour and compassion of the
   Most High may step in and oppose the tendency, and prevent the sad
   effect. Particularly, if there be any thing in the nature of man,
   whereby he has an universal unfailing tendency to that moral evil,
   which, according to the real nature and true demerit of things, as they
   are in themselves, implies his utter ruin, that must be looked upon as
   an evil tendency or propensity; however divine grace may interpose, to
   save him from deserved ruin, and to overrule things to an issue
   contrary to that which they tend to of themselves. Grace is sovereign,
   exercised according to the good pleasure of God, bringing good out of
   evil. The effect of it belongs not to the nature of things themselves,
   that otherwise have an ill tendency, any more than the remedy belongs
   to the disease; but is something altogether independent on it,
   introduced to oppose the natural tendency, and reverse the course of
   things. But the event to which things tend, according to their own
   demerit, and according to divine justice, is the event to which they
   tend in their own nature; as Dr. T.'s own words fully imply, (Pref. to
   Par. on Rom. p. 131.) "God alone (says he) can declare whether he will
   pardon or punish the ungodliness and unrighteousness of mankind, which
   is in its own nature punishable." Nothing is more precisely according
   to the truth of things, than divine justice: it weighs things in an
   even balance; it views and estimates things no otherwise than they are
   truly in their own nature. Therefore undoubtedly that which implies a
   tendency to ruin, according to the estimate of divine justice, does
   indeed imply such a tendency in its own nature.

   And then it must be remembered, that it is a moral depravity we are
   speaking of; and therefore when we are considering whether such
   depravity do not appear by a tendency to a bad effect or issue, it is a
   moral tendency to such an issue, that is the thing to be taken into the
   account. A moral tendency or influence is by desert. Then may it be
   said, man's nature or state is attended with a pernicious or
   destructive tendency, in a moral sense, when it tends to that which
   deserves misery and destruction. And therefore it equally shows the
   moral depravity of the nature of mankind in their present state,
   whether that nature be universally attended with an effectual tendency
   to destructive vengeance actually executed, or to their deserving
   misery and ruin, or their just exposedness, to destruction, however
   that fatal consequence may be prevented by grace or whatever the actual
   event be.

   One thing more is to be observed here, that the topic mainly insisted
   on by the opposers of the doctrine of original sin, is the justice of
   God; both in their objections against the imputation of Adam's sin, and
   also against its being so ordered, that men should come into the world
   with a corrupt and ruined nature, without having merited the
   displeasure of their Creator by any personal fault. But the latter is
   not repugnant to God's justice, if men actually are born into the world
   with a tendency to sin, and to misery and ruin for their sin, which
   actually will be the consequence, unless mere grace steps in and
   prevents it. If this be allowed, the argument from justice is given up:
   For it is to suppose, that their liableness to misery and ruin comes in
   a way of justice; otherwise there would be no need of the interposition
   of divine grace to save them. Justice alone would be sufficient
   security, if exercised, without grace. It is all one in this dispute
   about what is just and righteous, whether men are born in a miserable
   state, by a tendency to ruin, which actually follows, and that justly;
   or whether they are born in such a state as tends to a desert of ruin,
   which might justly follow, and would actually follow, did not grace
   prevent. For the controversy is not, what grace will do, but what
   justice might do.

   I have been the more particular on this head, because it enervates many
   of the reasonings and conclusions by which Dr. T. makes out his scheme;
   in which he argues from that state which mankind are in by divine
   grace, yea, which he himself supposes to be by divine grace; and yet
   not making any allowance for this, he from hence draws conclusions
   against what others suppose of the deplorable and ruined state mankind
   are in by the fall. [234] Some of his arguments and conclusions to this
   effect, in order to be made good, must depend on such a supposition as
   this;--that God's dispensations of grace, are rectifications or
   amendments of his foregoing constitutions and proceedings, which were
   merely legal; as though the dispensations of grace, which succeed those
   of mere law, implied an acknowledgment, that the preceding legal
   constitution would be unjust, if left as it was, or at least very hard
   dealing with mankind; and that the other were of the nature of a
   satisfaction to his creatures, for former injuries, or hard treatment.
   So that, put together the injury with the satisfaction, the legal and
   injurious dispensation, taken with the following good dispensation,
   which our author calls grace, and the unfairness or improper severity
   of the former, amended by the goodness of the latter, both together
   made up one righteous dispensation.

   The reader is desired to bear in mind what I have said concerning the
   interposition of divine grace not altering the nature of things, as
   they are in themselves. Accordingly, when I speak of such and such an
   evil tendency of things, belonging to the present nature and state of
   mankind, understand me to mean their tendency as they are in
   themselves, abstracted from any consideration of that remedy the
   sovereign and infinite grace of God has provided.--Having premised
   these things, I now assert, that mankind are all naturally in such a
   state, as is attended, without fail, with this consequence or issue;
   that they universally run themselves into that which is, in effect,
   their own utter eternal perdition, as being finally accursed of God,
   and the subjects of his remediless wrath through sin.--From which I
   infer, that the natural state of the mind of man is attended with a
   propensity of nature, which is prevalent and effectual, to such an
   issue; and that therefore their nature is corrupt and depraved with a
   moral depravity, that amounts to and implies their utter undoing.

   Here I would first consider the truth of the proposition; and then
   would show the certainty of the consequences which I infer from it. If
   both can be clearly and certainly proved, then I trust, none will deny
   but that the doctrine of original depravity is evident, and so the
   falseness of Dr. T.'s scheme demonstrated; the greatest part of whose
   book, called the Scripture Doctrine of Original Sin, &c. is against the
   doctrine of innate depravity. In p. 107. S. he speaks of the conveyance
   of a corrupt and sinful nature to Adam's posterity as the grand point
   to be proved by the maintainers of the doctrine of original sin.

   In order to demonstrate what is asserted in the proposition laid down,
   there is need only that these two things should be made manifest: one
   is this fact, that all mankind come into the world in such a state, as
   without fail comes to this issue, namely, the universal commission of
   sin; or that every one who comes to act in the world as a moral agent,
   is, in a greater or less degree, guilty of sin. The other is, that all
   sin deserves and exposes to utter and eternal destruction, unto God's
   wrath and curse; and would end in it, were it not for the interposition
   of divine grace to prevent the effect. Both which can be abundantly
   demonstrated to be agreeable to the Word of God, and to Dr. T.'s own
   doctrine.

   That everyone of mankind, at least such as are capable of acting as
   moral agents, are guilty of sin, (not now taking it for granted that
   they come guilty into the world,) is most clearly and abundantly
   evident from the Holy Scriptures: 1 Kings viii. 46. "If any man sin
   against thee; for there is no man that sinneth not." Eccl. vii.
   20."There is not a just man upon earth that doeth good, and sinneth
   not."Job ix. 2, 3."I know it is so of a truth (i.e. as Bildad had just
   before said, that God would not cast away a perfect man, &c.) but how
   should man be just with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot
   answer him one of a thousand." To the like purpose, Psal. cxliii. 2.
   "Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no
   man living be justified." So the words of the apostle, (in which he has
   apparent reference to those of the Psalmist,) Rom. iii.19, 20. "That
   every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God.
   Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in
   his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin." So, Gal. ii.16. 1
   John i. 7-10 "If we walk in the light, the blood of Christ cleanseth us
   from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
   the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
   to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If
   we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not
   in us." In this and innumerable other places, confession and repentance
   of sin are spoken of as duties proper for all; as also prayer to God
   for pardon of sin; also forgiveness of those that injure us, from that
   motive, that we hope to be forgiven of God. Universal guilt of sin
   might also be demonstrated from the appointment, and the declared use
   and end of the ancient sacrifices; and also from the ransom, which
   every one that was numbered in Israel, was directed to pay, to make
   atonement for his soul. (Exod. xxx. 11-16.) All are represented, not
   only as being sinful, but as having great and manifold iniquity. (Job
   ix. 2, 3. James. iii.1, 2.)

   There are many scriptures which both declare the universal sinfulness
   of mankind, and also that all sin deserves and justly exposes to
   everlasting destruction, under the wrath and curse of God; and so
   demonstrate both parts of the proposition I have laid down. To which
   purpose that passage in Gal. iii. 10. is exceeding full: "For as many
   as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is written,
   Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written
   in the book of the law, to do them." How manifestly is it implied in
   the apostle's meaning here, that there is no man but what fails in some
   instances of doing all things that are written in the book of the law,
   and therefore as many as have their dependence on their fulfilling the
   law, are under that curse which is pronounced on them that fail of it!
   And hence the apostle infers in the next verse, "that no man is
   justified by the law in the sight of God:" [235] as he had said before
   in the preceding chapter, ver. 16. "By the works of the law shall no
   flesh be justified." The apostle shows us he understands, that by this
   place which he cites from Deuteronomy, "the Scripture hath concluded,
   or shut up, all under sin." Gal. iii. 22. So that here we are plainly
   taught, both that every one of mankind is a sinner, and that every
   sinner is under the curse of God.

   To the like purpose is Rom. iv. 14. also 2 Cor. iii. 6, 7, 9. where the
   law is called "the letter that kills, the ministration of death, and
   the ministration of condemnation." The wrath, condemnation, and death,
   which is threatened in the law to all its transgressors, is final
   perdition, the second death, eternal ruin; as is very plain, and indeed
   is confessed. And this punishment which the law threatens for every
   sin, is a just punishment; being what every sin truly deserves; God's
   law being a righteous law, and the sentence of it a righteous sentence.

   All these things are what Dr. Taylor himself confesses and asserts. He
   says, that the law of God requires perfect obedience. (Note on Rom.
   vii. 6. p. 308.) "God can never require imperfect obedience, or by his
   holy law allow us to be guilty of any one sin, how small soever. And if
   the law, as a rule of duty, were in any respect abolished, then we
   might in some respects transgress the law, and yet not be guilty of
   sin. The moral law, or law of nature, is the truth, everlasting,
   unchangeable; and therefore, as such, can never be abrogated. On the
   contrary, our Lord Jesus Christ has promulgated it anew under the
   gospel, fuller and clearer than it was in the mosaical constitution, or
   any where else:--having added to its precepts the sanction of his own
   divine authority." And many things which he says imply, that all
   mankind do in some degree transgress the law. In p. 228. speaking of
   what may be gathered from Rom. vii. and viii. he says, "We are very
   apt, in a world full of temptation, to be deceived, and drawn into sin
   by bodily appetites, &c. And the case of those who are under a law
   threatening death to every sin, must be quite deplorable, if they have
   no relief from the mercy of the lawgiver."

   But this is very fully declared in what he says in his note on Rom. v.
   20. p. 297. His words are as follows: "Indeed, as a rule of action
   prescribing our duty, it (the law) always was and always must be a rule
   ordained for obtaining life; but not as a rule of justification, not as
   it subjects to death for every transgression. For if it could in its
   utmost rigor have given us life, then, as the apostle argues, it would
   have been against the promises of God. For if there had been a law, in
   the strict and rigorous sense of law, which could have made us live,
   verily justification should have been by the law. But he supposes, no
   such law was ever given: and therefore there is need and room enough
   for the promises of grace; or as he argues, Gal. ii. 21. it would have
   frustrated, or rendered useless, the grace of God. For if justification
   came by the law, then truly Christ is dead in vain, then he died to
   accomplish what was, or might have been, effected by law itself without
   his death. Certainly the law was not brought in among the Jews to be a
   rule of justification, or to recover them out of a state of death, and
   to procure life by their sinless obedience to it: For in this, as well
   as in another respect, it was weak; not in itself, but through the
   weakness of our flesh, Rom. viii. 3. The law, I conceive, is not a
   dispensation suitable to the infirmity of the human nature in our
   present state; or it doth not seem congruous to the goodness of God to
   afford us no other way of salvation, but by law; which if we once
   transgress, we are ruined for ever. for who then, from the beginning of
   the world, could be saved?" How clear and express are these things,
   that no one of mankind, from the beginning of the world, can ever be
   justified by the law, because every one transgresses it! [236]

   And here also we see, Dr. T. declares, that by the law men are
   sentenced to everlasting ruin for one transgression. To the like
   purpose he often expresses himself. So p. 207. "The law requireth the
   most extensive obedience, discovering sin in all its branches.--It
   gives sin a deadly force, subjecting every transgression to the penalty
   of death; and yet supplieth neither help nor hope to the sinner, but
   leaving him under the power of sin and sentence of death." In p. 213.
   he speaks of the law as extending to lust and irregular desires, and to
   every branch and principle of sin; and even to its latent principles,
   and minutest branches; again (Note on Rom. vii. 6. p. 308.) To every
   sin, how small soever. And when he speaks of the law subjecting every
   transgression to the penalty of death, he means eternal death, as he
   from time to time explains the matter. In p. 212, he speaks of the law
   in the condemning power of it, as binding us in everlasting chains. In
   p. 120. S. he says, that death which is the wages of sin, is the second
   death; and this, p. 78. he explains of final perdition. In his Key, p.
   107. § 296. he says, "The curse of the law subjected men for every
   transgression to eternal death." So in Note on Rom. v. 20. p. 291. "The
   law of Moses subjected those who were under it to death, meaning by
   death, eternal death." These are his words.

   He also supposes, that this sentence of the law, thus subjecting men
   for every, even the least, sin, and every minutest branch and latent
   principle of sin, to so dreadful a punishment, is just and righteous,
   agreeable to truth and the nature of things, or to the natural and
   proper demerits of sin. In this he is very full. Thus in p. 186. P. "It
   was sin (says he) which subjected us to death by the law, justly
   threatening sin with death. Which law was given us, that sin might
   appear; might be set forth in its proper colours; when we saw it
   subjected us to death by a law perfectly holy, just and good; that sin
   by the commandment, by the law, might be represented what it really is,
   an exceeding great and deadly evil." So in note on Rom. v. 20, p. 299.
   "The law or ministration of death, as it subjects to death for every
   transgression, is still of use to show the natural and proper demerit
   of sin." Ibid. p. 292. "The language of the law, dying thou shalt die,
   is to be understood of the demerit of the transgression, that which it
   deserves." Ibid. p. 298. "The law was added, saith Mr. Locke on the
   place, because the Israelites, the posterity of Abraham, were
   transgressors as well as other men, to show them their sins, and the
   punishment and death, which in strict justice they incurred by them.
   And this appears to be a true comment on Rom. vii.13.--Sin, by virtue
   of the law, subjected you to death for this end, that sin, working
   death in us, by that which is holy, just, and good, perfectly consonant
   to everlasting truth and righteousness.--Consequently every sin is in
   strict justice deserving of wrath and punishment; and the law in its
   rigour was given to the Jews, to set home this awful truth upon their
   consciences, to show them the evil and pernicious nature of sin; and
   that being conscious they had broke the law of God, this might convince
   them of the great need they had of the favour of the lawgiver, and
   oblige them, by faith in his goodness, to fly to his mercy, for pardon
   and salvation."

   If the law be holy, just, and good, a constitution perfectly agreeable
   to God's holiness, justice, and goodness; then he might have put it
   exactly in execution, agreeably to all these his perfections. Our
   author himself says, p. 133. S. "How that constitution, which
   establishes a law, the making of which is inconsistent with the justice
   and goodness of God, and the executing of it inconsistent with his
   holiness, can be a righteous constitution, I confess, is quite beyond
   my comprehension."

   Now the reader is left to judge, whether it be not most plainly and
   fully agreeable to Dr. T.'s own doctrine, that there never was any one
   person from the beginning of the world, who came to act in the world as
   a moral agent, and that it is not to be hoped there ever will be any,
   but what is a sinner or transgressor of the law of God; and that
   therefore this proves to be the issue and event of things, with respect
   to all mankind in all ages, that, by the natural and proper demerit of
   their own sinfulness, and in the judgment of the law of God, which is
   perfectly consonant to truth, and exhibits things in their true
   colours, they are the proper subjects of the curse of God, eternal
   death, and everlasting ruin; which must be the actual consequence,
   unless the grace or favour of the lawgiver interpose, and mercy prevail
   for their pardon and salvation. The reader has seen also how agreeable
   this is to the doctrine of the Holy Scripture. If so, and if the
   interposition of divine grace alters not the nature of things as they
   are in themselves, and that it does not in the least affect the state
   of the controversy we are upon--concerning the true nature and tendency
   of the state in which mankind come into the world--whether grace
   prevents the fatal effect or no; I trust, none will deny, that the
   proposition laid down, is fully proved, as agreeable to the Word of
   God, and Dr. T.'s own words; viz. That mankind are all naturally in
   such a state, as is attended, without fail, with this consequence or
   issue, that they universally are the subjects of that guilt and
   sinfulness, which is, in effect, their utter and eternal ruin, being
   cast wholly out of the favour of God, and subjected to his everlasting
   wrath and curse.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [233] Moral Philos. p. 289, 290.

   [234] He often speaks of death and affliction as coming on Adam's
   posterity in consequence of his sin; and in p. 20, 21. and many other
   places, he supposes, that these things come in consequence of his sin,
   not as a punishment or a calamity, but as a benefit. But in p. 23. he
   supposes, those things would be a great calamity and misery, if it were
   not for the resurrection; which resurrection he there, and in the
   following pages, and in many other places, speaks of as being by
   Christ; and often speaks of it as being by the grace of God in Christ.
   P. 63, 64. Speaking of our being subjected to sorrow, labour, and
   death, in consequence of Adam's sin, he represents these as evils that
   are reversed and turned into advantages, and from which we are
   delivered through grace in Christ. And p. 65, 66, 67. he speaks of God
   thus turning death into an advantage through grace in Christ, as what
   vindicates the justice of God in bringing death by Adam. P. 152, 156.
   One thing he alleges against this proposition of the Assembly of
   Divines--That we are by nature bond-slaves to Satan--That God hath been
   providing, from the beginning of the world to this day, various means
   and dispensations, to preserve and rescue mankind from the devil. P.
   168, 169, 170. In answer to that objection against his doctrine. That
   we are in worse circumstances than Adam, he alleges the happy
   circumstances we are under by the provision and means furnished through
   free grace in Christ. P. 228. In answering that argument against his
   doctrine --That there is a law in our members, bringing us into
   captivity to the law of sin and death.Rom. vii --He allows, that the
   case of those who are under a law threatening death for every sin,
   (which law he elsewhere says, shows us the natural and proper demerit
   of sin, and is perfectly consonant to everlasting truth and
   righteousness,) must be quite deplorable, if they have no relief from
   the mercy of the lawgiver. P. 90-93. S. In opposition to what is
   supposed of the miserable state mankind are brought into by Adam's sin,
   he alleges, The noble designs of love, manifested by advancing a new
   and happy dispensation, founded on the obedience and righteousness of
   the Son of God; and that, although by Adam we are subjected to death,
   yet in this dispensation a resurrection is provided; and that Adam's
   posterity are under a mild dispensation of Grace, &c. P. 112. S. He
   vindicates God's dealings with Adam, in placing him at first under the
   rigour of law, transgress and die, (which, as he expresses it, was
   putting his happiness on a foot extremely dangerous,) by saying, that
   as God had before determined in his own breast, so he immediately
   established his covenant upon a quite different bottom, namely, upon
   grace. P. 122, 123. S. Against what R. R. says, That God forsook man
   when he fell, and that mankind after Adam's sin were born without the
   divine favour, &c. he alleges, among other things, Christ's coming to
   be the propitiation for the sins of the whole world--And the riches of
   God's mercy in giving the promise of a Redeemer to destroy the works of
   the devil--That he caught his sinning falling creature in the arms of
   his grace. In his note on Rom. v. 20. p. 297, 298. he says as follows:
   "The law I conceive, is not a dispensation suitable to the infirmity of
   the human nature in our present state; or it doth not seem congruous to
   the goodness of God, to afford us no other way of salvation but by a
   law, which, if we once transgress, we are ruined for ever. For who then
   from the beginning of the world could be saved? And therefore it seems
   to me, that the law was not absolutely intended to be a rule for
   obtaining life, even to Adam in paradise: Grace was the dispensation
   God intended mankind should be under; and therefore Christ was
   fore-ordained before the foundation of the world."--There are various
   other passages in this author's writings of the like kind.

   [235] Gal. iii. 11.

   [236] I am sensible, these things are quite inconsistent with what he
   says elsewhere, of sufficient power in all mankind constantly to do the
   whole duty which God requires of them without a necessity of breaking
   God's law in any degree. (p. 63-68. S.) But, I hope, the reader will
   not think me accountable for his inconsistences.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   It follows from the proposition proved in the foregoing section, that
   all mankind are under the influence of a prevailing effectual tendency
   in their nature, to that sin and wickedness, which implies their utter
   and eternal ruin.

   The proposition laid down being proved, the consequence of it remains
   to be made out, viz. That the mind of man has a natural tendency or
   propensity to that event, which has been show universally and
   infallibly to take place; and that this is a corrupt or depraved
   propensity.--I shall here consider the former part of this consequence,
   namely, Whether such an universal, constant, infallible event is truly
   a proof of any tendency or propensity to that event; leaving the evil
   and corrupt nature of such a propensity to be considered afterwards.

   If any should say, they do not think that its being a thing universal
   and infallible in event, that mankind commit some sin, is a proof of a
   prevailing tendency to sin; because they do good, and perhaps more good
   than evil: Let them remember, that the question at present is not, How
   much sin there is a tendency to; but whether there be a prevailing
   propensity to that issue, which it is allowed all men do actually come
   to--that all fail of keeping the law perfectly--whether there be not a
   tendency to such imperfection of obedience, as always without fail
   comes to pass; to that degree of sinfulness, at least, which all fall
   into; and so to that utter ruin, which that sinfulness implies and
   infers. Whether an effectual propensity to this be worth the name of
   depravity, because the good that may be supposed to balance it, shall
   be considered by and by. If all mankind in all nations and ages, were
   at least one day in their lives deprived of the use of their reason,
   and raving mad; or that all, even every individual person, once cut
   their own throats, or put out their own eyes; it might be an evidence
   of some tendency in the nature or natural state of mankind to such an
   event; though they might exercise reason many more days than they were
   distracted, and were kind to and tender of themselves oftener than they
   mortally and cruelly wounded themselves.

   To determine whether the unfailing constancy of the above-named event
   be an evidence of tendency, let it be considered, What can be meant by
   tendency, but a prevailing liableness or exposedness to such or such an
   event? Wherein consists the notion of any such thing, but some stated
   prevalence or preponderation in the nature or state of causes or
   occasions, that is followed by, and so proves to be effectual to, a
   stated prevalence or commonness of any particular kind of effect? Or
   something in the permanent state of things, concerned in bringing a
   certain sort of event to pass, which is a foundation for the constancy,
   or strongly prevailing probability, of such an event? If we mean this
   by tendency, (and I know not what else can be meant by it, but this, or
   something like), then it is manifest, that where we see a stated
   prevalence of any effect there is a tendency to that effect in the
   nature and state of its causes. A common and steady effect shows, that
   there is somewhere a preponderation, a prevailing exposedness or
   liableness in the state of things, to what comes so steadily to pass.
   The natural dictate of reason shows, that where there is an effect,
   there is a cause, and a cause sufficient for the effect; because, if it
   were not sufficient, it would not be effectual; and that therefore,
   where there is a stated prevalence of the effect, there is a stated
   prevalence in the cause. A steady effect argues a steady cause. We
   obtain a notion of tendency, no other way than by observation: and we
   can observe nothing but events: and it is the commonness or constancy
   of events, that gives us a notion of tendency in all cases. Thus we
   judge of tendencies in the natural world. Thus we judge of the
   tendencies or propensities of nature in minerals, vegetables, animals,
   rational and irrational creatures. A notion of a stated tendency, or
   fixed propensity, is not obtained by observing only a single event. A
   stated preponderation in the cause or occasion, is argued only by a
   stated prevalence of the effect. If a die be once thrown, and it falls
   on a particular side, we do not argue from hence, that that side is the
   heaviest; but if it be thrown without skill or care, many thousands or
   millions of times, and it constantly falls on the same side, we have
   not the least doubt in our minds, but that there is something of
   propensity in the case, by superior weight of that side, or in some
   other respect. How ridiculous would he make himself, who should
   earnestly dispute against any tendency in the state of things to cold
   in the winter, or heat in the summer; or should stand to it, that
   although it often happened that water quenched fire, yet there was no
   tendency in it to such an effect!

   In the case we are upon, human nature, as existing in such an immense
   diversity of persons and circumstances, and never failing in any one
   instance of coming to that issue--that sinfulness, which implies
   extreme misery and eternal ruin--is as the die often cast. For it
   alters not the case in the least, as to the evidence of tendency,
   whether the subject of the constant event be an individual, or a nature
   and kind. Thus, if there be a succession of trees of the same sort,
   proceeding one from another, from the beginning of the world, growing
   in all countries, soils, and climates, all bearing ill fruit; it as
   much proves the nature and tendency of the kind, as if it were only one
   individual tree, that had remained from the beginning of the world,
   often transplanted into different soils, and had continued to bear only
   bad fruit. So, if there were a particular family, which, from
   generation to generation, and through every remove to innumerable
   different countries, and places of abode, all died of a consumption, or
   all run distracted, or all murdered themselves, it would be as much an
   evidence of the tendency of something in the nature or constitution of
   that race, as it would be of the tendency of something in the nature or
   state of an individual, if some one person had lived all that time, and
   some remarkable event had often appeared in him, which he had been the
   agent or subject of from year to year, and from age to age, continually
   and without fail. [237]

   Thus a propensity, attending the present nature or natural state of
   mankind, eternally to ruin themselves by sin, may certainly be inferred
   from apparent and acknowledged fact.--And I would now observe further,
   that not only does this follow from facts acknowledged by Dr. T. but
   the things he asserts, and the expressions which he uses, plainly imply
   that all mankind have such a propensity; yea, one of the highest kind,
   a propensity that is invincible, or a tendency which really amounts to
   a fixed, constant, unfailing necessity. There is a plain confession of
   a propensity or proneness to sin, p. 143.--"Man, who drinketh in
   iniquity like water; who is attended with so many sensual appetites,
   and so APT to indulge them."--And again, p. 228. "we are very apt, in a
   world full of temptation, to be deceived, and drawn into sin by bodily
   appetites." If we are very apt or prone to be drawn into sin by bodily
   appetites, and sinfully to indulge them, and very apt or prone to yield
   to temptation to sin, then we are prone to sin; for to yield to
   temptation to sin is sinful.--In the same page he shows, that on this
   account, and its consequences, the case of those who are under a law,
   threatening death for every sin, must be quite deplorable, if they have
   no relief from the mercy of the lawgiver. Which implies, that their
   case is hopeless, as to an escape from death, the punishment of sin, by
   any other means than God's mercy. And that implies such an aptness to
   yield to temptation, as renders it hopeless that any of mankind should
   wholly avoid it. But he speaks of it elsewhere, over and over, as truly
   impossible, or what cannot be; as in the words before cited in the last
   section, from his note on Rom. v. 20. where he repeatedly speaks of the
   law, which subjects us to death for every transgression, as what cannot
   give life; and states, that if God offered us no other way of
   salvation, no man from the beginning of the world could be saved. In
   the same place he cites with approbation Mr. Locke's words, in which,
   speaking of the Israelites, he says, "All endeavors after righteousness
   was lost labour, since any one slip forfeited life, and it was
   impossible for them to expect ought but death." Our author speaks of it
   as impossible for the law requiring sinless obedience to give life, not
   that the law was weak in itself, but through the weakness of our flesh.
   Therefore he says, he conceives the law not to be a dispensation
   suitable to the infirmity of the human nature in its present state.
   These things amount to a full confession, that the proneness in men to
   sin, and to a demerit of and just exposedness to eternal ruin, is
   universally invincible; or, which is the same thing, amounts to
   invincible necessity; which surely is the highest kind of tendency, or
   propensity: and that not the less, for his laying this propensity to
   our infirmity or weakness, which may seem to intimate some defect,
   rather than any thing positive: and it is agreeable to the sentiments
   of the best divines, that all sin originally comes from a defective or
   privative cause. But sin does not cease to be sin, justly exposing to
   eternal ruin (as implied in Dr. T.'s own words), for arising from
   infirmity or defect; nor does an invincible propensity to sin cease to
   be a propensity to such demerit of eternal ruin, because the proneness
   arises from such a cause.

   It is manifest, that this tendency, which has been proved, does not
   consist in any particular external circumstances that persons are in,
   peculiarly influencing their minds; but is inherent, and is seated in
   that nature which is common to all mankind, which they carry with them
   wherever they go, and still remains the same, however circumstances may
   differ. For it is implied in what has been proved, and shown to be
   confessed, that the same event comes to pass in all circumstances. In
   God's sight no man living can be justified; but all are sinners, and
   exposed to condemnation. This is true of persons of all constitutions,
   capacities, conditions, manners, opinions, and educations; in all
   countries, climates, nations, and ages; and through all the mighty
   changes and revolutions, which have come to pass in the habitable
   world.

   We have the same evidence, that the propensity in this case lies in the
   nature of the subject--and does not arise from any particular
   circumstances--as we have in any case whatsoever; which is only by the
   effects appearing to be the same in all changes of time and place, and
   under all varieties of circumstances. It is in this way only we judge,
   that any propensities, which we observe in mankind , are seated in
   their nature, in all other cases. It is thus we judge of the mutual
   propensity betwixt the sexes, or of the dispositions which are
   exercised in any of the natural passions or appetites, that they truly
   belong to the nature of man; because they are observed in mankind in
   general, through all countries, nations, and ages, and in all
   conditions.

   If any should say, Though it be evident that there is a tendency in the
   state of things to this general event--that all mankind should fail of
   perfect obedience, and should sin, and incur a demerit of eternal ruin;
   and also that this tendency does not lie in any distinguishing
   circumstances of any particular people, person, or age--yet it may not
   lie in man's nature, but in the general constitution and frame of this
   world. Though the nature of man may be good, without any evil
   propensity inherent in it; yet the nature and universal state of this
   world may be full of so many and strong temptations, and of such
   powerful influence on such a creature as man, dwelling in so infirm a
   body, &c. that the result of the whole may be a strong and infallible
   tendency in such a state of things, to the sin and eternal ruin of
   every one of mankind.

   To this I would reply, that such an evasion will not at all avail to
   the purpose of those whom I oppose in this controversy. It alters not
   the case as to this question, Whether man, in his present state, is
   depraved and ruined by propensities to sin. If any creature be of such
   a nature that it proves evil in its proper place, or in the situation
   which God has assigned it in the universe, it is of any evil nature.
   That part of the system is not good, which is not good in its place in
   the system; and those inherent qualities of that part of the system,
   which are not good, but corrupt, in that place, are justly looked upon
   as evil inherent qualities. That propensity is truly esteemed to belong
   to the nature of any being, or to be inherent in it, that is the
   necessary consequence of its nature, considered together with its
   proper situation in the universal system of existence, whether that
   propensity be good or bad. It is the nature of a stone to be heavy; but
   yet, if it were placed, as it might be, at a distance from this world,
   it would have no such quality. But being a stone, is of such a nature,
   that it will have this quality or tendency, in its proper place, in
   this world, where God has made it, it is properly looked upon as a
   propensity belonging to its nature. And if it be a good propensity
   here, in its proper place, then it is a good quality of its nature; but
   if it be contrariwise, it is an evil natural quality. So, if mankind
   are of such a nature, that they have an universal effectual tendency to
   sin and ruin in this world, where God has made and placed them, this is
   to be looked upon as a pernicious tendency belonging to their nature.
   There is, perhaps, scarce any such thing, in beings not independent and
   self-existent, as any power or tendency, but what has some dependence
   on other beings, with which they stand connected in the universal
   system of existence. Propensities are no propensities, any otherwise,
   than as taken with their objects. Thus it is with the tendencies
   observed in natural bodies, such as gravity, magnetism, electricity,
   &c. And thus it is with the propensities observed in the various kinds
   of animals; and thus it is with most of the propensities in created
   spirits.

   It may further be observed, that it is exactly the same thing, as to
   the controversy concerning an agreeableness with God's moral
   perfections of such a disposal of things--that man should come into the
   world in a depraved and ruined state, by a propensity to sin and
   ruin--whether God has so ordered it, that this propensity should lie in
   his nature considered alone, or with relation to its situation in the
   universe, and its connexion with other parts of the system to which the
   Creator has united it; which is as much of God's ordering, as man's
   nature itself, most simply considered.

   Dr. T. (p. 188, 189.) speaking of the attempt of some to solve the
   difficulty of God being the author of our nature, and yet that our
   nature is polluted, by supposing that God makes the soul pure, but
   unites it to a polluted body, (or a body so made, as tends to pollute
   the soul,) he cries out of it as weak and insufficient, and too gross
   to be admitted: For, says he, who infused the soul into the body? And
   if it is polluted by being infused into the body, who is the author and
   cause of its pollution? And who created the body? &c.--But is not the
   case just the same, as to those who suppose that God made the soul
   pure, and places it in a polluted world, or a world tending, by its
   natural state in which it is made, to pollute the soul, or to have such
   an influence upon it, that it shall without fail be polluted with sin,
   and eternally ruined? Here may not I also cry out, on as good grounds
   as Dr. T.--Who placed the soul here in this world? And if the world be
   polluted, or so constituted as naturally and infallibly to pollute the
   soul with sin, who is the cause of this pollution? And, who created the
   world?

   Though in the place now cited, Dr. T. so insists upon it, that God must
   be answerable for the pollution of the soul, if he has infused or put
   the soul into a body that tends to pollute it; yet this is the very
   thing which he himself supposes to be fact, with respect to the soul
   being created by God, in such a body, and in such a world; where he
   says, "We are apt, in a world full of temptation, to be drawn into sin
   by bodily appetites." And if so, according to his way of reasoning, God
   must be the author and cause of this aptness to be drawn into sin.
   Again, p. 143. we have these words, "Who drinketh in iniquity like
   water? Who is attended with so many sensual appetites, and so apt to
   indulge them?" In these words our author in effect says the individual
   things that he exclaims against as so gross, viz. The tendency of the
   body, as God has made it, to pollute the soul, which he has infused
   into it. These sensual appetites, which incline the soul, or make it
   apt, to a sinful indulgence, are either from the body which God hath
   made, or otherwise a proneness to sinful indulgence is immediately and
   originally seated in the soul itself, which will not mend the matter.

   I would lastly observe, that our author insists upon it, p. 42. S. That
   this lower world, in its present state, "Is as it was, when, upon a
   review, God pronounced it, and all its furniture, very good.--And that
   the present form and furniture of the earth is full of God's riches,
   mercy, and goodness, and of the most evident tokens of his love and
   bounty to the inhabitants." If so, there can be no room for evading the
   evidences from fact, of the universal infallible tendency of man's
   nature to sin and eternal perdition; since, on the supposition, the
   tendency to this issue does not lie in the general constitution and
   frame of this world, which God hath made to be the habitation of
   mankind.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [237] Here may be observed the weakness of that objection, made against
   the validity of the argument for a fixed propensity to sin, from the
   constancy and universality of the event, that Adam sinned in one
   instance, without a fixed propensity. Without doubt a single event is
   an evidence, that there was some cause or occasion of that event. But
   the thing we are speaking of, is a fixed cause: propensity is a stated
   continued thing. We justly agree, that a stated effect must have a
   stated cause, and truly observe, that we obtain the notion of tendency,
   or stated preponderation in causes, no other way than by observing a
   stated prevalence of a particular kind of effect. But who ever argues a
   fixed propensity from a single event? And is it not strange arguing,
   that because an event which once comes to pass, does not prove any
   stated tendency, therefore the unfailing constancy of an event is an
   evidence of no such thing? But because Dr. T. makes so much of this
   objection from Adam sinning without a propensity, I shall hereafter
   consider it more particularly, in the beginning of the 9th section of
   this chapter; where will also be considered what is objected from the
   fall of the angels.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   That propensity, which has been proved to be in the nature of all
   mankind, must be a very evil, depraved, and pernicious propensity;
   making it manifest, that the soul of man, as it is by nature, is in a
   corrupt, fallen, and ruined state; which is the other part of the
   consequence, drawn from the proposition laid down in the first section.

   The question to be considered, in order to determine whether man's
   nature be depraved and ruined, is not, Whether he is inclined to
   perform as many good deeds as bad ones? But, to which of these two he
   preponderates, in the frame of his heart, and the state of his nature,
   a state of innocence and righteousness, and favour with God; or a state
   of sin, guiltiness, and abhorrence in the sight of God?--Persevering
   sinless righteousness, or else the guilt of sin, is the alternative, on
   the decision of which depends--according to the nature and truth of
   things, as they are in themselves, and according to the rule of right,
   and of perfect justice--man being approved and accepted of his Maker
   and eternally blessed as good; or his being rejected, and cursed as
   bad. And therefore the determination of the tendency of man's heart and
   nature, with respect to these terms, is that which is to be looked at,
   in order to determine whether his nature is good or evil, pure or
   corrupt, sound or ruined. If such be man's nature, and the state of his
   heart, that he has an infallibly effectual propensity to the latter of
   those terms; then it is wholly impertinent to talk of the innocent and
   kind actions, even of criminals themselves, surpassing their crimes in
   numbers, and of the prevailing innocence, good nature, industry,
   felicity, and cheerfulness of the greater part of mankind. Let never so
   many thousands or millions of acts of honesty, good nature, &c. be
   supposed; yet, by the supposition, there is an unfailing propensity to
   such moral evil, as in its dreadful consequences infinitely outweighs
   all effects or consequences of any supposed good. Surely that tendency,
   which, in effect, is an infallible tendency to eternal destruction, is
   an infinitely dreadful and pernicious tendency: and that nature and
   frame of mind, which implies such a tendency, must be an infinitely
   dreadful and pernicious frame of mind. It would be much more absurd to
   suppose, that such a state of nature is not bad, under a notion of men
   doing more honest and kind things than evil ones; than to say, the
   state of that ship is good, for crossing the Atlantic ocean, though
   such as cannot hold together through the voyage, but will infallibly
   founder and sink, under a notion that it may probably go great part of
   the way before it sinks, or that it will proceed and sail above water
   more hours than it will be in sinking: or, to pronounce that road a
   good road to go to such a place, the greater part of which is plain and
   safe, though some parts of it are dangerous, and certainly fatal, to
   them that travel in it; or to call that a good propensity, which is an
   inflexible inclination to travel in such a way.

   A propensity to that sin which brings God's eternal wrath and curse
   (which has been proved to belong to the nature of man) is evil, not
   only as it is calamitous and sorrowful, ending in great natural evil;
   but as it is odious and detestable; for by the supposition, it tends to
   that moral evil, by which the subject becomes odious in the sight of
   God, and liable, as such, to be condemned, and utterly rejected, and
   cursed by him. This also makes it evident, that the state which it has
   been proved mankind are in, is a corrupt state in a moral sense, that
   it is inconsistent with the fulfillment of the law of God, which is the
   rule of moral rectitude and goodness. That tendency, which is opposite
   to what the moral law requires, and prone to that which the moral law
   utterly forbids, and eternally condemns, is doubtless a corrupt
   tendency, in a moral sense.

   So that this depravity is both odious, and also pernicious, fatal and
   destructive, in the highest sense; as inevitably tending to that which
   implies man's eternal ruin. It shows, that man, as he is by nature, is
   in a deplorable state, in the highest sense. And this proves that men
   do not come into the world perfectly innocent in the sight of God, and
   without any just exposedness to his displeasure. For the being by
   nature in a lost and ruined state, in the highest sense, is not
   consistent with being by nature in a state of favour with God.

   But if any should still insist on a notion of men's good deeds
   exceeding their bad ones, and that, seeing the good more than
   countervails the evil, they cannot be properly denominated evil; all
   persons and things being most properly denominated from that which
   prevails, and has the ascendant in them; I would say further, That if
   there is in man's nature a tendency to guilt and ill desert, in a vast
   overbalance to virtue and merit; or a propensity to sin, the demerit of
   which is so great, that the value and merit of all the virtuous acts
   that ever he performs, are as nothing to it; then truly the nature of
   man may be said to be corrupt and evil.

   That this is the true case, may be demonstrated by what is evident of
   the infinite heinousness of sin against God, from the nature of things.
   The heinousness of this must rise in some proportion to the obligation
   we are under to regard the Divine Being; and that must be in some
   proportion to his worthiness of regard; which doubtless is infinitely
   beyond the worthiness of any of our fellow-creatures. But the merit of
   our respect or obedience to God is not infinite. The merit of respect
   to any being does not increase, but is rather diminished, in proportion
   to the obligations we are under in strict justice to pay him that
   respect. There is no great merit in paying a debt we owe, and by the
   highest possible obligations in strict justice are obliged to pay; but
   there is great demerit in refusing to pay it. That on such accounts as
   these, there is an infinite demerit in all sin against God, which must
   therefore immensely outweigh all the merit which can be supposed to be
   in our virtue, I think, is capable of full demonstration; and that the
   futility of the objections which some have made against the argument,
   might most plainly be demonstrated. But I shall omit a particular
   consideration of the evidence of this matter from the nature of things,
   as I study brevity, and lest any should cry out, metaphysics! as the
   manner of some is, when any argument is handled against a tenet they
   are fond of, with a close and exact consideration of the nature of
   things. And this is not so necessary in the present case, inasmuch as
   the point asserted--that he who commits any one sin, has guilt and ill
   desert so great, that the value and merit of all the good which it is
   possible he should do in his whole life, is as nothing to it--is not
   only evident by metaphysics, but is plainly demonstrated by what has
   been shown to be fact, with respect to God's own constitutions and
   dispensations towards mankind. Thus, whatever acts of virtue and
   obedience a man performs, yet if he trespasses in one point, is guilty
   of any the least sin, he--according to the law of God, and so according
   to the exact truth of things, and the proper demerit of sin--is exposed
   to be wholly cast out of favour with God, and subjected to his curse,
   to be utterly and eternally destroyed. This has been proved; and shown
   to be the doctrine which Dr. T. abundantly teaches.

   But how can it be agreeable to the nature of things, and exactly
   consonant to everlasting truth and righteousness, thus to deal with a
   creature for the least sinful act, though he should perform ever so
   many thousands of honest and virtuous acts, to countervail the evil of
   that sin? Or how can it be agreeable to the exact truth and real
   demerit of things, thus wholly to cast off the deficient creature,
   without any regard to the merit of all his good deeds, unless that be
   in truth the case, that the value and merit of all those good actions,
   bear no proportion to the heinousness of the least sin? If it were not
   so, one would think, that however the offending person might have some
   proper punishment, yet seeing there is so much virtue to lay in the
   balance against the guilt, it would be agreeable to the nature of
   things, that he should find some favour, and not be altogether
   rejected, and made the subject of perfect and eternal destruction; and
   thus no account at all be made of all his virtue, so much as to procure
   him the least relief or hope. How can such a constitution represent sin
   in its proper colours, and according to its true nature and desert, (as
   Dr. T. says it does,) unless this be its true nature, that it is so
   bad, that even in the least instance it perfectly swallows up all the
   value of the sinner's supposed good deeds, let them be ever so many. So
   that this matter is not left to our metaphysics, or philosophy; the
   great lawgiver, and infallible judge of the universe, has clearly
   decided it, in the revelation he has made of what is agreeable to exact
   truth, justice, and the nature of things, in his revealed law, or rule
   of righteousness.

   He that in any respect or degree is a transgressor of God's law, is a
   wicked man, yea, wholly wicked in the eye of the law; all his goodness
   being esteemed nothing, having no account made of it, when taken
   together with his wickedness. And therefore, without any regard to his
   righteousness, he is, by the sentence of the law, and so by the voice
   of truth and justice, to be treated as worthy to be rejected, abhorred,
   and cursed forever; and must be so, unless grace interpose, to cover
   his transgression. But men are really, in themselves, what they are in
   the eye of the law, and by the voice of strict equity and justice;
   however they may be looked upon, and treated by infinite and unmerited
   mercy.

   So that, on the whole, it appears, all mankind have an infallibly
   effectual propensity to that moral evil, which infinitely outweighs the
   value of all the good that can be in them; and have such a disposition
   of heart, that the certain consequence of it is, their being, in the
   eye of perfect truth and righteousness, wicked men. And I leave all to
   judge, whether such a disposition be not in the eye of truth a depraved
   disposition?

   Agreeable to these things, the Scripture represents all mankind, not
   only as having guilt, but immense guilt, which they can have no merit
   or worthiness to countervail. Such is the representation we have in
   Matt. xviii. 21-35, to the end. There, on Peter's inquiring, How often
   his brother should trespass against him, and he forgive him, whether
   until seven times? Christ replies, I say not unto thee, until seven
   times, but until seventy times seven; apparently meaning, that he
   should esteem no number of offenses too many, and no degree of injury
   it is possible our neighbour should be guilty of towards us too great,
   to be forgiven. For which this reason is given in the parable
   following, that if ever we obtain forgiveness and favour with God, he
   must pardon that guilt and injury towards his majesty, which is
   immensely greater than the greatest injuries that ever men are guilty
   of one towards another, yea, than the sum of all their injuries put
   together, let them be ever so many, and ever so great; so that the
   latter would be but as an hundred pence to ten thousand talents, which
   immense debt we owe to God, and have nothing to pay; which implies,
   that we have no merit to countervail any part of our guilt. And this
   must be, because if all that may be called virtue in us, be compared
   with our ill desert, it is in the sight of God as nothing to it. The
   parable is not to represent Peter's case in particular, but that of all
   who then were, or ever should be, Christ's disciples; as appears by the
   conclusion of the discourse, ( ver. 35.) "So likewise shall my heavenly
   Father do, if ye, from your hearts, forgive not every one his brother
   their trespasses."

   Therefore how absurd must it be for Christians to object, against the
   depravity of man's nature, a greater number of innocent and kind
   actions, than of crimes; and to talk of a prevailing innocence, good
   nature, industry, and cheerfulness of the greater part of mankind!
   Infinitely more absurd, than it would be to insist, that the domestic
   of a prince was not a bad servant, because though sometimes he
   contemned and affronted his master to a great degree, yet he did not
   spit in his master's face so often as he performed acts of service.
   More absurd, than it would be to affirm, that his spouse was a good
   wife to him, because, although she committed adultery, and that with
   the slaves and scoundrels sometimes, yet she did not do this so often
   as she did the duties of a wife. These notions would be absurd, because
   the crimes are too heinous to be atoned for, by many honest actions of
   the servant or spouse of the prince; there being a vast disproportion
   between the merit of the one, and the ill desert of the other: but
   infinitely less, than that between the demerit of our offenses against
   God, and the value of our acts of obedience.

   Thus I have gone through with my first argument; having shown the
   evidence of the truth of the proposition laid down at first, and proved
   its consequence. But there are many other things, that manifest a very
   corrupt tendency or disposition in man's nature, in his present state,
   which I shall take notice of in the following sections.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   The depravity of nature appears by a propensity in all to sin
   immediately, as soon as they are capable of it, and to sin continually
   and progressively; and also by the remains of sin in the best of men.

   The great depravity of man's nature appears, not only in that they
   universally commit sin, who spend any long time in the world; but in
   that men are naturally so prone to sin, that none ever fail of
   immediately transgressing God's law, and so of bringing infinite guilt
   on themselves, and exposing themselves to eternal perdition, as soon as
   they are capable of it.

   The Scriptures are so very express upon it, that all mankind, all
   flesh, all the world, every man living, are guilty of sin; that it must
   at least be understood, everyone capable of active duty to God, or of
   sin against him. There are multitudes in the world, who have but very
   lately begun to exert their faculties, as moral agents; and so have but
   just entered on their state trial, as acting for themselves: many
   thousands constantly, who have not lived one month, or week, or day,
   since they have arrived at any period that can be assigned (for the
   commencement of their agency) from their birth to twenty years of age.
   Now--if there be not a strong propensity in men's nature to sin, that
   should, as it were, hurry them on to speedy transgression, and if they
   have no guilt previous to their personal sinning--what should hinder,
   but that there might always be a great number, who have hitherto kept
   themselves free from sin, and have perfectly obeyed God's law, and so
   are righteous in his sight, with the righteousness of the law? And who,
   if they should be called out of the world without any longer trial, as
   great numbers die at all periods of life, would be justified by the
   deeds of the law? And how then can it be true, that in God's sight no
   man living can be justified, that no man can be just with God, and that
   by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified, because by the law
   is the knowledge of sin? And what should hinder but that there may
   always be many in the world--who are capable subjects of instruction
   and counsel, and of prayer to God--for whom the calls of God's word to
   repentance, to seek pardon through the blood of Christ, and to forgive
   others their injuries because they need that God should forgive them,
   would not be proper; and for whom the Lord's prayer is not suitable,
   wherein Christ directs all his followers to pray, that God would
   forgive their sins, as they forgive those that trespass against them?

   If there are any in the world--though but lately become capable of
   acting for themselves, as subjects of God's law--who are perfectly free
   from sin; such are most likely to be found among the children of
   Christian parents, who give them the most pious education, and set them
   the best examples. And therefore, such would never be so likely to be
   found in any part or age of the world, as in the primitive Christian
   church, in the first age of Christianity, (the age of the church's
   greatest purity,) so long after Christianity had been established, that
   there had been time for great numbers of children to be born, and
   educated by those primitive Christians. It was in that age, and in such
   a part of that age, that the apostle John wrote his first epistle to
   the Christians. But if there was then a number of them come to
   understanding, who were perfectly free from sin, why should he write as
   he does? 1 John i. 8, 9, 10. "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
   ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is
   faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
   unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar,
   and the truth is not in us." [238]

   Again, the reality and greatness of the depravity of man's nature
   appears in this, That he has a prevailing propensity to be continually
   sinning against God. What has been observed above, will clearly prove
   this. That same disposition of nature, which is an effectual propensity
   to immediate sin, amounts to a propensity to continual sin. For a being
   prone to continual sinning, is nothing but a proneness to immediate sin
   continued. Such appears to be the tendency of nature to sin, that as
   soon as ever man is capable, it causes him immediately to sin, without
   suffering any considerable time to pass without sin. And therefore, if
   the same propensity be continued undiminished, there will be an equal
   tendency to immediate sinning again, without any considerable time
   passing. And so the same will always be a disposition still immediately
   to sin, with as little time passing without sin afterwards, as at
   first. The only reason that can be given why sinning must be immediate
   at first, is that the disposition is so great, that it will not suffer
   any considerable time to pass without sin: and therefore, the same
   disposition being continued in equal degree, without some new
   restraint, or contrary tendency, it will still equally tend to the same
   effect. And though it is true, the propensity may be diminished, or
   have restraints laid upon it, by the gracious disposals of Providence,
   or the merciful influences of God's Spirit; yet this is not owing to
   nature. That strong propensity of nature, by which men are so prone to
   immediate sinning at first, has no tendency in itself to a diminution;
   but rather to an increase; as the continued exercise of an evil
   disposition, in repeated actual sins, tends to strengthen it more and
   more: agreeable to that observation of Dr. T.'s, p. 228.: "We are apt
   to be drawn into sin by bodily appetites, and when once we are under
   the government of these appetites, it is at least exceeding difficult,
   if not impracticable, to recover ourselves, by the mere force of
   reason." The increase of strength of disposition in such a case, is as
   in a falling body, the strength of its tendency to descend is
   continually increased, so long as its motion is continued. Not only a
   constant commission of sin, but a constant increase in the habits and
   practice of wickedness, is the true tendency of man's depraved nature,
   if unrestrained by divine grace; as the true tendency of the nature of
   a heavy body, if obstacles are removed, is not only to fall with a
   continual motion, but with a constantly increasing motion. And we see,
   that increasing iniquity is actually the consequence of natural
   depravity, in most men, notwithstanding all the restraints they have.
   Dispositions to evil are commonly much stronger in adult persons, than
   in children, when they first begin to act in the world as rational
   creatures.

   If sin be such a thing as Dr. T. himself represents it, p. 69. "a thing
   of an odious and destructive nature, the corruption and ruin of our
   nature, and infinitely hateful to God;" then such a propensity to
   continual and increasing sin, must be a very evil disposition. And if
   we may judge of the perniciousness of an inclination of nature, by the
   evil of the effect it naturally tends to, the propensity of man's
   nature must be evil indeed: for the soul being immortal, as Dr. T.
   acknowledges, p. 94. S. it will follow from what has been observed
   above, that man has a natural disposition to one of these two things;
   either to an increase of wickedness without end, or till wickedness
   comes to be so great, that the capacity of his nature will not allow it
   to be greater. This being what his wickedness will come to by its
   natural tendency, if divine grace does not prevent, it may as truly be
   said to be the effect which man's natural corruption tends to, as that
   an acorn in a proper soil, truly tends by its nature to become a great
   tree.

   Again, That sin which is remaining in the hearts of the best men on
   earth, makes it evident, that man's nature is corrupt, as he comes into
   the world. A remaining depravity of heart in the greatest saints, may
   be argued from the sins of most of those who are set forth in Scripture
   as the most eminent instances and examples of virtue and piety: and is
   also manifest from this, that the Scripture represents all God's
   children as standing in need of chastisement. Heb. xii. 6, 7, 8. "For
   whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth; and scourgeth every son whom he
   receiveth.--What son is he, whom the father chasteneth not?--If ye are
   without chastisement, then are ye bastards, and not sons." But this is
   directly and fully asserted in some places; as in Eccles. vii. 20.
   "There is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not."
   Which is as much as to say, there is no man on earth, that is so just,
   as to have attained to such a degree of righteousness, as not to commit
   any sin. Yea, the apostle James speaks of all Christians as often
   sinning, or committing many sins; even in that primitive age of the
   christian church, an age distinguished from all others by eminent
   attainments in holiness: Jam. iii. 2. "In many things we all offend."
   And that there is pollution in the hearts of all antecedent to all
   means for purification, is very plainly declared in Prov. xx. 9. "Who
   can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?"

   According to Dr. T. men come into the world wholly free from sinful
   propensities. And if so, it appears from what has been already said,
   there would be nothing to hinder, but that many, without being better
   than they are by nature, might perfectly avoid the commission of sin.
   But much more might this be the case with men after they had, by care,
   diligence, and good practice, attained those positive habits of virtue,
   whereby they are at a much greater distance from sin, than they were
   naturally:--which this writer supposes to be the case with many good
   men. But since the Scripture teaches us, that the best men in the world
   do often commit sin, and have remaining pollution of heart, this makes
   it abundantly evident, that men, when they are no otherwise than they
   were by nature, without any of those virtuous attainments, have a
   sinful depravity; yea, must have great corruption of nature.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [238] If any should object, that this is an overstraining of things;
   and that it supposes a greater niceness and exactness than is observed
   in scripture representations, to infer from these expressions, that all
   men sin immediately as soon as ever they are capable of it. To this I
   would say, that I think the arguments used are truly solid, and do
   really and justly conclude, either that men are born guilty, and so are
   chargeable with sin before they come to act for themselves, or else
   commit sin immediately, without the least time intervening, after they
   are capable of understanding their obligations to God, and reflecting
   on themselves; and that the Scripture clearly determines, there is not
   one such person in the world , free from sin. But whether this be
   straining things to too great an exactness, or not; yet I suppose, none
   that do not entirely set aside the sense of such scriptures as have
   been mentioned, and deny those propositions which Dr. T himself allows
   to be contained in some of them, will deny they prove, that no
   considerable time passes after men are capable of acting for
   themselves, as the subjects of God's law, before they are guilty of
   sin; because if the time were considerable, it would be great enough to
   deserve to be taken notice of, as an exception to such universal
   propositions, as, in thy sight shall no man living be justified, &c.
   And if this be allowed, that men are so prone to sin, that in fact all
   mankind do sin, as it were, immediately after they come to be capable
   of it, or fail not to sin so soon, that no considerable time passes
   before they run into transgression against God; it does not much alter
   the case, as to the present argument. If the time of freedom from sin
   be so small, as not to be worthy of notice in the forementioned
   universal propositions of Scripture, it is also so small, as not to be
   worthy of notice in the present argument.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   The depravity of nature appears, in that the general consequence of the
   state and tendency of man's nature is a much greater degree of sin,
   than righteousness; not only with respect to value and demerit, but
   matter and quantity.

   I have before shown, that there is a propensity in man's nature to that
   sin, which in heinousness and ill desert immensely outweighs all the
   value and merit of any supposed good, that may be in him, or that he
   can do. I now proceed to say further, that such is man's nature, in his
   present state, that it tends to this lamentable effect, that there
   should at all times, through the course of his life, be at least much
   more sin, than righteousness; not only as to weight and value, but as
   to matter and measure; more disagreement of heart and practice from the
   law of God, and from the law of nature and reason, than agreement and
   conformity. The law of God is the rule of right, as Dr. T. often calls
   it: It is the measure of virtue and sin: so much agreement as there is
   with this rule, so much is there of rectitude, righteousness, or true
   virtue, and no more; and so much disagreement as there is with this
   rule, so much sin is there. Having premised this, the following things
   may be here observed.

   I. The degree of disagreement from this rule of right is to be
   determined, not only by the degree of distance from it in excess, but
   also in defect; or in other words, not only in positive transgression,
   or doing what is forbidden, but also in withholding what is required.
   The divine Lawgiver does as much prohibit the one as the other, and
   does as much charge the latter as a sinful breach of his law, exposing
   to his eternal wrath and curse, as the former. Thus at the day of
   judgment, as described Matt. xxv. The wicked are condemned as cursed,
   to everlasting fire, for their sin in defect and omission: I was an
   hungred, and ye gave me no meat, &c. And the case is thus, not only
   when the defect is in word or behaviour, but in the inward temper and
   exercise of the mind. 1 Cor. xvi. 22 . "If any man love not the Lord
   Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha." Dr. T. speaking of the
   sentence and punishment of the wicked, (Matt. xxv. 41, 46.) says, p.
   159: "It was manifestly for want of benevolence, love, and compassion
   to their fellow-creatures, that they were condemned." And elsewhere, as
   was observed before, he says, that the law of God extends to the latent
   principles of sin to forbid them, and to condemn to eternal destruction
   for them. And if so, it doubtless also extends to the inward principles
   of holiness, to require them, and in like manner to condemn for the
   want of them.

   II. The sum of our duty to God, required in his law, is love; taking
   love in a large sense, for the true regard of our hearts to god,
   implying esteem, honour, benevolence, gratitude, complacence, &c. This
   is not only very plain by the Scripture, but it is evident in itself.
   The sum of what the law of God requires, is doubtless obedience to that
   law: no law can require more than that it be obeyed. But it is
   manifest, that obedience is nothing, any otherwise than as a testimony
   of the respect of our hearts to God: without the heart, man's external
   acts are no more than the motions of the limbs of a wooden image; have
   no more of the nature of either sin or righteousness. It must therefore
   needs be, that love to God, the respect of the heart, must be the sum
   of the duty required in his law.

   III. It therefore appears from the premises, that whosoever withholds
   more of that love or respect of heart from God, which his law requires,
   than he affords, has more sin than righteousness. Not only he that has
   less divine love, than passions and affections which are opposite; but
   also he that does not love God half so much as he ought, or has reason
   to do, has justly more wrong than right imputed to him, according to
   the law of God, and the law of reason; he has more irregularity than
   rectitude, with regard to the law of love. The sinful disrespect of his
   heart towards God, is greater than his respect to him.

   But what considerate person is there, even among the more virtuous part
   of mankind, but would be ashamed to say, and profess before God or men,
   that he loves God half so much as he ought to do; or that he exercises
   one half of that esteem, honour, and gratitude towards God, which would
   be altogether becoming him; considering what God is, and what great
   manifestations he has made of his transcendent excellency and goodness,
   and what benefits he receives from him? And if few or none of the best
   of men can with reason and truth make even such a profession, how far
   from it must the generality of mankind be?

   The chief and most fundamental of all the commands of the moral law,
   requires us to love the Lord our God with all our hearts, and with all
   our souls, with all our strength, and all our mind: that is, plainly,
   with all that is within us, or to the utmost capacity of our nature.
   God is in himself worthy of infinitely greater love, than any creature
   can exercise towards him; love equal to his perfections, which are
   infinite. God loves himself with no greater love than he is worthy of,
   when he loves himself infinitely; but we can give God no more than we
   have. Therefore, if we give him so much, if we love him to the utmost
   extent of the faculties of our nature, we are excused. But when what is
   proposed, is only that we should love him as much as our capacity will
   allow, all excuse of want of capacity ceases, and obligation takes hold
   of us; and we are doubtless obliged to love God to the utmost of what
   is possible for us, with such faculties, and such opportunities and
   advantages to know God, as we have. And it is evidently implied in this
   great commandment of the law, that our love to God should be so great,
   as to have the most absolute possession of all the soul, and the
   perfect government of all the principles and springs of action that are
   in our nature.

   Though it is not easy, precisely to fix the limits of man's capacity,
   as to love to God; yet in general we may determine, that his capacity
   of love is coextended with his capacity of knowledge: the exercise of
   the understanding opens the way for the exercise of the other faculty.
   Now, though we cannot have any proper positive understanding of God's
   infinite excellency; yet the capacity of the human understanding is
   very great, and may be extended far. It is needless to dispute, how far
   man's knowledge may be said to be strictly comprehensive of things that
   are very great, as of the extent of the expanse of the heavens, &c. The
   word comprehensive, seems to be ambiguous. But doubtless we are capable
   of some proper positive understanding of the greatness of these things,
   in comparison of other things that we know. We are capable of some
   clear understanding of the greatness or considerableness of a whole
   nation; or of the whole world of mankind, as vastly exceeding that of a
   particular person or family. We can positively understand, that the
   whole globe of the earth is vastly greater than a particular hill or
   mountain. And can have some good positive apprehension of the starry
   heavens, as so greatly exceeding the globe of the earth, that the
   latter is as it were nothing to it. So the human faculties are capable
   of a real and clear understanding of the greatness, glory, and goodness
   of God, and of our dependence upon him, from the manifestations which
   God has made of himself to mankind, as being beyond all expression
   above that of the most excellent human friend, or earthly object. And
   so we are capable of esteem and love to God, which shall be
   proportionable, much exceeding that which we have to any creature.

   These things may help us to form some judgment, how vastly the
   generality of mankind fall below their duty, with respect to love to
   God; yea, how far they are from coming half way to that height of love,
   which is agreeable to the rule of right. Surely if our esteem of God,
   desires after him, and delight in him, were such as become us,
   considering the things forementioned, they would exceed our regard to
   other things, as the heavens are high above the earth, and would
   swallow up all other affections like a deluge. But how far, how
   exceeding far, are the generality of the world from any appearance of
   being influenced and governed by such a degree of divine love as this!

   If we consider the love of God, with respect to one exercise of it,
   gratitude, how far indeed do the generality of mankind come short of
   the rule of right and reason in this! If we consider how various,
   innumerable, and vast the benefits we receive from God, how infinitely
   great and wonderful that grace, which is revealed and offered to them
   who live under the gospel--in that eternal salvation which is procured
   by God giving his only-begotten Son to die for sinners--and also how
   unworthy we are all, deserving (as Dr. T. confesses) eternal perdition
   under God's wrath and curse--how great is the gratitude that would
   become us, who are the subjects of so many and great benefits! What
   grace is this towards poor sinful lost mankind, set before us in so
   affecting a manner, as in the extreme sufferings of the Son of God; who
   was carried through those pains by a love stronger than death, a love
   that conquered those mighty agonies, a love whose length and breadth,
   and depth and height, passes knowledge? But oh! what poor returns!--How
   little the gratitude! How low, how cold and inconstant, the affection
   in the best, compared with the obligation! And what then shall be said
   of the gratitude of the generality? Or rather, who can express the
   ingratitude?

   If the greater part of them who are called Christians, were no enemies
   to Christ in heart and practice, were not governed by principles
   opposite to him and his gospel, but had some real love and gratitude;
   yet if their love falls vastly short of the obligation, or occasion
   given, they are guilty of shameful and odious ingratitude. As, when a
   man has been the subject of some instance of transcendent generosity,
   whereby he has been relieved from the most extreme calamity, and
   brought into very opulent, honourable, and happy circumstances, by a
   benefactor of excellent character; and yet expresses no more gratitude
   on such an occasion, than would be requisite for some kindness
   comparatively infinitely small, he may justly fall under the imputation
   of vile unthankfulness, and of much more ingratitude than gratitude;
   though he may have no ill will to his benefactor, or no positive
   affection of mind contrary to thankfulness and benevolence. What is
   odious in him is his defect, whereby he falls so vastly below his duty.

   Dr. Turnbull abundantly insists, that the forces of the affections
   naturally in man are well proportioned; and often puts a question to
   this purpose,--How man's nature could have been better constituted in
   this respect? How the affections of his heart could have been better
   proportioned?--I will now mention one instance, out of many that might
   be mentioned. Man, if his heart were not depraved, might have had a
   disposition to gratitude to God for his goodness, in proportion to his
   disposition to anger towards men for their injuries. When I say, in
   proportion, I mean considering the greatness and number of favours and
   injuries, and the degree in which the one and the other are unmerited,
   and the benefit received by the former, and the damage sustained by the
   latter. Is there not an apparent and vast difference and inequality in
   the dispositions to these two kinds of affection, in the generality of
   both old and young, adult persons and little children? How ready is
   resentment for injuries received from men! And how easily is it raised
   in most, at least to an equality with the desert! And is it so with
   respect to gratitude for benefits received from God, in any degree of
   comparison? Dr. Turnbull pleads for the natural disposition to anger
   for injuries, as being good and useful: but surely gratitude to God, if
   we were inclined to it, would be at least as good and useful as the
   other.

   How far the generality of mankind are from their duty, with respect to
   love to God, will further appear, if we consider that we are obliged
   not only to love him with a love of gratitude for benefits received;
   but true love to God primarily consists in a supreme regard to him for
   what he is in himself. The tendency of true virtue is to treat every
   thing as it is, and according to its nature. And if we regard the Most
   High according to the infinite dignity and glory of his nature, we
   shall esteem and love him with all our heart and soul, and to the
   utmost of the capacity of our nature, on this account; and not
   primarily because he has promoted our interest. If God be infinitely
   excellent in himself, then he is infinitely lovely on that account; or
   in other words, infinitely worthy to be loved. And doubtless, if he be
   worthy to be loved for this, then he ought to be loved for it. And it
   is manifest, there can be no true love to him, if he be not loved for
   what he is in himself. For if we love him not for his own sake, but for
   something else, then our love is not terminated on him, but on
   something else, as its ultimate object. That is no true value for
   infinite worth, which implies no value for that worthiness in itself
   considered, but only on the account of something foreign. Our esteem of
   God is fundamentally defective, if it be not primarily for the
   excellency of his nature, which is the foundation of all this is
   valuable in him in any respect. If we love not God because he is what
   he is, but only because he is profitable to us, in truth we love him
   not at all: if we seem to love him, our love is not to him, but to
   something else.

   And now I must leave it to every one to judge for himself, from his own
   opportunities of observation and information concerning mankind, how
   little there is of this disinterested love to God, this pure divine
   affection, in the world. How very little indeed in comparison of other
   affections altogether diverse, which perpetually urge, actuate, and
   govern mankind, and keep the world, through all nations and ages, in a
   continual agitation and commotion! This is an evidence of a horrid
   contempt of God. It would justly be esteemed a great instance of
   disrespect and contempt of a prince, if one of his subjects, when he
   came into his house, should set him below his meanest slave. But in
   setting the infinite jehovah below earthly objects and enjoyments, men
   degrade him below those things, between which and him there is an
   infinitely greater distance, than between the highest earthly potentate
   and the most abject of mortals. Such a conduct as the generality of men
   are guilty of towards God, continually and through all ages, in
   innumerable respects, would be accounted the most vile contemptuous
   treatment of a fellow-creature, of distinguished dignity. Particularly
   men's treatment of the offers God makes of himself to them as their
   friend, their father, their God, and everlasting portion; their
   treatment of the exhibitions he has made of his unmeasurable love, and
   the boundless riches of his grace in Christ, attended with earnest
   repeated calls, counsels, expostulations, and entreaties; as also of
   the most dreadful threatenings of his eternal displeasure and
   vengeance.

   Before I finish this section, it may be proper to say something in
   reply to an objection, some may be ready to make, against the force of
   this argument--that men do not come half-way to that degree of love to
   God, which becomes them, and is their duty. The objection is this: That
   the argument seems to prove too much, in that it will prove, that even
   good men themselves have more sin than holiness; which also has been
   supposed. But if this were true, it would follow, that sin is the
   prevalent principle even in good men, and that it is the principle
   which has the predominancy in the heart and practice of the truly
   pious; which is plainly contrary to the Word of God.

   I answer, If it be indeed so, that there is more sin, consisting in
   defect of required holiness, than there is of holiness, in good men in
   this world; yet it will not follow, that sin has the chief government
   of their heart and practice, for two reasons.

   1. They may love God more than other things, and yet there may not be
   so much love, as there is want of due love; or in other words, they may
   love God more than the world, and therefore the love of God may be
   predominant, and yet may not love God near half so much as they ought
   to do. This need not be esteemed a paradox: A person may love a father,
   or some great friend and benefactor, of a very excellent character,
   more than some other object, a thousand times less worthy of his esteem
   and affection, and yet love him ten times less than he ought; and so be
   chargeable, all things considered, with a deficiency in respect and
   gratitude, that is very unbecoming and hateful. If love to God prevails
   above the love of other things, then virtue will prevail above evil
   affections, or positive principles of sin; by which principles it is,
   that sin has a positive power and influence. For evil affections
   radically consist in inordinate love to other things besides God: and
   therefore, virtue prevailing beyond these, will have the governing
   influence. The predominance of the love of God in the hearts of good
   men, is more from the nature of the object loved, and the nature of the
   principle of true love, than the degree of the principle. The object is
   one of supreme loveliness; immensely above all other objects in
   worthiness of regard; and it is by such a transcendent excellency, that
   he is God, and worthy to be regarded and adored as God: and he that
   truly loves God, loves him as God. True love acknowledges him to be
   divinely and supremely excellent; and must arise from some knowledge,
   sense, and conviction of his worthiness of supreme respect: and though
   the sense and view of it may be very imperfect, and the love that
   arises from it in like manner imperfect; yet if there be any realizing
   view of such divine excellency, it must cause the heart to respect God
   above all.

   2. Another reason, why a principle of holiness maintains the dominion
   in the hearts of good men, is the nature of the covenant of grace, and
   the promises of that covenant, on which true christian virtue relies,
   and which engage God's strength and assistance to be on its side, and
   to help it against its enemy, that it may not be overcome. The just
   live by faith. Holiness in the Christian, or his spiritual life, is
   maintained, as it has respect by faith to its author and finisher, and
   derives strength and efficacy from the divine fountain, and by this
   means overcomes. For, as the apostle says, This is the victory that
   overcomes the world, even our faith. It is our faith in him who has
   promised never to leave nor forsake his people; not to forsake the
   works of his own hands, nor suffer his people to be tempted above their
   ability; that his grace shall be sufficient for them, his strength be
   made perfect in weakness; and that where he has begun a good work he
   will carry it on to the day of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   The corruption of man's nature appears by its tendency, in its present
   state, to an extreme degree of folly and stupidity in matters of
   religion.

   It appears, that man's nature is greatly depraved, by an apparent
   proneness to an exceeding stupidity and sottishness in those things
   wherein his duty and main interest are chiefly concerned. I shall
   instance in two things, viz. men's proneness to idolatry; and a
   general, great disregard of eternal things, in them who live under the
   light of the gospel.

   It is manifest, in the first instance, that man's nature in its present
   state is attended with a great propensity to forsake the acknowledgment
   and worship of the true God, and to fall into the most stupid idolatry.
   This has been sufficiently proved by known fact, on abundant trial:
   insomuch as the world of mankind in general (excepting one small
   people, miraculously delivered and preserved) through all nations, in
   all parts of the world, ages after ages, continued without the
   knowledge and worship of the true God, and overwhelmed in gross
   idolatry, without the least appearance or prospect of its recovering
   itself from so great blindness, or returning from its brutish
   principles and customs, till delivered by divine grace.

   In order to the most just arguing from fact, concerning the tendency of
   man's nature, as that is in itself, it should be inquired what the
   event has been, where nature has been left to itself, to operate
   according to its own tendency, with least opposition made to it by
   anything supernatural; rather than in exempt places, where the infinite
   power and grace of God have interposed, and extraordinary means have
   been used to stem the current, and bring men to true religion and
   virtue. As to the means by which God's people of old, in the line of
   Abraham, were delivered and preserved from idolatry, they were
   miraculous, and of mere grace. Notwithstanding which, they were often
   relapsing into the notions and ways of the heathen; and when they had
   backslidden, never were recovered, but by divine gracious
   interposition. And as to the means by which many gentile nations have
   been delivered since the days of the gospel, they are such as have been
   wholly owing to the most wonderful, miraculous, and infinite grace. God
   was under no obligation to bestow on the heathen world greater
   advantages than they had in the ages of their gross darkness; as
   appears by the fact, that God actually did not, for so long a time,
   bestow greater advantages.

   Dr. T. himself observes (Key, p. 1.) That in about four hundred years
   after the flood, the generality of mankind were fallen into idolatry.
   And thus it was every where through the world, excepting among that
   people that was saved and preserved by a constant series of miracles,
   through a variety of countries, nations, and climates, great
   enough--and through successive changes, revolutions, and ages, numerous
   enough--to be a sufficient trial of what mankind are prone to, if there
   be any such thing as a sufficient trial.

   That men should forsake the true God for idols, is an evidence of the
   most astonishing folly and stupidity, by God's own testimony, Jer. ii.
   12, 13. "Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be ye horribly
   afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord: for my people have
   committed two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
   waters, and have hewed out to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns,
   that can hold no water." And that mankind in general did thus, so soon
   after the flood, was from the evil propensity of their hearts, and
   because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge; as is
   evident by Rom. i. 28. And the universality of the effect shows that
   the cause was universal, and not any thing belonging to the particular
   circumstances of one, or only some nations or ages, but something
   belonging to that nature, which is common to all nations, and which
   remains the same through all ages. And what other cause could this
   great effect possibly arise from, but a depraved disposition, natural
   to all mankind? It could not arise from want of a sufficient capacity
   or means of knowledge. This is in effect confessed on all hands. Dr.
   Turnbull (Chris. Phil. p. 21) says: "The existence of one infinitely
   powerful, wise, and good mind, the Author, Creator, Upholder, and
   Governor of all things, is a truth that lies plain and obvious to all
   that will but think." And (ibid. p. 245.) "Moral knowledge, which is
   the most important of all knowledge, may easily be acquired by all
   men." And again, (ibid. p. 292.) "Every man by himself, if he would
   duly employ his mind in the contemplation of the works of God about
   him, or in the examination of his own frame,--might make very great
   progress in the knowledge of the wisdom and goodness of God. This all
   men, generally speaking, might do, with very little assistance; for
   they have all sufficient abilities for thus employing their minds, and
   have all sufficient time for it." Mr. Locke says, (Hum. Und. p. iv,
   chap. iv, p. 242. edit. 11.) "Our own existence, and the sensible parts
   of the universe, offer the proofs of a Deity so clearly and cogently to
   our thoughts, that I deem it impossible for a considerate man to
   withstand them. For I judge it as certain and clear a truth, as can any
   where be delivered, that the invisible things of God are clearly seen
   from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are
   made, even his eternal power and godhead." And Dr. T. himself (in p.
   78.) says, "The light given to all ages and nations of the world, is
   sufficient for the knowledge and practice of their duty." And (p. 111,
   112.) citing those words of the apostle, Rom. ii. 14, 15. he says,
   "This clearly supposes that the Gentiles, who were then in the world,
   might have done the things contained in the law by nature, or their
   natural power." And in one of the next sentences he says, "The apostle,
   in Rom. i. 19, 20, 21. affirms that the Gentiles had light sufficient
   to have seen God's eternal power and godhead, in the works of creation;
   and that the reason why they did not glorify him as God, was because
   they became vain in their imaginations, and had darkened their foolish
   heart; so that they were without excuse. And in his paraphrase on those
   verses in the 1st of Rom. he speaks of the very heathens, that were
   without a written revelation, as having that clear and evident
   discovery of God's being and perfections, that they are inexcusable in
   not glorifying him suitably to his excellent nature, and as the author
   of their being and enjoyments." And (p. 146. S.) he says, "God affords
   every man sufficient light to know his duty." If all ages and nations
   of the world have sufficient light for the knowledge of God, and their
   duty to him, then even such nations and ages, in which the most brutish
   ignorance and barbarity prevailed, had sufficient light, if they had
   but a disposition to improve it; and then much more those of the
   heathen, which were more knowing and polished, and in ages wherein arts
   and learning had made greatest advances. But even in such nations and
   ages, there was no advance made towards true religion; and Dr. Winder
   observes, (Hist. of Knowl. vol. ii, p. 336.) in the following words;
   "The pagan religion degenerated into greater absurdity, the further it
   proceeded; and it prevailed in all its height of absurdity, when the
   pagan nations were polished to the height. Though they set out with the
   talents of reason, and had solid foundations of information to build
   upon, it in fact proved, that with all their strengthened faculties,
   and growing powers of reason, the edifice of religion rose in the most
   absurd deformities and disproportions, and gradually went on in the
   most irrational, disproportioned, incongruous systems, of which the
   most easy dictates of reason would have demonstrated the absurdity.
   They were contrary to all just calculations in moral mathematics." He
   observes, "that their grossest abominations first began in Egypt, where
   was an ostentation of the greatest progress in learning and science:
   and they never renounced clearly any of their abominations, or openly
   returned to the worship of the one true God, the Creator of all things,
   and to the original, genuine sentiments of the highest and most
   venerable antiquity. The pagan religion continued in this deep state of
   corruption to the last. The pagan philosophers, and inquisitive men,
   made great improvements in many sciences, and even in morality itself;
   yet the inveterate absurdities of pagan idolatry remained without
   remedy. Every temple smoked with incense to the sun and moon, and other
   inanimate material luminaries, and earthly elements, to Jupiter, Juno,
   Mars, and Venus, &c. the patrons and examples of almost every vice.
   Hecatombs bled on the altars of a thousand gods; as mad superstition
   inspired. And this was not the disgrace of our ignorant untaught
   northern countries only; but even at Athens itself, the infamy reigned,
   and circulated through all Greece; and finally prevailed, amidst all
   their learning and politeness, under the Ptolemies in Egypt, and the
   Caesars at Rome. Now if the knowledge of the pagan world, in religion,
   proceeded no further than this; if they retained all their deities,
   even the most absurd of them all, their deified beasts, and deified
   men, even to the last breath of pagan power: we may justly ascribe the
   great improvements in the world, on the subject of religion, to divine
   revelation, either vouchsafed in the beginning, when this knowledge was
   competently clear and copious; or at the death of paganism, when this
   light shone forth in its consummate luster at the coming of Christ."

   Dr. T. often speaks of the idolatry of the heathen world, as great
   wickedness, in which they were wholly inexcusable; and yet often speaks
   of their case as remediless, and of them as being dead in sin, and
   unable to recover themselves. If so, and yet, according to his own
   doctrine, every age, every nation, and every man, had sufficient light
   afforded, to know God, and their whole duty to him; then their
   inability to deliver themselves must be a moral inability, consisting
   in a desperate depravity, and most evil disposition of heart.

   And if there had not been sufficient trial of the propensity of the
   hearts of mankind, through all those ages that passed from Abraham to
   Christ, the trial has been continued down to this day, in all those
   vast regions of the face of the earth, that have remained without any
   effects of the light of the gospel; and the dismal effect continues
   everywhere unvaried. How was it with that multitude of nations
   inhabiting South and North America? What appearance was there, when the
   Europeans first came hither, of their being recovered, or recovering,
   in any degree, from the grossest ignorance, delusions, and most stupid
   paganism? And how is it at this day, in those parts of Africa and Asia,
   into which the light of the gospel has not penetrated?

   This strong and universally prevalent disposition of mankind to
   idolatry, of which there has been such great trial, and so notorious
   and vast proof, in fact, is a most glaring evidence of the exceeding
   depravity of the human nature; as it is a propensity, in the utmost
   degree, contrary to the highest end, the main business, and chief
   happiness of mankind--consisting in the knowledge, service, and
   enjoyment of the living God, the Creator and Governor of the world--in
   the highest degree contrary to that for which mainly God gave mankind
   more understanding than the beasts of the earth, and made them wiser
   than the fowls of heaven; which was, that they might be capable of the
   knowledge of God. It is also in the highest degree contrary to the
   first and greatest commandment of the moral law, That we should have no
   other gods before jehovah, and that we should love and adore him with
   all our heart, soul, mind, and strength. The Scriptures are abundant in
   representing the idolatry of the heathen world, as their exceeding
   wickedness, and their most brutish stupidity. They who worship and
   trust in idols, are said themselves to be like the lifeless statues
   they worship, like mere senseless stocks and stones. (Psalm cxv. 4-8.
   and Psalm cxxxv. 15-18.)

   A second instance of the natural stupidity of mankind, is that great
   disregard of their own eternal interest, which appears so remarkably,
   so generally among them who live under the gospel.

   Mr. Locke observes, (Hum. Und. vol. i. p. 207.) "Were the will
   determined by the views of good, as it appears in contemplation,
   greater or less to the understanding, it could never get loose from the
   infinite eternal joys of heaven, once proposed, and considered as
   possible; the eternal condition of a future state infinitely
   outweighing the expectation of riches or honour, or any other worldly
   pleasure, which we can propose to ourselves; though we should grant
   these the more probable to be obtained." Again, (p. 228, 229.) "He that
   will not be so far a rational creature, as to reflect seriously upon
   infinite happiness and misery, must needs condemn himself, as not
   making that use of his understanding he should. The rewards and
   punishments of another life, which the Almighty has established, as the
   enforcements of his laws, are of weight enough to determine the choice,
   against whatsoever pleasure or pain this life can show. When the
   eternal state is considered but in its bare possibility, which nobody
   can make any doubt of, he that will allow exquisite and endless
   happiness to be but the possible consequence of a good life here, and
   the contrary state the possible reward of a bad one, must own himself
   to judge very much amiss, if he does not conclude that a virtuous life,
   with the certain expectation of everlasting bliss, which may come, is
   to be preferred to a vicious one, with the fear of that dreadful state
   of misery, which it is very possible may overtake the guilty, or at
   least the terrible uncertain hope of annihilation. This is evidently
   so; though the virtuous life here had nothing but pain, and the vicious
   continual pleasure; which yet is for the most part quite otherwise, and
   wicked men have not much the odds to brag of, even in their present
   possession: nay, all things rightly considered, have I think even the
   worst part here. But when infinite happiness is put in one scale,
   against infinite misery in the other; if the worst that comes to the
   pious man, if he mistakes, be the best that the wicked man can attain
   to, if he be in the right; who can, without madness, run the venture?
   Who in his wits would choose to come within a possibility of infinite
   misery? which if he miss, there is yet nothing to be got by that
   hazard: whereas, on the other side, the sober man ventures nothing,
   against infinite happiness to be got, if his expectation comes to
   pass."

   That disposition of mind which is a propensity to act contrary to
   reason, is a depraved disposition. It is not because the faculty of
   reason, which God has given to mankind, is not sufficient fully to
   discover to them, that forty, sixty, or an hundred years, is as nothing
   in comparison of eternity--infinitely less than a second of time to an
   hundred years--that the greatest worldly prosperity is not treated with
   the most perfect disregard, in all cases where there is any degree of
   competition of earthly things, with salvation from exquisite, eternal
   misery, and the enjoyment of everlasting glory and felicity. But is it
   a matter of controversy, whether men in general show a strong
   disposition to act far otherwise, from their infancy, till death
   sensibly approaches? In things that concern their temporal interest,
   they easily discern the difference between things of a long and short
   continuance. It is no hard matter to convince men of the difference
   between being admitted to the accommodations and entertainments of a
   convenient, beautiful, well-furnished habitation, and to partake of the
   provisions and produce of a plentiful estate for a day, or a night; and
   having all given them, and settled upon them, as their own, to possess
   as long as they live, and to be theirs and their heirs' forever. There
   would be no need of preaching sermons, and spending strength and life,
   to convince them of the difference. Men know how to adjust things in
   their dealings and contracts one with another, according to the length
   of time in which anything agreed for is to be used or enjoyed. In
   temporal affairs, they are sensible, that it concerns them to provide
   for future time, as well as for the present. Thus common prudence
   teaches them to take care in summer to lay up for winter; yea, to
   provide a fund, or an estate, whence they may be supplied for a long
   time to come. And not only so, but they are forward to spend and be
   spent, in order to provide for their children after they are dead;
   though it be quite uncertain, who shall enjoy what they lay up, after
   they have left the world. And if their children should have the comfort
   of it, as they desire, they will not partake with them in that comfort,
   or have any portion in any thing under the sun. In things which relate
   to men's temporal interest, they seem very sensible of the uncertainty
   of life, especially in the lives of others; and to make answerable
   provision for the security of their worldly interest, that no
   considerable part of it may rest only on so uncertain a foundation, as
   the life of a neighbour or friend. Common discretion leads them to take
   good care, that their outward possessions be well secured, by a good
   and firm title. In worldly concerns, men discern their opportunities,
   and are careful to improve them before they are past. The husbandman is
   careful to plough his ground, and sow his seed, in the proper season;
   otherwise he knows he cannot expect a crop: and when the harvest is
   come, he will not sleep away the time; for he knows, if he does so, the
   crop will soon be lost. How careful and eagle-eyed is the merchant to
   improve opportunities to enrich himself! How apt are men to be alarmed
   at the appearance of danger to their worldly estate, or any thing that
   remarkably threatens great damage to their outward interest! And how
   will they bestir themselves in such a case, if possible, to avoid the
   threatened calamity! In things purely secular, and not of a moral or
   spiritual nature, they easily receive conviction by past experience,
   when any thing, on repeated trial, proves unprofitable or prejudicial;
   and are ready to take warning by what they have found themselves, and
   also by the experience of their neighbours and forefathers.

   But if we consider how men generally conduct themselves in things on
   which their well-being infinitely more depends, how vast is the
   diversity! In these things how cold, lifeless, and dilatory! With what
   difficulty are a few, out of multitudes, excited to any tolerable
   degree of care and diligence, by the innumerable means used, in order
   to make them wise for themselves! And when some vigilance and activity
   is excited, how apt is it to die away, like a mere force against a
   natural tendency! What need of a constant repetition of admonitions and
   counsels, to keep the heart from falling asleep! How many objections
   are made! How are difficulties magnified! And how soon is the mind
   discouraged! How many arguments, often renewed, variously and
   elaborately enforced, do men stand in need of, to convince them of
   things that are almost self-evident! As that things which are eternal,
   are infinitely more important than things temporal, and the like. And
   after all, how very few are convinced effectually, or in such a manner
   as to induce them to a practical preference of eternal things! How
   senseless are men of the necessity of improving their time, as to their
   spiritual interest, and their welfare in another world! Though it be an
   endless futurity, and though it be their own personal, infinitely
   important good, that is to be cared for. Though men are so sensible of
   the uncertainty of their neighbours' lives, when any considerable part
   of their own estates depends on the continuance of them; how stupidly
   senseless do they seem to be of the uncertainty of their own lives,
   when their preservation from immensely great, remediless, and endless
   misery, is risked by a present delay, through a dependence on future
   opportunity! What a dreadful venture will men carelessly and boldly
   run, repeat, and multiply, with regard to their eternal salvation; who
   yet are very careful to have everything in a deed or bond, firm, and
   without a flaw! How negligent are they of their special advantages and
   opportunities for their soul's good! How hardly awakened by the most
   evident and imminent dangers, threatening eternal destruction, yea,
   though put in mind of them, and much pains taken to point them forth,
   show them plainly, and fully to represent them, if possible to engage
   their attention! How are they like the horse, that boldly rushes into
   the battle! How hardly are men convinced by their own frequent and
   abundant experience, of the unsatisfactory nature of earthly things,
   and the instability of their own hearts in their good frames and
   intentions! And how hardly convinced by their own observation, and the
   experience of all past generations, of the uncertainty of life and its
   enjoyments! Psal. xlix. 11., &c.: "Their inward thought is, that their
   houses shall continue for ever.--Nevertheless, man being in honour,
   abideth not; he is like the beasts that perish. This their way is their
   folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings. Like sheep are they
   laid in the grave."

   In these things, men who are prudent for their temporal interest, act
   as if they were bereft of reason: "They have eyes, and see not; ears,
   and hear not; neither do they understand: they are like the horse and
   mule, that have no understanding."--Jer. viii. 7. "The stork in the
   heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle, and the crane, and
   the swallow, observe the time of their coming: but my people know not
   the judgment of the Lord."

   These things are often mentioned in Scripture, as evidences of extreme
   folly and stupidity, wherein men act as great enemies to themselves, as
   though they loved their own ruin; Prov. viii. 36. Laying wait for their
   own blood, Prov. i. 18. And how can these things be accounted for, but
   by supposing a most wretched depravity of nature? Why otherwise should
   not men be as wise for themselves in spiritual and eternal things, as
   in temporal? All Christians will confess, that man's faculty of reason
   was given him chiefly to enable him to understand the former, wherein
   his main interest and true happiness consist. This faculty would
   therefore undoubtedly be every way as fit for understanding them, as
   the latter, if not depraved. The reason why these are understood, and
   not the other, is not that such things as have been mentioned,
   belonging to men's spiritual and eternal interest, are more obscure and
   abstruse in their own nature. For instance, the difference between long
   and short, the need of providing for futurity, the importance of
   improving proper opportunities, and of having good security, and a sure
   foundation, in affairs wherein our interest is greatly concerned, &c.
   these things are as plain in themselves in religious, as in other
   matters. And we have far greater means to assist us to be wise for
   ourselves in eternal than in temporal things. We have the abundant
   instruction of perfect and infinite wisdom itself, to lead and conduct
   us in the paths of righteousness, so that we may not err. And the
   reasons of things are most clearly, variously, and abundantly set
   before us in the word of God; which is adapted to the faculties of
   mankind, tending greatly to enlighten and convince the mind: whereas,
   we have no such excellent and perfect rules to instruct and direct us
   in things pertaining to our temporal interest, nor any thing to be
   compared to it.

   If any should say, It is true, if men gave full credit to what they are
   told concerning eternal things, and these appeared to them as real and
   certain things, it would be an evidence of a sort of madness in them,
   that they show no greater regard to them in practice: but there is
   reason to think, this is not the case; the things of another world
   being unseen, appear to men as things of a very doubtful nature, and
   attended with great uncertainty.--In answer, I would observe, agreeable
   to what has been cited from Mr. Locke, though eternal things were
   considered in their bare possibility, if men acted rationally, they
   would infinitely outweigh all temporal things in their influence on
   their hearts. And I would also observe, that to suppose eternal things
   not to be fully believed, at least by them who enjoy the light of the
   gospel, does not weaken, but rather strengthen, the argument for the
   depravity of nature. For the eternal world being what God had chiefly
   in view in the creation of men, this world was made wholly subordinate
   to the other, man's state here being only a state of probation,
   preparation, and progression, with respect to the future state. Eternal
   things are in effect their all, their whole concern; to understand and
   know which, it chiefly was, that they had understanding given them;
   therefore we may undoubtedly conclude, that if men have not respect to
   them as real and certain things, it cannot be for want of sufficient
   evidence of their truth: but it must be from a dreadful stupidity of
   mind, occasioning a sottish insensibility of their truth and
   importance, when manifested by the clearest evidence.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   That man's nature is corrupt, appears, in that by far the greater part
   of mankind, in all ages, have been wicked men.

   The depravity of man's nature appears, not only in its propensity to
   sin in some degree, which renders a man an evil or wicked man in the
   eye of the law, and strict justice, as was before shown; but it is so
   corrupt, that its depravity either shows that men are, or tends to make
   them to be, of such an evil character, as shall denominate them wicked
   men, according to the tenor of the covenant of grace.

   This may be argued from several things which have been already
   observed: as from a tendency to continual sin; a tendency to much
   greater degrees of sin than righteousness, and from the general extreme
   stupidity of mankind. But yet the present state of man's nature, as
   implying, or tending to, a wicked character, may deserve to be more
   particularly considered, and directly proved. And in general, this
   appears, in that there have been so very few in the world, from age to
   age, ever since the world has stood, that have been of any other
   character.

   It is abundantly evident in Scripture, and is what I suppose none that
   call themselves Christians will deny, that the whole world is divided
   into good and bad, and that all mankind at the day of judgment will
   either be approved as righteous, or condemned as wicked: either
   glorified, as children of the kingdom, or cast into a furnace of fire,
   as children of the wicked one.

   I need not stand to show what things belong to the character of such as
   shall hereafter be accepted as righteous, according to the Word of God.
   It may be sufficient for my present purpose, to observe what Dr. T.
   himself speaks of, as belonging essentially to the character of such.
   In p. 203. he says, "This is infallibly the character of true
   Christians, and what is essential to such, that they have really
   mortified the flesh with its lusts;--they are dead to sin, and live no
   longer therein; the old man is crucified, and the body of sin
   destroyed; they yield themselves to God, as those that are alive from
   the dead, and their members as instruments of righteousness to God, and
   as servants of righteousness to holiness."--There is more to the like
   purpose in the two next pages. In p. 228. he says, "Whatsoever is evil
   and corrupt in us, we ought to condemn; not so, as it shall still
   remain in us, that we may always be condemning it, but that we may
   speedily reform, and be effectually delivered from it; otherwise
   certainly we do not come up to the character of the true disciples of
   Christ."

   In p. 248. he says, "Unless God's favour be preferred before all other
   enjoyments whatsoever, unless there be a delight in the worship of God,
   and in converse with him, unless every appetite be brought into
   subjection to reason and truth, and unless there be a kind and
   benevolent disposition towards our fellow-creatures, how can the mind
   be fit to dwell with God, in his house and family, to do him service in
   his kingdom, and to promote the happiness of any part of his
   creation."--And in his Key, § 286. p. 101, 102, &c. showing there, what
   it is to be a true Christian, he says, among other things, "That he is
   one who has such a sense and persuasion of the love of God in Christ,
   that he devotes his life to the honour and service of God, in hope of
   eternal glory. And that to the character of a true Christian, it is
   absolutely necessary, that he diligently study the things that are
   freely given him of God, viz. his election, regeneration, &c. that he
   may gain a just knowledge of those inestimable privileges, may taste
   that the Lord is gracious, and rejoice in the gospel-salvation, as his
   greatest happiness and glory.--It is necessary, that he work these
   blessings on his heart, till they become a vital principle, producing
   in him the love of God, engaging him to all cheerful obedience to his
   will, giving him a proper dignity and elevation of soul, raising him
   above the best and worst of this world, carrying his heart into heaven,
   and fixing his affections and regards upon his everlasting inheritance,
   and the crown of glory laid up for him there.--Thus he is armed against
   all the temptations and trials resulting from any pleasure or pain,
   hopes or fears, gain or loss, in the present world. None of these
   things move him from a faithful discharge of any part of his duty, or
   from a firm attachment to truth and righteousness; neither counts he
   his very life dear to him, that he may do the will of God, and finish
   his course with joy. In a sense of the love of God in Christ, he
   maintains daily communion with God, by reading and meditating on his
   Word. In a sense of his own infirmity, and the readiness of the divine
   favour to succour him, he daily addresses the throne of grace, for the
   renewal of spiritual strength, in assurance of obtaining it, through
   the one Mediator Christ Jesus. Enlightened and directed by the heavenly
   doctrine of the gospel," &c. [239]

   Now I leave every one that has any degree of impartiality, to judge,
   whether there be not sufficient grounds to think, that it is but a very
   small part indeed, of the many myriads and millions which overspread
   this globe, who are of a character that in any wise answers these
   descriptions. However Dr. T. insists, that all nations, and every man
   on the face of the earth, have light and means sufficient to do the
   whole will of God, even they that live in the grossest darkness of
   paganism.

   Dr. T. in answer to arguments of this kind, very impertinently from
   time to time objects, that we are no judges of the viciousness of men's
   characters, nor are able to decide in what degree they are virtuous or
   vicious. As though we could have no good grounds to judge, that any
   thing appertaining to the qualities or properties of the mind, which is
   invisible, is general or prevailing among a multitude or collective
   body, unless we can determine how it is with each individual. I think I
   have sufficient reason, from what I know and have heard of the American
   Indians, to judge, that there are not many good philosophers among
   them; though the thoughts of their hearts, and the ideas and knowledge
   they have in their minds, are things invisible; and though I have never
   seen so much as a thousandth part of the Indians; and with respect to
   most of them, should not be able to pronounce peremptorily concerning
   any one, that he was not very knowing in the nature of things, if all
   should singly pass before me. And Dr. T. himself seems to be sensible
   of the falseness of his own conclusions, that he so often urges against
   others; if we may judge by his practice, and the liberties he takes, in
   judging of a multitude himself. He, it seems, is sensible that a man
   may have good grounds to judge, that wickedness of character is general
   in a collective body; because he openly does it himself. (Key, p. 102.)
   After declaring the things which belong to the character of a true
   Christian, he judges of the generality of Christians, that they have
   cast off these things, that they are a people that do err in their
   hearts, and have not known God's ways, p. 259. he judges, that the
   generality of Christians are the most wicked of all mankind, when he
   thinks it will throw some disgrace on the opinion of such as he
   opposes. The like we have from time to time in other places, (as p.
   168. p. 258, Key, p. 127, 128.)

   But if men are not sufficient judges, whether there are few of the
   world of mankind but what are wicked, yet doubtless God is sufficient,
   and his judgment, often declared in his word, determines the
   matter.Matt. vii. 13, 14. "Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is
   the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many
   there be that go in thereat: because strait is the gate and narrow is
   the way that leadeth to life, and few there be that find it." It is
   manifest, that here Christ is not only describing the state of things,
   as it was at that day, and does not mention the comparative smallness
   of the number of them that are saved, as a consequence of the peculiar
   perverseness of that people, and of that generation; but as a
   consequence of the general circumstances of the way to life, and the
   way to destruction, the broadness of the one, and the narrowness of the
   other. In the straitness of the gate, &c. I suppose none will deny,
   that Christ has respect to the strictness of those rules, which he had
   insisted on in the preceding sermon, and which render the way to life
   very difficult. But certainly these amiable rules would not be
   difficult, were they not contrary to the natural inclinations of men's
   hearts; and they would not be contrary to those inclinations, were
   these not depraved. Consequently the wideness of the gate, and
   broadness of the way, that leads to destruction, in consequence of
   which many go in thereat, must imply the agreeableness of this way to
   men's natural inclinations. The like reason is given by Christ, why few
   are saved. Luke xiii. 23, 24. "Then said one unto him, Lord, are there
   few saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait
   gate: for many I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be
   able." That there are generally but few good men in the world, even
   among them who have the most distinguishing and glorious advantages for
   it, is evident by that saying of our Lord, "Many are called, but few
   are chosen." And if there are but few among these, how few, how very
   few indeed, must persons of this character be, compared with the whole
   world of mankind! The exceeding smallness of the number of saints,
   compared with the whole world, appears by the representations often
   made of them as distinguished from the world; in which they are spoken
   of as called and chosen out of the world, redeemed from the earth,
   redeemed from among men; as being those that are of God, while the
   whole world lieth in wickedness, and the like.

   And if we look into the Old Testament, we shall find the same testimony
   given. Prov. xx. 6. "Most men will proclaim every man his own goodness:
   but a faithful man who can find?" By the faithful man, as the phrase is
   used in Scripture, is intended much the same as a sincere, upright, or
   truly good man; as in Psal. xii. 1. and Psal. xxxi. 23. and Psal. ci.
   6. and other places. Again, Eccl. vii. 25-29. "I applied mine heart to
   know, and to search, and to find out wisdom, and the reason of things,
   and to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness:
   and I find more bitter than death, the woman whose heart is snares, &c.
   Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to
   find out the account, which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one
   man among a thousand have I found: but a woman among all these have I
   not found. Lo, this only have I found, that God made man upright; but
   they have sought out many inventions." Solomon here signifies, that
   when he set himself diligently to find out the account or proportion of
   true wisdom, or thorough uprightness among men, the result was, that he
   found it to be but as one to a thousand, &c. Dr. T. on this place, p.
   184. says, "The wise man in the context, is inquiring into the
   corruption and depravity of mankind, of the men and women, that lived
   in his time." As though what he said represented nothing of the state
   of things in the world in general, but only in his time. But does Dr.
   T. or anybody else, suppose this only to be the design of that book, to
   represent the vanity and evil of the world in that time, and to show
   that all was vanity and vexation of spirit in Solomon's day? That day
   truly, we have reason to think, was a day of the greatest smiles of
   Heaven on that nation, that ever had been on any nation from the
   foundation of the world. Not only does the subject and argument of the
   whole book show it to be otherwise; but also the declared design of the
   book in the first chapter; where the world is represented as very much
   the same, as to its vanity and evil, from age to age. It makes little
   or no progress, after all its revolutions and restless motions,
   labours, and pursuits; like the sea, that has all the rivers constantly
   emptying themselves into it, from age to age, and yet is never the
   fuller. As to that place, Prov. xx. 6."A faithful man who can find?"
   there is no more reason to suppose that the wise man has respect only
   to his time, in these words, than in those immediately preceding,
   "Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep waters; but a man of
   understanding will draw it out." Or in the words next following, "The
   just man walketh in his integrity: his children are blessed after him."
   Or in any other proverb in the whole book. And if it were so, that
   Solomon in these things meant only to describe his own times, it would
   not at all weaken the argument. For, if we observe the history of the
   Old Testament, there is reason to think there never was any time from
   Joshua to the captivity, wherein wickedness was more restrained, and
   virtue and religion more encouraged and promoted, than in David's and
   Solomon's times. And if there was so little true piety in that nation,
   the only people of God under heaven, even in their best times, what may
   we suppose, concerning the world in general, take one time with
   another?

   Notwithstanding what some authors advance concerning the prevalence of
   virtue, honesty, good neighbourhood, cheerfulness, &c. In the world;
   Solomon, whom we may justly esteem as wise and just an observer of
   human nature, and the state of the world of mankind, as most in these
   days (besides, Christians ought to remember, that he wrote by divine
   inspiration)--judged the world to be so full of wickedness, that it was
   better never to be born, than to be born to live only in such a world.
   Eccl. iv. 1-3. "So I returned and considered all the oppressions that
   are done under the sun; and behold, the tears of such as were
   oppressed, and they had no comforter: and on the side of their
   oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter. Wherefore, I
   praised the dead, which were already dead, more than the living, which
   are yet alive. Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet
   been; who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun."
   Surely it will not be said that Solomon has only respect to his time
   here too, when he speaks of the oppressions of them that were in power;
   since he himself, and others appointed by him, and wholly under his
   control, were the men that were in power in that land, and in almost
   all the neighbouring countries.

   The same inspired writer says, Eccles. ix. 3. "The heart of the sons of
   men is full of evil; and madness is in their heart while they live; and
   after that they go to the dead." If these general expressions are to be
   understood only of some, and those the smaller part, when in general,
   truth, honesty, good-nature, &c. govern the world, why are such general
   expressions from time to time used? Why does not this wise and noble
   prince express himself in a more generous and benevolent strain, and
   say, wisdom is in the hearts of the sons of men while they live,
   &c.--instead of leaving in his writings so many sly, ill-natured
   suggestions, which pour such contempt on human nature, and tend so much
   to excite mutual jealousy and malevolence, to taint the minds of
   mankind through all generations after him?

   If we consider the various successive parts and periods of the duration
   of the world, it will, if possible, be yet more evident, that by far
   the greater part of mankind have, in all ages, been of a wicked
   character. The short accounts we have of Adam and his family are such
   as lead us to suppose, that the greater part of his posterity in his
   life-time, yea, in the former part of his life, were wicked. It
   appears, that his eldest son Cain, was a very wicked man, who slew his
   righteous brother Abel. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years
   before Seth was born: and by that time, we may suppose, his posterity
   began to be considerably numerous: when he was born, his mother called
   his name Seth; for God, said she, hath appointed me another seed
   instead of Abel. Which naturally suggests this to our thoughts; that of
   all her seed then existing, none were of any such note for religion and
   virtue, as that their parents could have any great comfort in them, or
   expectation from them, on that account. And by the brief history we
   have, it looks as if--however there might be some intervals of a
   revival of religion, yet--in the general, mankind grew more and more
   corrupt till the flood. It is signified that when men began to multiply
   on the face of the earth, wickedness prevailed exceedingly, Gen. vi. 1,
   &c. And that before God appeared to Noah, to command him to build the
   ark, one hundred and twenty years before the flood, the world had long
   continued obstinate in great and general wickedness, and the disease
   was become inveterate. The expressions (Gen. vi. 3, 5, 6.) suggest as
   much: "And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with
   man.--And God saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth,
   and that every imagination of the thought of his heart was evil, only
   evil continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the
   earth, and it grieved him at his heart." And by that time, "all flesh
   had corrupted his way upon the earth," (Gen. vi. 12.) And as Dr. T.
   himself observes, (p. 122.) "Mankind were universally debauched into
   lust, sensuality, rapine, and injustice."

   And with respect to the period after the flood, to the calling of
   Abraham; Dr. T. says, as already observed, that in about four hundred
   years after the flood, the generality of mankind were fallen into
   idolatry; which was before all they were dead who came out of the ark.
   And it cannot be thought, the world went suddenly into that general and
   extreme degree of corruption, but that they had been gradually growing
   more and more corrupt; though it is true, it must be by very swift
   degrees--however soon we may suppose they began--to get to that pass in
   one age.

   And as to the period from the calling of Abraham to the coming of
   Christ, Dr. T. justly observes as follows: (Key, p. 133): "If we reckon
   from the call of Abraham to the coming of Christ, the Jewish
   dispensation continued one thousand nine hundred and twenty-one years;
   during which period, the other families and nations of the earth, not
   only lay out of God's peculiar kingdom, but also lived in idolatry,
   great ignorance, and wickedness." And with regard to the Israelites, it
   is evident that wickedness was the generally prevailing character among
   them, from age to age. If we consider how it was with Jacob's family,
   the behavior of Reuben with his father's concubine, the behavior of
   Judah with Tamar, the conduct of Jacob's sons towards the Shechemites,
   and the behaviour of Joseph's ten brethren in their cruel treatment of
   him; we cannot think, that the character of true piety belonged to many
   of them, according to Dr. T.'s own notion of such a character; though
   it be true, they might afterwards repent. And with respect to the time
   the children of Israel were in Egypt; the Scripture, speaking of them
   in general, or as a collective body, often represents them as complying
   with the abominable idolatries of the country [240] . And as to that
   generation which went out of Egypt, and wandered in the wilderness,
   they are abundantly represented as extremely and almost universally
   wicked, perverse, and children of divine wrath. And after Joshua's
   death, the Scripture is very express, that wickedness was the
   prevailing character in the nation, from age to age. So, it was till
   Samuel's time. 1 Sam. viii. 7, 8. "They have rejected me, that I should
   not reign over them; according to all their works which they have done,
   since the day that I brought them out of Egypt, unto this day." Yea, so
   it was till Jeremiah's and Ezekiel's time. (Jer. xxxii. 30, 31.) "For
   the children of Israel, and the children of Judah, have only done evil
   before me from their youth; for the children of Israel have only
   provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the Lord: for
   this city hath been to me a provocation of mine anger, and of my fury,
   from the day they built it, even unto this day." (Compare Jer. v. 21,
   23. and Jer. vii. 25, 26, 27.) So Ezek. ii. 3, 4. "I send thee to the
   children of Israel, to a rebellious nation, that hath rebelled against
   me, they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this
   very day: for they are impudent children, and stiff-hearted." And it
   appears by the discourse of Stephen; (Acts vii.), that this was
   generally the case with that nation, from their first rise, even to the
   days of the apostles. After this summary rehearsal of the instances of
   their perverseness from the very time of their selling Joseph into
   Egypt, he concludes, ( ver. 51-53.) "Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised
   in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. As your fathers
   did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted?
   And they have slain them which showed before of the coming of that just
   One, of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have
   received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it."

   Thus it appears, that wickedness was the generally prevailing character
   in all nations, till Christ came. And so also it appears to have been
   since his coming to this day. So in the age of apostles. There was a
   great number of persons of a truly pious character in the latter part
   of the apostolic age, when multitudes of converts had been made, and
   Christianity was as yet in its primitive purity; but what says the
   apostle John of the church of God at that time, as compared with the
   rest of the world? (1 John v. 19. ) "We know that we are of God, and
   the whole world lieth in wickedness." And after that Christianity came
   to prevail to that degree, that Christians had the upper hand in
   nations and civil communities, still the greater part of mankind
   remained in their old heathen state; which Dr. T. speaks of as a state
   of great ignorance and wickedness. And besides, this is noted in all
   ecclesiastical history, that as the Christians gained in power and
   secular advantages, true piety declined, and corruption and wickedness
   prevailed among them.--And as to the state of the Christian world,
   since Christianity began to be established by human laws, wickedness
   for the most part has greatly prevailed; as is very notorious, and is
   implied in what Dr. T. himself says: In giving an account how the
   doctrine of original sin came to prevail among Christians, he observes
   (p. 167. S.) "That the christian religion was very early and grievously
   corrupted, by dreaming, ignorant, superstitious monks." In p. 259. he
   says, "The generality of Christians have embraced this persuasion
   concerning original sin; and the consequence has been, that the
   generality of Christians have been the most wicked, lewd, bloody, and
   treacherous of all mankind."

   Thus, a view of the several successive periods of the past duration of
   the world, from the beginning to this day, shows, that wickedness has
   ever been exceeding prevalent, and has had vastly the superiority in
   the world. And Dr. T. himself in effect owns, that it has been so ever
   since Adam first turned into the way of transgression. "It is certain
   (says he, p. 168.) the moral circumstances of mankind, since the time
   Adam first turned into the way of transgression, have been very
   different from a state of innocence. So far as we can judge from
   history, or what we know at present, the greatest part of mankind have
   been, and still are, very corrupt; though not equally so in every age
   and place." And lower in the same page, he speaks of Adam's posterity,
   as having sunk themselves into the most lamentable degrees of
   ignorance, superstition, idolatry, injustice, debauchery, &c.

   These things clearly determine the point, concerning the tendency of
   man's nature to wickedness, if we may be allowed to proceed according
   to such rules and methods of reasoning, as are never denied or doubted
   to be good and sure, in experimental philosophy; [241] or may reason
   from experience and facts, in that manner which common sense leads all
   mankind to in other cases. If experience and trial will evince anything
   at all concerning the natural disposition of the human heart, one would
   think the experience of so many ages, as have elapsed since the
   beginning of the world, and the trial made by hundreds of different
   nations together, for so long a time, should be sufficient to convince
   all, that wickedness is agreeable to the nature of mankind in its
   present state.

   Here, to strengthen the argument, if there were any need of it, I might
   observe, not only the extent and generality of the prevalence of
   wickedness in the world, but the height to which it has risen, and the
   degree in which it has reigned. Among innumerable things which confirm
   this, I shall now only observe, The degree in which mankind have from
   age to age been hurtful one to another. Many kinds of brute animals are
   esteemed very noxious and destructive, many of them are fierce,
   voracious, and many very poisonous, and the destroying of them has
   always been looked upon as a public benefit: but have not mankind been
   a thousand times as hurtful and destructive as any one of them, yea, as
   all the noxious beasts, birds, fishes, and reptiles in the earth, air,
   and water, put together, at least of all kinds of animals that are
   visible? And no creature can be found anywhere so destructive of its
   own kind as man is. All others, for the most part, are harmless and
   peaceable, with regard to their own species. Where one wolf is
   destroyed by another wolf, one viper by another, probably a thousand
   men are destroyed by those of their own species. Well therefore might
   our blessed Lord say, when sending forth his disciples into the world,
   (Matt. x. 16, 17.) "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
   wolves;--but, beware of men." Why do I say wolves? I send you forth
   into the wide world of men, that are far more hurtful and pernicious,
   and of whom you had much more need to beware, than of wolves.

   It would be strange indeed, that this should be the state of mankind,
   distinguished by reason, for that very end, that they might be capable
   of religion, which summarily consists in love, if men, as they come
   into the world, are in their nature innocent and harmless, undepraved,
   and perfectly free from all evil propensities.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [239] What Dr. Turnbull says of the character of a good man, is also
   worthy to be observed, Chris. Phil. p. 86, 258, 259, 288, 375, 376,
   409, 410

   [240] Levit. xvii.7. Josh. v.9.and Josh. xxiv.14. Ezek. xx. 7, 8. and
   Ezek. xxii.3.

   [241] Dr. Turnbull, though so great an enemy to the doctrine of the
   depravity of nature, yet greatly insists upon it, that the experimental
   method of reasoning ought to be adopted in moral matter, and things
   pertaining to the human nature; and should chiefly be relied upon, in
   moral as well as natural philosophy. See Introduc. to Mor. Phil.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   The native depravity of mankind appears, in that there has been so
   little good effect of so manifold and great means, used to promote
   virtue in the world.

   The evidence of the native corruption of mankind, appears much more
   glaring, when it is considered that the world has been so generally, so
   constantly, and so exceedingly corrupt, notwithstanding the various,
   great, and continual means that have been used to restrain men from
   sin, and promote virtue and true religion among them.

   Dr. T. supposes, that sorrow and death, which come on mankind in
   consequence of Adam's sin was brought on them in great favour; as a
   benevolent father, exercising an wholesome discipline towards his
   children; to restrain them from sin, by increasing the vanity of all
   earthly things, to abate their force to tempt and delude; to induce
   them to be moderate in gratifying the appetites of the body; to mortify
   pride and ambition; and that men might always have before their eyes a
   striking demonstration that sin is infinitely hateful to God, by a
   sight of that, than which nothing is more proper to give them the
   utmost abhorrence of iniquity, and to fix in their minds a sense of the
   dreadful consequences of sin, &c. &c. And in general, that they do not
   come as punishments, but purely as means to keep men from vice, and to
   make them better.--If it be so, surely they are great means. Here is a
   mighty alteration: mankind, once so easy and happy, healthful,
   vigorous, and beautiful, rich in all the pleasant and abundant
   blessings of paradise, now turned out, destitute, weak, and decaying,
   into a wide barren world, yielding briers and thorns, instead of the
   delightful growth and sweet fruit of the garden of Eden, to wear out
   life in sorrow and toil, on the ground cursed for his sake; and at
   last, either through long and lingering decay, or severe pain and acute
   disease, to expire and turn into putrefaction and dust. If these are
   only used as medicines, to prevent and to cure the diseases of the
   mind, they are sharp medicines indeed; especially death; which, to use
   Hezekiah's representation, is as it were breaking all his bones. And,
   one would think, should be very effectual, if the subject had no
   depravity--no evil and contrary bias, to resist, and hinder a proper
   effect--especially in the old world, when the first occasion of this
   terrible alteration, this severity of means, was fresh in memory. Adam
   continued alive near two-thirds of the time before the flood; so that a
   very great part of those who were alive till the flood, might have
   opportunity of seeing and conversing with him, and hearing from his
   mouth, not only an account of his fall, and the introduction of the
   awful consequences of it, but also of his first finding himself in
   existence in the new-created world, of the creation of Eve, and what
   passed between him and his Creator in paradise.

   But what was the success of these great means, to restrain men from
   sin, and to induce them to virtue? Did they prove sufficient?--instead
   of this, the world soon grew exceeding corrupt; till, to use our
   author's own words, mankind were universally debauched into lust,
   sensuality, rapine, and injustice.

   Then God used further means: he sent Noah, a preacher of righteousness,
   to warn the world of the universal destruction which would come upon
   them by a flood of waters, if they went on in sin. This warning he
   delivered with circumstances tending to strike their minds, and command
   their attention. He immediately went about building that vast
   structure, the ark, in which he must employ a great number of hands,
   and probably spent all he had in the world to save himself and his
   family. And under these uncommon means God waited upon them one hundred
   and twenty years--But all to no effect. The whole world, for ought
   appears, continued obstinate, and absolutely incorrigible: so that
   nothing remained to be done with them, but utterly to destroy the
   inhabitants of the earth; and to begin a new world, from that single
   family who had distinguished themselves by their virtue, that from them
   might be propagated a new and purer race. Accordingly, this was done:
   and the inhabitants of this new world, Noah's posterity, had these new
   and extraordinary means to restrain sin, and excite to virtue, in
   addition to the toil, sorrow, and common mortality, which the world has
   been subjected to before, in consequence of Adam's sin; viz. that God
   had newly testified his dreadful displeasure for sin, in destroying the
   many millions of mankind, all at one blow, old and young, men, women,
   and children, without pity on any for all the dismal shrieks and cries
   with which the world was filled. They themselves, the remaining family,
   were wonderfully distinguished by God's preserving goodness, that they
   might be a holy seed, being delivered from the corrupting examples of
   the old world; and being all the offspring of a living parent, whose
   pious instructions and counsels they had, to enforce these things upon
   them, to prevent sin, and engage them to their duty. These inhabitants
   of the new earth, must, for a long time, have before their eyes many
   evident and striking effects of that universal destruction, to be a
   continual affecting admonition to them. And besides all this, God now
   shortened the life of man to about one half of what it used to be. The
   shortening man's life, Dr. T. says (p. 68.) "Was that the wild range of
   ambition and lust might be brought into narrower bounds, and have less
   opportunity of doing mischief; and that death, being still nearer to
   our view, might be a more powerful motive to regard less the things of
   a transitory world, and to attend more to the rules of truth and
   wisdom."

   And now let us observe the consequence.--These new and extraordinary
   means, in addition to the former, were so far from proving sufficient,
   that the new world degenerated, and became corrupt, by such swift
   degrees, that as Dr. T. observes, mankind in general were sunk into
   idolatry, in about four hundred years after the flood, and so in about
   fifty years after Noah's death, they became so wicked and brutish, as
   to forsake the true God, and turn to the worship of inanimate
   creatures.

   When things were come to this dreadful pass, God was pleased, for a
   remedy, to introduce a new and wonderful dispensation--separating a
   particular family, and people, from all the rest of the world, by a
   series of most astonishing miracles, done in the open view of the
   world; and fixing their dwelling, as it were, in the midst of the
   earth, between Asia, Europe, and Africa, and in the midst of those
   nations which were most considerable for power, knowledge, and
   arts--that might, in an extraordinary manner, dwell among that people,
   in visible tokens of his presence. There he manifested himself, and
   thence to the world, by a course of miraculous operations and effects,
   for many ages; that the people might be holy to God, as a kingdom of
   priests, and might stand as a city on a hill, to be a light to the
   world. He also gradually shortened man's life, till it was brought to
   about one-twelfth part of what it used to be before the flood; and so,
   according to Dr. T. greatly diminishing his temptations to sin, and
   increasing his excitements to holiness.--And now let us consider what
   the success of these means was, both as to the Gentile world, and the
   nation of Israel.

   Dr. T. justly observes, (Key, p. 24. § 75.) "The Jewish dispensation
   had respect to the nations of the world, to spread the knowledge and
   obedience of God in the earth; and was established for the benefit of
   all mankind."--But how unsuccessful were these means, and all other
   means used with the heathen nations, so long as this dispensation
   lasted! Abraham was a person noted in all the principal nations then in
   the world; as in Egypt, and the eastern monarchies. God made his name
   famous by his wonderful, distinguishing dispensations towards him,
   particularly by so miraculously subduing, before him and his trained
   servants, those armies of the four eastern kings. This great work of
   the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, was greatly noticed
   by Melchizedeck; and one would think, should have been sufficient to
   awaken the attention of all the nations in that part of the world, and
   to lead them to the knowledge and worship of the only true God;
   especially if considered in conjunction with that miraculous and most
   terrible destruction of Sodom, and all the cities of the plain, for
   their wickedness, with Lot's miraculous deliverance; facts which
   doubtless in their day were much famed abroad in the world. But there
   is not the least appearance, in any accounts we have, of any
   considerable good effect. On the contrary, those nations which were
   most in the way of observing and being affected with these things, even
   the nations of Canaan, grew worse and worse, till their iniquity came
   to the full, in Joshua's time. And the posterity of Lot, that saint so
   wonderfully distinguished, soon became some of the most gross
   idolaters; as they appear to have been in Moses's time. (See Num. xxv.)
   Yea, and the far greater part even of Abraham's posterity, the children
   of Ishmael, Ziman, Joksham, Medan, Midian, Ishbak and Shuah, and Esau,
   soon forgot the true God and fell off to heathenism.

   Great things were done in the sight of the nations, tending to awaken
   them, and lead them to the knowledge and obedience of the true God, in
   Jacob's and Joseph's time; in that God did miraculously, by the hand of
   Joseph, preserve from perishing by famine, as it were the whole world;
   as appears by Gen. xli. 56, 57. Agreeably to which, the name that
   Pharaoh gave to Joseph, Zaphnath-Paaneah, as is said, in the Egyptian
   language, signifies savior of the world. But there does not appear to
   have been any good abiding effect of this; no, not so much as among the
   Egyptians, the chief of all the heathen nations at that day, who had
   these great works of Jehovah in their most immediate view. On the
   contrary, they grew worse and worse, and seem to be far more gross in
   their idolatries and ignorance of the true God, and every way more
   wicked, and ripe for ruin, when Moses was sent to Pharaoh, than they
   were in Joseph's time.

   After this, in Moses and Joshua's time, the great God was pleased to
   manifest himself in a series of the most astonishing miracles, for
   about fifty years together, wrought in the most public manner, in
   Egypt, in the wilderness, and in Canaan, in the view as it were of the
   whole world; miracles by which the world was shaken, the whole frame of
   the visible creation, earth, seas, and rivers, the atmosphere, the
   clouds, sun, moon, and stars were affected; miracles, greatly tending
   to convince the nations of the world, of the vanity of their false
   gods, showing Jehovah to be infinitely above them, in the thing wherein
   they dealt most proudly, and exhibiting God's awful displeasure at the
   wickedness of the heathen world. And these things are expressly spoken
   of as one end of these great miracles; (Exod. lx.14.Numb. xiv. 21.Josh.
   iv. 23, 24.) However, no reformation followed, but by the scripture
   account, the nations which had them most in view, were dreadfully
   hardened, stupidly refusing all conviction and reformation, and
   obstinately went on in opposition to the living God, to their own
   destruction.

   After this, God from time to time very publicly manifested himself to
   the nations of the world, by wonderful works wrought in the time of the
   Judges, of a like tendency with those already mentioned. Particularly
   in so miraculously destroying, by the hand of Gideon, almost the whole
   of that vast army of the Midianites, Amalekites, and all the children
   of the east, consisting of about 135,000 men. (Judg. vii. 12.andJudg.
   viii. 10.) But no reformation followed this, or the other great works
   of God, wrought in the times of Deborah and Barak, Jeptha and Samson.

   After these things, God used new, and in some respects, much greater
   means with the heathen world, to bring them to the knowledge and
   service of the true God, in the days of David and Solomon. He raised up
   David, a man after his own heart, a most fervent worshipper of the true
   God, and zealous hater of idols, and subdued before him almost all the
   nations between Egypt and Euphrates; often miraculously assisting him
   in his battles with his enemies. And he confirmed Solomon his son in
   the full and quiet possession of that great empire, for about forty
   years; and made him the wisest, richest, most magnificent, and every
   way the greatest monarch that ever had been in the world; and by far
   the most famous, and of greatest name among the nations; especially for
   his wisdom, and things concerning the name of his God; particularly the
   temple he built, which was exceeding magnificent, that it might be of
   fame and glory throughout all lands; 1 Chron. xxii. 5. And we are told,
   that there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all
   kings of the earth; (1 Kings. iv. 34.and1 Kings. x. 24.) And the
   Scripture informs us, that these great things were done, that the
   "nations in far countries might hear of God's great name, and of his
   out-stretched arm; that all the people of the earth might fear him, as
   well as his people Israel: and that all the people of the earth might
   know, that the Lord was God, and that there was none else." (1 Kings.
   viii. 41-43, 60.) But still there is no appearance of any considerable
   abiding effect, with regard to any one heathen nation.

   After this, before the captivity in Babylon, many great things were
   done in the sight of the gentile nations, very much tending to
   enlighten, affect, and persuade them. As God destroying the army of the
   Ethiopians of a thousand thousand, before Asa; Elijah's and Elisha's
   miracles; especially Elijah miraculously confounding Baal's prophets
   and worshippers; Elisha healing Naaman, the king of Syria's prime
   minister, and the miraculous victories obtained, through Elisha's
   prayers, over the Syrians, Moabites, and Edomites; the miraculous
   destruction of the vast united army of the children of Moab, Ammon, and
   Edom, at Jehoshaphat's prayer. (2 Chron. xx.) Jonah's preaching at
   Nineveh, together with the miracle of his deliverance from the whale's
   belly; which was published, and well attested, as a sign to confirm his
   preaching: but more especially that great work of God, in destroying
   Sennacherib's army by an angel, for his contempt of the God of Israel,
   as if he had been no more than the gods of the heathen.

   When all these things proved ineffectual, God took a new method with
   the heathen world, and used, in some respects, much greater means to
   convince and reclaim them, than ever before. In the first place, his
   people, the Jews, were removed to Babylon, the head and heart of the
   heathen world, (Chaldea having been very much the foundation of
   idolatry,) to carry thither the revelations which God had made of
   himself, contained in the sacred writings; and there to bear their
   testimony against idolatry; as some of them, particularly Daniel,
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, did, in a very open manner before the
   king, and the greatest men of the empire, with such circumstances as
   made their testimony very famous in the world. And God confirmed it
   with great miracles; which were published through the empire, by order
   of its monarch, as the mighty works of the God of Israel, showing him
   to be above all gods: Daniel, that great prophet, at the same time
   being exalted to be governor of all the wise men of Babylon, and one of
   the chief officers of Nebuchadnezzar's court.

   After this, God raised up Cyrus to destroy Babylon, for its obstinate
   contempt of the true God, and injuriousness towards his people;
   according to the prophecies of Isaiah, speaking of him by name,
   instructing him concerning the nature and dominion of the true God.
   (Isa. xlv.) Which prophecies were probably shown to him, whereby he was
   induced to publish his testimony concerning the God of Israel, as the
   god. (Ezra i. 2, 3.) Daniel, about the same time, being advanced to be
   prime minister of state in the new empire, erected under Darius, did in
   that place appear openly as a worshipper of the God of Israel, and him
   alone; God confirming his testimony for him, before the king and all
   the grandees of his kingdom, by preserving him in the den of lions;
   whereby Darius was induced to publish to all people, nations, and
   languages, that dwelt in all the earth, his testimony, that the God of
   Israel was the living God, and steadfast forever, &c.

   When, after the destruction of Babylon, some of the Jews returned to
   their own land, multitudes never returned, but were dispersed abroad
   through many parts of the vast Persian empire; as appears by the book
   of Esther. And many of them afterwards, as good histories inform us,
   were removed into the more western parts of the world; and so were
   dispersed as it were all over the heathen world, having the Holy
   Scriptures with them, and synagogues every where, for the worship of
   the true God. And so it continued to be, to the days of Christ and his
   apostles; as appears by the Acts of the Apostles. Thus that light,
   which God had given them, was carried abroad into all parts of the
   world: so that now they had far greater advantages to come to the
   knowledge of the truth, in matters of religion, if they had been
   disposed to improve their advantages.

   And besides all these things, from about Cyrus's time, learning and
   philosophy increased, and was carried to a great height. God raised up
   a number of men of prodigious genius, to instruct others, and improve
   their reason and understanding, in the nature of things: and
   philosophic knowledge having gone on to increase for several ages,
   seemed to be got to its height before Christ came, or about that time.

   And now let it be considered what was the effect of all these
   things.--Instead of a reformation, or any appearance or prospect of it,
   the heathen world in general rather grew worse. As Dr. Winder observes,
   "The inveterate absurdities of pagan idolatry continued without remedy,
   and increased as arts and learning increased; and paganism prevailed in
   all its height of absurdity, when pagan nations were polished to the
   height, and in the most polite cities and countries; and thus continued
   to the last breath of pagan power." And so it was with respect to
   wickedness in general, as well as idolatry; as appears by what the
   apostle Paul observes in Rom. i.--Dr. T. speaking of the time when the
   gospel-scheme was introduced (Key, § 289.) says, "The moral and
   religious state of the heathen was very deplorable, being generally
   sunk into great ignorance, gross idolatry, and abominable vice."
   Abominable vices prevailed, not only among the common people, but even
   among their philosophers themselves, yea, some of the chief of them,
   and of greatest genius; so Dr. T. himself observes, as to that
   detestable vice of sodomy, which they commonly and openly allowed and
   practised without shame. (See Dr. T.'s note on Rom. i. 27).

   Having thus considered the state of the heathen world, with regard to
   the effect of means used for its reformation, during the Jewish
   dispensation, from the first foundation of it in Abraham's time; let us
   now consider how it was with that people themselves, who were
   distinguished with the peculiar privileges of that dispensation. The
   means used with the heathen nations were great; but they were small, if
   compared with those used with the Israelites. The advantages by which
   that people were distinguished, are represented in Scripture as vastly
   above all parallel, in passages which Dr. T. takes notice of (Key, §
   54.) And he reckons these privileges among those which he calls
   antecedent blessings, consisting in motives to virtue and obedience;
   and says, (Key, § 66.) "That this was the very end and design of the
   dispensation of God's extraordinary favours to the Jews, viz. to engage
   them to duty and obedience, or that it was a scheme for promoting
   virtue, is clear beyond dispute, from every part of the Old Testament."
   Nevertheless, the generality of that people, through all the successive
   periods of that dispensation, were men of a wicked character. But it
   will be more abundantly manifest, how strong the natural bias to
   iniquity appeared to be among that people, by considering more
   particularly their condition from time to time.

   Notwithstanding the great things God had done in the times of Abraham,
   Isaac, and Jacob, to separate them and their posterity from the
   idolatrous world, that they might be a holy people to himself; yet in
   about two hundred years after Jacob's death, and in less than one
   hundred and fifty years after the death of Joseph, and while some were
   alive who had seen Joseph, the people had in a great measure lost the
   true religion, and were apace conforming to the heathen world. For a
   remedy, and the more effectually to alienate them from idols, and
   engage them to the God of their fathers, God appeared, in order to
   bring them out from among the Egyptians, and separate them from the
   heathen world, and to reveal himself in his glory and majesty, in so
   affecting and astonishing a manner, as tended most deeply and durably
   to impress their minds; that they might never forsake him any more. But
   so perverse were they, that they murmured even in the midst of the
   miracles that God wrought for them in Egypt, and murmured at the Red
   sea, in a few days after God had brought them out with such a mighty
   hand. When he had led him through the sea, they sang his praise, but
   soon forgat his works. Before they got to mount Sinai, they openly
   manifested their perverseness from time to time; so that God says of
   them, Exod. xvi. 28. "How long refuse ye to keep my commandments, and
   my laws?" Afterwards they murmured again at Rephidim.

   In about two months after they came out of Egypt, they came to mount
   Sinai; where God entered into a most solemn covenant with the people,
   that they should be an holy people unto him, with such astonishing
   manifestations of his power, majesty, and holiness, as were altogether
   unparalleled. God puts the people in mind, (Deut. iv. 32-34.) "For ask
   now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day
   that God created man upon the earth; and ask from one side of heaven
   unto the other, whether there has been any such thing as this great
   thing is, or hath been heard like it. Did ever people hear the voice of
   God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and
   live? Or hath God assayed to take him a nation from the midst of
   another nation?" &c. And these great things were in order to impress
   their minds with such a conviction and sense of divine truth, and their
   obligations, that they might never forget them; as God says, (Exod.
   xix. 9) "Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may
   hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever." But what was
   the effect of all? It was not more than two or three months, before
   that people, under that very mountain, returned to their old Egyptian
   idolatry, and were singing and dancing before a golden calf, which they
   had set up to worship. And after awful manifestations of God's
   displeasure for that sin, and so much done to bring them to repentance,
   and confirm them in obedience, it was but a few months before they came
   to that violence of spirit, in open rebellion against God, that with
   the utmost vehemence they declared their resolution to follow God no
   longer, but to make them a captain to return into Egypt. And thus they
   went on in perverse opposition to the Most High, from time to time
   repeating their open acts of rebellion, in the midst of continued
   astonishing miracles, till that generation was destroyed. And though
   the following generation seems to have been the best that ever was in
   Israel, yet notwithstanding their good example, and notwithstanding all
   the wonders of God's power and love to that people in Joshua's time,
   how soon did that people degenerate, and begin to forsake God, and join
   with the heathen in their idolatries, till God, by severe means, and by
   sending prophets and judges, extraordinarily influenced from above,
   reclaimed them! But when they were brought to some reformation by such
   means, they soon fell away again into the practice of idolatry; and so
   from one age to another; and nothing proved effectual for any abiding
   reformation.

   After things had gone on thus for several hundred years, God used new
   methods with his people, in two respects: First, he raised up a great
   prophet, under whom a number of young men were trained up in schools,
   that from among them there might be a constant succession of great
   prophets in Israel, of such as God should choose; which seems to have
   been continued for more than five hundred years. Secondly, God raised
   up a great king, David, one eminent for wisdom, piety, and fortitude,
   to subdue all their heathen neighbours, who used to be such a snare to
   them; and to confirm, adorn, and perfect the institutions of his public
   worship; and by him to reveal more fully the great salvation, and
   future glorious kingdom of the Messiah. And after him was raised up his
   son, Solomon, the wisest and greatest prince that ever was on earth,
   more fully to settle and establish those things which his father David
   had begun, concerning the public worship of God in Israel, and to build
   a glorious temple for the honour of jehovah, and the institutions of
   his worship, and to instruct the neighbour nations in true wisdom and
   religion. But what was the success of these new and extraordinary
   means? If we take Dr. T. for our expositor of Scripture, the nation
   must be extremely corrupt in David's time; for he supposes he has
   respect to his own times, in those words, Psal. xiv. 2, 3. "The Lord
   looked down from heaven, to see if there were any that did understand,
   and seek God: they are all gone aside: they are together become filthy;
   there is none that doeth good; no, not one." But, whether Dr. T. be in
   the right in this, or not, yet if we consider what appeared in Israel,
   in Absalom's and Sheba's rebellion, we shall not see cause to think,
   that the greater part of the nation at that day were men of true wisdom
   and piety. As to Solomon's time, Dr. T. supposes, as has been already
   observed, that Solomon speaks of his own times, when he says, he had
   found but one in a thousand that was a thoroughly upright man.

   However, it appears, that all those great means used to promote and
   establish virtue and true religion, in Samuel's, David's, and Solomon's
   times, were so far from having any general abiding good effect in
   Israel, that Solomon himself, with all his wisdom, and notwithstanding
   the unparalleled favours of God to him, had his mind corrupted, so as
   openly to tolerate idolatry in the land, and greatly to provoke God
   against him. And as soon as he was dead, ten tribes of the twelve
   forsook the true worship of God, and instead of it, openly established
   the like idolatry that the people fell into at mount Sinai, when they
   made the golden calf; and continued fully obstinate in this apostasy,
   notwithstanding all means that could be used with them by the prophets,
   whom God sent, one after another, to reprove, counsel, and warn them,
   for about two hundred and fifty years; especially those two great
   prophets, Elijah and Elisha. Of all the kings that reigned over them,
   there was not so much as one but what was of a wicked character. And at
   last their case seemed utterly desperate; so that nothing remained to
   be done with them, but to remove them out of God's sight. Thus the
   scripture represents the matter, 2 Kings xvii.

   And as to the other two tribes; though their kings were always of the
   family of David, and they were favoured in many respects far beyond
   their brethren, yet they were generally exceeding corrupt. Their kings
   were, most of them, wicked men, and their magistrates, and priests, and
   people, were generally agreed in the corruption. Thus the matter is
   represented in the scripture history, and the books of the prophets.
   And when they had seen how God had cast off the ten tribes, instead of
   taking warning, they made themselves vastly more vile than ever the
   others had done. 2 Kings. xvii. 18, 19. Ezek. xvi. 46, 47, 51. God
   indeed waited longer upon them, for his servant David's sake, and for
   Jerusalem's sake, that he had chosen; and used more extraordinary means
   with them; especially by those great prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah, but
   to no effect: so that at last, as the prophets represent the matter,
   they were like a body universally and desperately diseased and
   corrupted, that would admit of no cure, the whole head sick, and the
   whole heart faint, &c.

   Things being come to that pass, God took this method with them; he
   utterly destroyed their city and land, and the temple which he had
   among them, made thorough work in purging the land of them; as when a
   man empties a dish, wipes it, and turns it upside down; or when a
   vessel is cast into a fierce fire, till its filthiness is thoroughly
   burnt out.( 2 Kings. xxi. 13. Ezek. chap. xxiv.) They were carried into
   captivity, and there left, till that wicked generation was dead, and
   those old rebels were purged out; that afterwards the land might be
   resettled with a more pure generation.

   After the return from the captivity, and God had built the Jewish
   church again in their own land, by a series of wonderful providences;
   yet they corrupted themselves again, to so great a degree, that the
   transgressors were come to the full again in the days of Antiochus
   Epiphanes; as the matter is represented in the prophecy of Daniel.
   (Dan. viii. 23.) And then God made them the subjects of a dispensation,
   little, if any thing, less terrible, than that which had been in
   Nebuchadnezzar's days. And after God had again delivered them, and
   restored the state of religion among them, by the instrumentality of
   the Maccabees, they degenerated again: so that when Christ came, they
   were arrived to that extreme degree of corruption, which is represented
   in the accounts given by the evangelists.

   It may be observed here in general, that the Jews, though so vastly
   distinguished with advantages, means, and motives to holiness, yet are
   represented, from time to time, as more wicked in the sight of God,
   than the very worst of the heathen. As, of old, God swore by his life,
   that the wickedness of Sodom was small, compared with that of the Jews;
   (Ezek. xvi. 47, 48, &c. also chapter Ezek. v. 5-10.) So, Christ
   speaking of the Jews, in his time, represents them as having much
   greater guilt than the inhabitants of Tyre and Sydon, or even Sodom and
   Gomorrah.

   But we are now come to the time when the grandest scene was displayed
   that ever was opened on earth. After all other schemes had been so long
   and so thoroughly tried, and had so greatly failed of success, both
   among Jews and Gentiles; that wonderful dispensation was at length
   introduced--the greatest scheme for suppressing and restraining
   iniquity among mankind, that ever infinite wisdom and mercy
   contrived--even the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ. "A new
   dispensation of grace was erected (to use Dr. T.'s own words, p. 239,
   240.) for the more certain and effectual sanctification of mankind,
   into the image of God; delivering them from the sin and wickedness,
   into which they might fall, or were already fallen; to redeem them from
   all iniquity, and bring them to the knowledge and obedience of God." In
   whatever high and exalted terms the Scripture speaks of the means and
   motives which the Jews enjoyed of old; yet their privileges are
   represented as having no glory in comparison of the advantages of the
   gospel. Dr. T.'s words (p. 233.) are worthy to be here repeated. "Even
   the heathen (says he) knew God, and might have glorified him as God;
   but under the glorious light of the gospel, we have very clear ideas of
   the divine perfections, and particularly of the love of God as our
   Father, and as the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
   We see our duty in the utmost extent, and the most cogent reasons to
   perform it: we have eternity opened to us, even an endless state of
   honour and felicity, the reward of virtuous actions; and the Spirit of
   God promised for our direction and assistance. And all this may and
   ought to be applied to the purifying of our minds, and the perfecting
   of holiness. And to these happy advantages we are born; for which we
   are bound for ever to praise and magnify the rich grace of God in the
   Redeemer." And he elsewhere says, [242] "The gospel-constitution is a
   scheme the most perfect and effectual for restoring true religion, and
   promoting virtue and happiness, that ever the world has yet seen." And
   [243] admirably adapted to enlighten our minds, and sanctify our
   hearts. And [244] never were motives so divine and powerful proposed,
   to induce us to the practice of all virtue and goodness.

   And yet even these means have been ineffectual upon the far greater
   part of them with whom they have been used; of the many that have been
   called, few have been chosen.

   As to the Jews, God's ancient people, with whom they were used in the
   first place, and used long by Christ and his apostles, the generality
   of them rejected Christ and his gospel, with extreme pertinacity of
   spirit. They not only went on still in that career of corruption which
   had been increasing from the time of the Maccabees; but Christ's
   coming, his doctrine and miracles, the preaching of his followers, and
   the glorious things that attended the same, were the occasion, through
   their perverse misimprovement, of an infinite increase of their
   wickedness. They crucified the Lord of glory, with the utmost malice
   and cruelty, and persecuted his followers; they pleased not God, and
   were contrary to all men; they went on to grow worse and worse, till
   they filled up the measure of their sin, and wrath came upon them to
   the uttermost; and they were destroyed, and cast out of God's sight,
   with unspeakably greater tokens of the divine abhorrence and
   indignation, than in the days of Nebuchadnezzar. The greater part of
   the whole nation were slain, and the rest were scattered abroad through
   the earth in the most abject and forlorn circumstances. And in the same
   spirit of unbelief and malice against Christ and the gospel, and in
   their miserable dispersed circumstances, do they remain to this day.

   And as to the gentile nations, though there was a glorious success of
   the gospel amongst them, in the apostles' days; yet probably not one in
   ten of those that had the gospel preached to them embraced it. The
   powers of the world were set against it, and persecuted it with
   insatiable malignity. And among the professors of Christianity, there
   presently appeared in many a disposition to abuse the gospel to the
   service of pride and licentiousness. The apostles foretold a grand
   apostasy of the christian world, which should continue many ages; and
   observed, that there appeared a disposition to such an apostasy, among
   professing Christians, even in that day. (2 Thess. ii. 7.) The greater
   part of the ages now elapsed, have been spent in that grand and general
   apostasy, under which the christian world, as it is called, has been
   transformed into what has been vastly more dishonourable and hateful to
   God, and repugnant to true virtue, than the state of the heathen world
   before: which is agreeable to the prophetical descriptions given of it
   by the Holy Spirit.

   In these latter ages of the christian church, God has raised up a
   number of great and good men, to bear testimony against the corruptions
   of the church of Rome, and by their means introduced that light into
   the world, by which, in a short time, at least one-third part of Europe
   was delivered from the more gross enormities of Anti-christ: which was
   attended at first with a great reformation, as to vital and practical
   religion. But how is the gold become dim! To what a pass are things
   come in protestant countries at this day, and in our nation in
   particular! To what a prodigious height has a deluge of infidelity,
   profaneness, luxury, debauchery, and wickedness of every kind, arisen!
   The poor savage Americans are mere babes, if I may so speak, as to
   proficiency in wickedness, in comparison of multitudes in the christian
   world. Dr. T. himself, as before observed, represents, that the
   generality of Christians have been the most wicked, lewd, bloody, and
   treacherous of all mankind; and (Key, § 388) that "The wickedness of
   the christian world renders it so much like the heathen, that the good
   effects of our change to Christianity are but little seen."

   With respect to the dreadful corruption of the present day, it is to be
   considered, besides the advantages already mentioned, that great
   advances in learning and philosophic knowledge have been made in the
   present and past century; affording great advantage for a proper and
   enlarged exercise of our rational powers, and for our seeing the bright
   manifestation of God's perfection in his works. And it is to observed,
   that the means and inducements to virtue, which this age enjoys, are in
   addition to most of those which were mentioned before, as given of old;
   and among other things, in addition to the shortening of man's life to
   70 or 80 years, from near a thousand. And, with regard to this, I would
   observe, that as the case now stands in christendom, take one with
   another of those who ever come to years of discretion, their life is
   not more than forty or forty-five years; which is but about the
   twentieth part of what it once was: and not so much in great cities,
   places where profaneness, sensuality, and debauchery, commonly prevail
   to the greatest degree.

   Dr. T. (Key, § 1.) truly observes, That God has from the beginning
   exercised wonderful and infinite wisdom, in the methods he has, from
   age to age, made use of to oppose vice, cure corruption, and promote
   virtue in the world; and introduced several schemes to that end. It is
   indeed remarkable, how many schemes and methods were tried of old, both
   before and after the flood; how many were used in the times of the Old
   Testament, both with Jews and heathens, and how ineffectual all these
   ancient methods proved, for 4000 years together, till God introduced
   that grand dispensation, for redeeming men from all iniquity, and
   purifying them to himself, a people zealous of good works; which the
   Scripture represents as the subject of the admiration of angels. But
   even this has now so long proved ineffectual, with respect to the
   generality, that Dr. T. thinks there is need of a new dispensation; the
   present light of the gospel being insufficient for the full reformation
   of the christian world, by reason of its corruptions: (Note on Rom. i.
   27.)--And yet all these things, according to him, without any natural
   bias to the contrary; no stream of natural inclination or propensity at
   all, to oppose inducements to goodness; no native opposition of heart,
   to withstand those gracious means, which God has ever used with
   mankind, from the beginning of the world to this day; any more than
   there was in the heart of Adam, the moment God created him in perfect
   innocence.

   Surely Dr. T.'s scheme is attended with strange paradoxes. And that his
   mysterious tenets may appear in a true light, it must be observed
   that--at the same time he supposes these means, even the very greatest
   and best of them, to have proved so ineffectual, that help from them,
   as to any general reformation, is to be despaired of--that he maintains
   all mankind, even the heathen in all parts of the world, yea, every
   single person in it, (which must include every Indian in America,
   before the Europeans came hither; and every inhabitant of the unknown
   parts of Africa and Terra Australis,) has ability, light, and means
   sufficient to do their whole duty; yea, many passages in his writings
   plainly suppose, to perform perfect obedience to God's law, without the
   least degree of vice or iniquity. [245]

   But I must not omit to observe, that Dr. T. supposes, the reason why
   the gospel-dispensation has been so ineffectual, is, that it has been
   greatly misunderstood and perverted. In his Key (§ 389.) he says,
   "Wrong representations of the scheme of the gospel have greatly
   obscured the glory of divine grace, and contributed much to the
   corruption of its professors.--Such doctrines have been almost
   universally taught and received, as quite subvert it. Mistaken notions
   about nature, grace, election and reprobation, justification,
   regeneration, redemption, calling, adoption, &c. have quite taken away
   the very ground of the christian life."

   But how came the gospel to be so universally and exceedingly
   misunderstood? Is it because it is in itself so very dark and
   unintelligible, and not adapted to the apprehension of the human
   faculties? If so, how is the possession of such an obscure and
   unintelligible thing, so glorious an advantage?--Or is it because of
   the native blindness, corruption, and superstition of mankind? But this
   is giving up the thing in question, and allowing a great depravity of
   nature. Dr. T. speaks of the gospel as far otherwise than dark and
   unintelligible; he represents it as exhibiting the clearest and most
   glorious light, calculated to deliver the world from darkness, and to
   bring them into marvelous light. He speaks of the light which the Jews
   had, under the Mosaic dispensation, as vastly exceeding the light of
   nature, which the heathen enjoyed; and yet he supposes that even the
   latter was so clear, as to be sufficient to lead men to the knowledge
   of God, as their whole duty to him. He speaks of the light of the
   gospel as vastly exceeding the light of the Old Testament; and says of
   the apostle Paul in particular, "That he wrote with great perspicuity;
   that he takes great care to explain every part of his subject; that he
   has left no part of it unexplained and unguarded; and that never was an
   author more exact and cautious in this." [246] Is it not strange,
   therefore, that the Christian world, without any native depravity,
   should be so blind in the midst of such glaring light, as to be all, or
   the generality, agreed, from age to age, so essentially to
   misunderstand that which is made so very plain?

   Dr. T. says (p. 167. S.) "It is my persuasion, that the christian
   religion was very early and grievously corrupted by dreaming, ignorant,
   superstitious monks, too conceited to be satisfied with the plain
   gospel; and has long remained in that deplorable state."--But how came
   the whole christian world, without any blinding depravity, to hearken
   to these ignorant foolish men, rather than unto wiser and better
   teachers? especially, when the latter had plain gospel on their side,
   and the doctrines of the other were (as our author supposes) so very
   contrary not only to the plain gospel, but to men's reason and common
   sense? or were all the teachers of the Christian church nothing but a
   parcel of ignorant dreamers? If so, this is very strange indeed, unless
   mankind naturally loves darkness rather than light; seeing in all parts
   of the christian world, there was a great multitude in the work of the
   ministry, who had the gospel in their hands, and whose whole business
   it was to study and teach it; and therefore had infinitely greater
   advantages to become truly wise, than the heathen philosophers. But if,
   by some strange and inconceivable means, notwithstanding all these
   glorious advantages, all the teachers of the christian church through
   the world, without any native evil propensity, very early became silly
   dreamers--and also in their dreaming, generally stumbled on the same
   individual monstrous opinions, and so the world might be blinded for a
   while--yet, why did not they hearken to that wise and great man,
   Pelagius, and others like him, when he plainly held forth the truth to
   the christian world? Especially seeing his instructions were so
   agreeable to the plain doctrines, and the bright and clear light of the
   gospel of Christ, and also so agreeable to the plainest dictates of the
   common sense and understanding of all mankind; but the other so
   repugnant to it, that (according to our author) if they were true, it
   would prove understanding to be no understanding, and the word of God
   to be no rule of truth, nor at all to be relied upon, and God to be a
   Being worthy of no regard?

   Besides, if the inefficacy of the gospel to restrain sin and promote
   virtue, be owing to the general prevalence of these doctrines, which
   are supposed to be so absurd and contrary to the gospel, here is this
   further to be accounted for; namely, Why, since there has been so great
   an increase of light in religious matters (as must be supposed on Dr.
   T.'s scheme) in this and the last age, and these monstrous doctrines of
   original sin, election, reprobation, justification, regeneration, &c.
   have been so much exploded, especially in our nation, there has been no
   reformation attending this great advancement of light and truth: but on
   the contrary, vice, and every thing opposite to practical Christianity,
   has gone on to increase, with such a prodigious celerity, as to become
   like an overflowing deluge; threatening, unless God mercifully
   interposes, speedily to swallow up all that is virtuous and
   praiseworthy.

   Many other things might have been mentioned under this head--the means
   which mankind have had to restrain vice, and promote virtue--such as
   wickedness being many ways contrary to men's temporal interest and
   comfort, and their having continually before their eyes so many
   instances of persons made miserable by their vices; the restraints of
   human laws, without which men cannot live in society; the judgments of
   God brought on men for their wickedness, with which history abounds,
   and the providential rewards of virtue; and innumerable particular
   means, that God has used from age to age to curb the wickedness of
   mankind, which I have omitted. But there would be no end of a
   particular enumeration of such things. They that will not be convinced
   by the instances which have been mentioned, probably would not be
   convinced, if the world had stood a thousand times so long, and we had
   the most authentic and certain accounts of means having been used from
   the beginning, in a thousand times greater variety; and new
   dispensations had been introduced, after others had been tried in vain,
   ever so often, and still to little effect. He that will not be
   convinced by a thousand good witnesses, it is not likely that he would
   be convinced by a thousand thousand.

   The proofs that have been extant in the world, from trial and fact, of
   the depravity of man's nature, are inexpressible, and as it were
   infinite, beyond the representation of all similitude. If there were a
   piece of ground which abounded with briers and thorns, or some
   poisonous plant, and all mankind had used their endeavors, for a
   thousand years together, to suppress that evil growth--and to bring
   that ground by manure and cultivation, planting and sowing, to produce
   better fruit, all in vain; it would still be overrun with the same
   noxious growth--it would not be a proof, that such a produce was
   agreeable to the nature of that soil, in any wise to be compared to
   that which is given in divine providence, that wickedness is a produce
   agreeable to the nature of the field of the world of mankind. For the
   means used with it have been various, great, and wonderful, contrived
   by the unsearchable and boundless wisdom of God; medicines procured
   with infinite expense, exhibited with a vast apparatus; a marvelous
   succession of dispensations, introduced one after another, displaying
   an incomprehensible length and breadth, depth and height, of divine
   wisdom, love, and power, and every perfection of the godhead, to the
   eternal admiration of principalities and powers in heavenly places.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [242] Key, § 167.

   [243] Note on Rom. i. 16.

   [244] Pref to Par, on Rom. p 145, 47

   [245] See p. 259. 63, 64, 72. S.

   [246] Pref. To Par. On Rom. p. 146, 48.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   Several evasions of the arguments for the depravity of nature, from
   trial and events considered.

   Evasion I. Dr. T. says, (p. 231, 232.) "Adam's nature, it is allowed,
   was very far from being sinful; yet he sinned. And therefore, the
   common doctrine of Original Sin, is no more necessary to account for
   the sin that has been or is in the world, than it is to account for
   Adam's sin. [247] Again (p. 52--54 S. &c.) "If we allow mankind to be
   as wicked as R. R. has represented them to be; and suppose that there
   is not one upon earth that is truly righteous, and without sin, and
   that some are very enormous sinners, yet it will not thence follow,
   that they are naturally corrupt.--For, if sinful action infers a nature
   originally corrupt, then, whereas Adam (according to them that hold the
   doctrine of Original Sin) committed the most heinous and aggravated
   sin, that ever was committed in the world; for, according to them, he
   had greater light than any other man in the world, to know his duty,
   and greater power than any other man to fulfill it, and was under
   greater obligations than any other man to obedience; he sinned, when he
   knew he was the representative of millions, and that the happy or
   miserable state of all mankind, depended on his conduct; which never
   was, nor can be, the case of any other man in the world:--then, I say,
   it will follow, that his nature was originally corrupt, &c.--Thus their
   argument from the wickedness of mankind, to prove a sinful and corrupt
   nature, must inevitably and irrecoverably fall to the ground.--Which
   will appear more abundantly, if we take in the case of the angels, who
   in numbers sinned, and kept not their first estate, though created with
   a nature superior to Adam's." Again (p. 145. S.) "When it is inquired,
   how it comes to pass that our appetites and passions are now so
   irregular and strong, as that not one person has resisted them, so as
   to keep himself pure and innocent? If this be the case, if such as make
   the inquiry will tell the world, how it came to pass that Adam's
   appetites and passions were so irregular and strong, that he did not
   resist them, so as to keep himself pure and innocent, when upon their
   principles he was far more able to have resisted them; I also will tell
   them how it comes to pass, that his posterity does not resist them.
   [248] Sin doth not alter its nature, by its being general; and
   therefore how far soever it spreads, it must come upon all just as it
   came upon Adam."

   These things are delivered with much assurance. But is there any reason
   in such a way of talking? One thing implied in it, and the main thing,
   if any at all to the purpose, is, that because an effect being general,
   does not alter the nature of the effect, therefore nothing more can be
   argued concerning the cause, from its happening constantly, and in the
   most steady manner, than from its happening but once. But how contrary
   is this to reason! Suppose a person, through the deceitful persuasions
   of a pretended friend, once takes a poisonous draught of a liquor to
   which he had before no inclination; but after he has once taken of it,
   he is observed to act as one that has an insatiable, incurable thirst
   after more of the same, in his constant practice, obstinately continued
   in as long as he lives, against all possible arguments and endeavors
   used to dissuade him from it. And suppose we should from hence argue a
   fixed inclination, and begin to suspect that this is the nature and
   operation of the poison, to produce such an inclination, or that this
   strong propensity is some way the consequence of the first draught. In
   such a case, could it be said with good reason, that a fixed propensity
   can no more be argued from his consequent constant practice, than from
   his first draught? Or, suppose a young man, soberly inclined, enticed
   by wicked companions, should drink to excess, until he had got a habit
   of excessive drinking, and should come under the power of a greedy
   appetite after strong drink, so that drunkenness should become a common
   and constant practice with him: and suppose an observer, arguing from
   this general practice, should say, "It must needs be that this young
   man has a fixed inclination to that sin; otherwise, how should it come
   to pass that he should make such a trade of it?" And another,
   ridiculing the weakness of his arguing, should reply, "Do you tell me
   how it came to pass, that he was guilty of that sin the first time,
   without a fixed inclination, and I will tell you how he is guilty of it
   so generally without a fixed inclination. Sin does not alter its nature
   by being general: and therefore, how common soever it becomes, it must
   come at all times by the same means that it came at first." I leave it
   to every one to judge, who would be chargeable with weak arguing in
   such a case.

   It is true, there is no effect without some cause, ground, or reason of
   that effect, and some cause answerable to the effect. But certainly it
   will not follow, that a transient effect requires a permanent cause, or
   a fixed propensity. An effect happening once, though great, yea, though
   it may come to pass on the same occasion in many subjects at the same
   time, will not prove any fixed propensity, or permanent influence. It
   is true, it proves an influence great and extensive, answerable to the
   effect, once exerted, or once effectual; but it proves nothing in the
   cause fixed or constant. If a particular tree, or a great number of
   trees standing together, have blasted fruit on their branches at a
   particular season--or if the fruit be very much blasted, and entirely
   spoiled--it is evident that something was the occasion of such an
   effect at that time; but this alone does not prove the nature of the
   tree to be bad. But if it be observed, that those trees, and all other
   trees of the kind, wherever planted, and in all soils, countries,
   climates, and seasons, and however cultivated and managed, still bear
   ill fruit, from year to year, and in all ages, it is a good evidence of
   the evil nature of the tree. And if the fruit, at all these times, and
   in all these cases, be very bad, it proves the nature of the tree to be
   very bad. If we argue, in like manner, from what appears among men, it
   is easy to determine, whether the universal sinfulness of mankind--all
   sinning immediately, as soon as capable of it, and continually and
   generally being of a wicked character, at all times, in all ages, in
   all places, and under all possible circumstances, against means and
   motives inexpressibly manifold and great, and in the utmost conceivable
   variety--be from a permanent internal great cause.

   If the voice of common sense were heard, there would be no occasion for
   labour in multiplying arguments to show, that one act does not prove a
   fixed inclination; but that constant pursuit does. We see that, in
   fact, it is agreeable to the reason of all mankind, to argue fixed
   principles tempers, and prevailing inclinations, from repeated and
   continued actions--though the actions are voluntary, and performed of
   choice--and thus to judge of the tempers and inclinations of persons,
   ages, sexes, tribes, and nations. But is it the manner of men to
   conclude, that whatever they see others once do, they have a fixed
   abiding inclination to do? Yea, there may be several acts seen, and yet
   not be taken as good evidence of an established propensity; even though
   that one act, or those several acts, are followed by such constant
   practice, as afterwards evidences fixed disposition. As for example;
   there may be several instances of a man drinking some spirituous
   liquor, and those instances be no sign of a fixed inclination to that
   liquor: but these acts may be introductory to a settled habit or
   propensity, which may be made very manifest afterwards by constant
   practice.

   From these things it is plain, that what is alleged concerning the
   first sin of Adam, and of the angels, without a previous fixed
   disposition to sin, cannot in the least weaken the arguments brought to
   prove fixed propensity to sin in mankind, in their present state. From
   the permanence of the cause has been argued, the permanence of the
   effect. And that the permanent cause consists in an internal fixed
   propensity, and not in any particular external circumstances, has been
   argued from the effects being the same, through a vast variety and
   change of circumstances. But the first acts of sin in Adam or the
   angels, considered in themselves, were no permanent, continued effects.
   And though a great number of the angels sinned, and the effect on that
   account was the greater, and more extensive; yet this extent of the
   effect is a very different thing from that permanence, or settled
   continuance of effect, which is supposed to show a permanent cause, or
   fixed propensity. Neither was there any trial of a vast variety of
   circumstances attending a permanent effect, to show the fixed cause to
   be internal, consisting in a settled disposition of nature, in the
   instances objected. And however great the sin of Adam, or of the
   angels, was, and however great the means, motives, and obligations were
   against which they sinned--and whatever may be thence argued concerning
   the transient cause, occasion, or temptation, as being very subtle,
   remarkably tending to deceive and seduce, &c.--yet it argues nothing of
   any settled disposition, or fixed cause, either great or small; the
   effect both in the angels and our first parents, being in itself
   transient, and, for ought appears, happening in each of them under one
   system or coincidence of influential circumstances. [249]

   The general continued wickedness of mankind, against such means and
   motives, proves each of these things, viz. that the cause is fixed, and
   that the fixed cause is internal in man's nature, and also that it is
   very powerful. It proves, that the cause is fixed, because the effect
   is so abiding, through so many changes. It proves that the fixed cause
   is internal, because the circumstances are so various--including a
   variety of means and motives--and they are such circumstances as cannot
   possibly cause the effect, being most opposite to it in their tendency.
   And it proves the greatness of the internal cause; or that the
   propensity is powerful; because the means which have opposed its
   influence, have been so great, and yet have been statedly overcome.

   But here I may observe, by the way, that with regard to the motives and
   obligations against which our first father sinned, it is not reasonably
   alleged, that he sinned when he knew his sin would have destructive
   consequences to all his posterity, and might in process of time, pave
   the whole globe with skulls, &c. It is evident, by the plain account
   the scripture gives us of the temptation which prevailed with our first
   parents to commit that sin, that it was so contrived by the subtlety of
   the tempter, as first to blind and deceive them as to that matter, and
   to make them believe that their disobedience should be followed with no
   destruction or calamity at all to themselves (and therefore not to
   their posterity,) but on the contrary, with a great increase and
   advancement of dignity and happiness.

   Evasion II. Let the wickedness of the world be ever so general and
   great, there is no necessity of supposing any depravity of nature to be
   the cause: man's own free will is cause sufficient. Let mankind be more
   or less corrupt, they make themselves corrupt by their own free choice.
   This Dr. T. abundantly insists upon, in many parts of his book . [250]

   But I would ask, how it comes to pass that mankind so universally agree
   in this evil exercise of their free will? If their wills are in the
   first place as free to good as to evil, what is it to be ascribed to,
   that the world of mankind, consisting of so many millions, in so many
   successive generations, without consultation, all agree to exercise
   their freedom in favour of evil? If there be no natural tendency or
   preponderation in the case, then there is as good a chance for the will
   being determined to good as to evil. If the cause be indifferent, why
   is not the effect in some measure indifferent? If the balance be no
   heavier at one end than the other, why does it perpetually preponderate
   one way? How comes it to pass, that the free will of mankind has been
   determined to evil, in like manner before the flood and after the
   flood; under the law and under the gospel; among both Jews and
   Gentiles, under the Old Testament, and since then, among Christians,
   Jews, Mahometans; among papists and protestants; in those nations where
   civility, politeness, arts, and learning most prevail, and among the
   Negroes and Hottentots in Africa, the Tartars in Asia, and Indians in
   America, towards both the poles, and on every side of the globe; in
   greatest cities and obscurest villages; in palaces and in huts,
   wigwams, and cells under ground? Is it enough to reply, It happens so,
   that men every where, and in all times, choose thus to determine their
   own wills, and so to make themselves sinful, as soon as ever they are
   capable of it, and to sin constantly as long as they live, and
   universally to choose never to come up half way to their duty?

   A steady effect requires a steady cause; but free will, without any
   previous propensity to influence its determinations, is no permanent
   cause; nothing can be conceived of, farther from it: for the very
   notion of freedom of will, consisting in self-determining power,
   implies contingence; and if the will is perfectly free from any
   government of previous inclination, its freedom must imply the most
   absolute and perfect contingence: and surely nothing can be conceived
   of, more unfixed than that. The notion of liberty of will, in this
   sense, implies perfect freedom from every thing that should previously
   fix, bind, or determine it; that it may be left to be fixed and
   determined wholly by itself: therefore its determinations must be
   previously altogether unfixed. And can that which is so unfixed, so
   contingent, be a cause sufficient to account for an effect, in such a
   manner, and to such a degree, permanent, fixed, and constant?

   When we see any person going on in a certain course with great
   constancy, against all manner of means to dissuade him, do we judge
   this to be no argument of a fixed disposition of mind, because, being
   free, he may determine to do so, if he will, without any such
   disposition? Or if we see a nation, or people, that differ greatly from
   other nations, in such and such instances of their constant conduct--as
   though their tempers and inclinations were very diverse--and any should
   say, We cannot judge at all of the temper or disposition of people, by
   any thing observable in their constant practice or behaviour, because
   they have all free will, and therefore may all choose to act so, if
   they please, without anything in their temper or inclination to bias
   them. Would such an account of such effects be satisfying to the reason
   of mankind? But infinitely further would it be from satisfying a
   considerate mind, to account for the constant and universal sinfulness
   of mankind, by saying, that their will is free, and therefore all may,
   if they please, make themselves wicked: they are free when they first
   begin to act as moral agents, and therefore all may, if they please,
   begin to sin as soon as they begin to act: they are free as long as
   they continue to act in the world, and therefore they may all commit
   sin continually, if they will: men of all nations are free, and
   therefore all nations may act alike in these respects, if they please,
   though some do not know how other nations do act. Men of high and low
   condition, learned and ignorant, are free, and therefore they may agree
   in acting wickedly, if they please, though they do not consult
   together. Men in all ages are free, and therefore men in one age may
   all agree with men in every other age in wickedness, if they please,
   though they do not know how men in other ages have acted, &c. Let every
   one judge whether such an account of things can satisfy reason.

   Evasion III. It is said by many opposers of the doctrine of original
   sin, that the corruption of mankind may be owing not to a depraved
   nature, but to bad example. And I think we must understand Dr. T. as
   having respect to the powerful influence of bad instruction and
   example, when he says, (p. 118.) "The Gentiles in their heathen state,
   when incorporated into the body of the gentile world, were without
   strength, unable to help or recover themselves." And in several other
   places to the like purpose. If there was no depravity of nature, what
   else could there be but bad instruction and example, to hinder the
   heathen world, as a collective body, (for as such Dr. T. speaks of
   them, as may be seen p. 117, 118.) from emerging out of their
   corruption, on the rise of each new generation? As to their bad
   instruction, our author insists upon it, that the heathen,
   notwithstanding all their disadvantages, had sufficient light to know
   God, and do their whole duty. Therefore it must be chiefly bad example,
   according to him, that rendered their case helpless.

   Now concerning this way of accounting for the corruption of the world,
   by the influence of bad example, I would observe,

   1. It is accounting for the thing by the thing itself. It is accounting
   for the corruption of the world by the corruption of the world. For,
   that bad examples are general all over the world to be followed by
   others, and have been so from the beginning, is only an instance, or
   rather a description, of that corruption of the world which is to be
   accounted for. If mankind are naturally no more inclined to evil than
   good, then how come there to be so many more bad examples than good
   ones, in all ages? And if there are not, how come to bad examples that
   are set, to be so much more followed than the good? If the propensity
   of man's nature be not to evil, how comes the current of general
   example, every where, and at all times, to be so much to evil? And when
   opposition has been made by good examples, how comes it to pass that it
   has had so little effect to stem the stream of general wicked practice?

   I think from the brief account the Scripture gives us of the behaviour
   of our first parents, and of the expressions of their faith and hope in
   God's revealed mercy, we have reason to suppose, that before ever they
   had any children, they repented, were pardoned, and became truly pious.
   So that God planted the world at first with a noble vine; and at the
   beginning of their generations, he set the stream of example the right
   way. And we see, that children are more apt to follow the example of
   their parents, than of any others; especially in early youth, their
   forming time, when those habits are generally contracted, which abide
   by them all their days. Besides, Adam's children had no other examples
   to follow, but those of their parents. How therefore came the stream so
   soon to turn, and to proceed the contrary way, with so violent a
   current? When mankind became so universally and desperately corrupt, as
   not to be fit to live on earth any longer, and the world was every
   where full of bad examples, God destroyed them all at once--except
   righteous Noah and his family--in order to remove those bad examples,
   and that the world might be planted again with good example, and the
   stream again turned the right way. How therefore came it to pass, that
   Noah's posterity did not follow his good example, especially when they
   had such extraordinary things to enforce it, but so generally, even in
   his life-time, became exceeding corrupt? One would think, the first
   generations at least, while all lived together as one family, under
   Noah, their venerable father, might have followed his good example. And
   if they had done so, then, when the earth came to be divided in Peleg's
   time, the heads of the several families would have set out their
   particular colonies with good examples, and the stream would have been
   turned the right way in all the various divisions, colonies, and
   nations of the world. But we see, in fact, that in about fifty years
   after Noah's death, the world in general was overrun with dreadful
   corruption; so that all virtue and goodness was like soon to perish
   from among mankind, unless something extraordinary should be done to
   prevent it.

   Then, for a remedy, God separated Abraham and his family from all the
   rest of the world, that they might be delivered from the influence of
   bad example, and that in his posterity he might have an holy seed. Thus
   God again planted a noble vine; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob being
   eminently pious. But how soon did their posterity degenerate, till true
   religion was like to be swallowed up! We see how desperately and almost
   universally corrupt they were, when God brought them out of Egypt, and
   led them in the wilderness.

   Then God was pleased, before he planted his people in Canaan, to
   destroy that perverse generation in the wilderness, that he might plant
   them there a noble vine, wholly a right seed, and set them out with
   good example, in the land where they were to have their settled abode.
   Jer. ii. 21. It is evident, that the generation which came with Joshua
   into Canaan was an excellent generation, by innumerable things said of
   them. [251] But how soon did that people, nevertheless, become the
   degenerate plant of a strange vine!

   And when the nation had a long time proved desperately and incurable
   corrupt, God destroyed them, and sent them into captivity--till the old
   rebels were dead and purged out, in order to deliver their children
   from their evil example. And when the following generation was purified
   as in a furnace, God planted them again in the land of Israel, a noble
   vine, and set them out with good example; which yet was not followed by
   their posterity.

   When again the corruption was become inveterate, the christian church
   was planted; and a glorious out-pouring of the Spirit of God caused
   true virtue and piety to be exemplified far beyond whatever had been on
   earth before; and thus the christian church was planted a noble vine.
   But that primitive good example has not prevailed, to cause virtue to
   be generally and stedfastly maintained in the christian world. To how
   great a degree it has been otherwise, has already been observed.

   After many ages of general and dreadful apostasy, God was pleased to
   erect the protestant church, as separated from the more corrupt part of
   christendom; and true piety flourished in it very much at first; God
   planted it a noble vine: but notwithstanding the good examples of the
   first reformers, what a melancholy pass is the protestant world come to
   at this day!

   When England grew very corrupt, God brought over a number of pious
   persons, and planted them in New England, and this land was planted a
   noble vine. But how is the gold become dim! How greatly have we
   forsaken the pious examples of our fathers!

   So prone have mankind always proved themselves to degeneracy and
   backsliding, that it shows plainly their natural propensity. And when
   good has revived, and been promoted among men, it has been by some
   divine interposition, opposing the natural current; the fruit of some
   extraordinary means. And the efficacy of such means has soon been
   overcome by constant natural bias, the effect of good example presently
   lost, and evil has regained the dominion. Like a heavy body, which may
   by some great power be caused to ascend, against its nature, a little
   while, but soon goes back again towards the centre, to which it
   naturally and constantly tends.

   So that evil example will in no wise account for the corruption of
   mankind, without supposing a natural proneness to sin. The tendency of
   example alone will not account for general wicked practice, as
   consequent on good example. And if the influence of bad example is a
   reason of some of the wickedness, that alone will not account for men
   becoming worse than the example set, degenerating more and more, and
   growing worse and worse, which has been their manner.

   2. There has been given to the world an example of virtue, which, were
   it not for a dreadful depravity of nature, would have influence on them
   who live under the gospel, far beyond all other examples; that is, the
   example of Jesus Christ.

   God, who knew the human nature, and how apt men are to be influenced by
   example, had made answerable provision. His infinite wisdom has
   contrived that we should have set before us the most amiable and
   perfect example, in such circumstances, as should have the greatest
   tendency to influence all the principles of man's nature, but his
   corruption. Men are apt to be moved by the example of others like
   themselves, or in their own nature: therefore this example was given in
   our nature. Men are ready to follow the example of the great and
   honourable; and this--though that of one in our nature, yet--was the
   example of one infinitely higher and more honourable than kings or
   angels. A people are apt to follow the example of their prince. This is
   the example of that glorious person, who stands in a peculiar relation
   to Christians as their Lord and King, the supreme head of the church;
   and not only so, but the King of kings, supreme head of the universe,
   and head over all things to the church. Children are apt to follow the
   example of their parents; this is the example of the Author of our
   being, and of our holy and happy being; the Creator of the world, and
   everlasting Father of the universe. Men are very apt to follow the
   example of their friends: the example of Christ is that of one who is
   infinitely our greatest friend, standing in the most endearing
   relations of brother, redeemer, spiritual head and husband; whose grace
   and love expressed to us, transcends all other love and friendship, as
   much as heaven is higher than the earth. The virtues and acts of his
   example were exhibited to us in the most endearing and engaging
   circumstances that can possibly be conceived of.--His obedience and
   submission to God, his humility, meekness, patience, charity,
   self-denial, &c. being exercised and expressed in a work of infinite
   grace, love, condescension, and beneficence to us--and had all their
   highest expressions in his laying down his life, and meekly, patiently,
   and cheerfully undergoing unutterable suffering for our eternal
   salvation. Men are peculiarly apt to follow the example of those from
   whom they have great benefits: but it is utterly impossible to conceive
   of greater benefits, that we could have by the virtues of any person,
   than we have by the virtuous acts of Christ; we, who depend upon being
   thereby saved from eternal destruction, and brought to inconceivable,
   immortal glory at God's right hand. Surely if it were not for an
   extreme corruption of the human heart, such an example would have that
   strong influence on it, which would as it were swallow up the power of
   all the evil and hateful examples of a generation of vipers.

   3. The influence of bad example, without corruption of nature, will not
   account for children universally committing sin as soon as capable of
   it; which, I think, is a fact that has been made evident by the
   Scripture. It will not account for it in the children of eminently
   pious parents; the first example set in their view being very good;
   which was especially the case of many children in christian families in
   the apostolic days, when the apostle John supposes that every
   individual person had sin to repent of, and confess to God.

   4. What Dr. T. supposes to have been fact, with respect to a great part
   of mankind--the state of the heathen world, which he supposes,
   considered as a collective body, was helpless, dead in sin, and unable
   to recover itself--cannot consistently be accounted for from the
   influence of bad example. Not evil example alone, no, nor as united
   with evil instruction, can be supposed a sufficient reason why every
   new generation that arose among them, should not be able to emerge from
   the idolatry and wickedness of their ancestors, in any consistence with
   his scheme. The ill example of ancestors could have no power to oblige
   them to sin, any other way than as a strong temptation. But Dr. T.
   himself says, (p. 72, S.) "To suppose men's temptations to be superior
   to their powers, will impeach the goodness and justice of God, who
   appoints every man's trial." And as to bad instructions, as he supposes
   that they all, yea every individual person, had light sufficient to
   know God, and do their whole duty. And if each one could do this for
   himself, then surely they might all be agreed in it through the power
   of free will, as well as the whole world be agreed in corruption by the
   same power.

   Evasion IV. Some modern opposers of the doctrine of original sin, thus
   account for the general prevalence of wickedness, viz. that in the
   course of nature our senses grow up first, and the animal passions get
   the start of reason. So Dr. Turnbull, [252] "Sensitive objects first
   affect us, and inasmuch as reason is a principle, which, in the nature
   of things, must be advanced to strength and vigour, by gradual
   cultivation, and these objects are continually assailing and soliciting
   us; so, unless a very happy education prevents, our sensitive appetites
   must have become very strong, before reason can have force enough to
   call them to an account, and assume authority over them." From hence
   Dr. Turnbull supposes it comes to pass, [253] "That though some few
   may, through the influence of virtuous example, be said to be
   sanctified from the womb, so liberal, so generous, so virtuous, so
   truly noble is their cast of mind; yet generally speaking, the whole
   world lieth in such wickedness, that, with respect to the far greater
   part of mankind, the study of virtue is beginning to reform, and is a
   severe struggle against bad habits, early contracted, and deeply
   rooted; it is therefore putting off an old inveterate corrupt nature,
   and putting on new form and temper; it is molding ourselves anew; it is
   a being born again, and becoming as children.--And how few are there in
   the world who escape its pollutions, so as not to be early in that
   class, or to be among the righteous that need no repentance!"

   Dr. Taylor, though not so explicit, seems to hint at the same thing,
   (p. 192.) "It is by slow degrees that children come to the use of
   understanding; the animal passions being for some years the governing
   part of their constitution. And therefore, though they may be froward
   and apt to displease us, yet how far this is sin in them, we are not
   capable of judging. But it may suffice to say, that it is the will of
   God that children should have appetites and passions to regulate and
   restrain, that he hath given parents instructions and commands to
   discipline and inform their minds, that if parents first learned true
   wisdom for themselves, and then endeavored to bring up their children
   in the way of virtue, there would be less wickedness in the world."

   Concerning these things I would observe, that such a scheme is attended
   with the very same difficulties, which they who advance it would avoid
   by it; liable to the same objections, which they make against God's
   ordering it so, that men should be brought into being with a prevailing
   propensity to sin. For this scheme supposes, the Author of nature has
   so ordered things, that men should come into being as moral agents,
   that is, should first have existence in a state and capacity of moral
   agency, under a prevailing propensity to sin. For that strength, which
   sensitive appetites and animal passions come to by their habitual
   exercise, before persons come to the exercise of their rational powers,
   amounts to a strong propensity to sin, when they first come to the
   exercise of those rational powers, by the supposition: because this is
   given as a reason why the scale is turned for sin, and why, generally
   speaking, the whole world lies in wickedness, and the study of virtue
   is a severe struggle against bad habits, early contracted, and deeply
   rooted. These deeply rooted habits must imply a tendency to sin;
   otherwise they could not account for that which they are brought to
   account for, namely, prevailing wickedness in the world: for that cause
   cannot account for an effect, which is supposed to have no tendency to
   that effect. And this tendency which is supposed, is altogether
   equivalent to a natural tendency, being as necessary to the subject.
   For it is supposed to be brought on the person, who is the subject of
   it, when he has no power to oppose it; the habit, as Dr. Turnbull says,
   becoming very strong, before reason can have force enough to call the
   passions to account, or assume authority over them. And it is supposed,
   that this necessity, by which men become subject to this propensity to
   sin, is from the ordering and disposal of the Author of nature; and
   therefore must be as much from his hand, and as much without the hand
   of the person himself, as if he were first brought into being with such
   a propensity. Moreover, it is supposed that the effect is truly
   wickedness. For it is alleged as a cause why the whole world lies in
   wickedness, and why all but a very few are first in the class of the
   wicked, and not among the righteous, that need no repentance. If they
   need repentance, what they are guilty of is truly and properly
   wickedness, or moral evil; for certainly men need no repentance for
   that which is no sin, or blamable evil. It, as a consequence of this
   propensity, the world lies in wickedness, and the far greater part are
   of a wicked character, without doubt the far greater part go to eternal
   perdition: for death does not pick and choose, only for men of a
   righteous character. And certainly that is an evil, corrupt state of
   things, which naturally tends to and issues in this consequence, that
   as it were the whole world lies and lives in wickedness, dies in
   wickedness, and perishes eternally. And this by the supposition, is a
   state of things, wholly ordered by the Author of nature, before mankind
   are capable of having any hand in the affair. And is this any relief to
   the difficulties, which these writers object against the doctrine of
   natural depravity?

   And I might here also observe, that this way of accounting for the
   wickedness of the world amounts to just the same thing with that
   solution of man's depravity, mentioned before, against which Dr. T.
   cries out, as too gross to be admitted, (p. 188, 189.) viz. God
   creating the soul pure, and putting it into such a body, as naturally
   tends to pollute it. For this scheme supposes, that God creates the
   soul pure, and puts it into a body, and into such a state in that body,
   that the natural consequence is a strong propensity to sin, as soon as
   the soul is capable of sinning.

   Dr. Turnbull seems to suppose, that the matter could not have been
   ordered otherwise, consistent with the nature of things, than that
   animal passions should be so aforehand with reason, as that the
   consequence should be that which has been mentioned; because reason is
   a faculty of such a nature, that it can have strength and vigour no
   otherwise than by exercise and culture. [254] But can there be any
   force in this? Is there any thing in nature, to make it impossible, but
   that the superior principles of man's nature should be so proportioned
   to the inferior, as to prevent such a dreadful consequence, as the
   moral and natural ruin, and eternal perdition of the far greater part
   of mankind? Could not those superior principles be in much greater
   strength at first, and yet be capable of endless improvement? And what
   should hinder its being so ordered by the Creator, that they should
   improve by vastly swifter degrees than they do? If we are Christians,
   we must be forced to allow it to be possible in the nature of things,
   that the principles of human nature should be so balanced, that the
   consequence should be no propensity to sin, in the very beginning of a
   capacity for moral agency; because we must own, that it was so in fact
   in Adam, when first created, and also in the man Christ Jesus; though
   the faculties of the latter were such as grew by culture and
   improvement, so that he increased in wisdom as he grew in stature.

   Evasion V. Seeing men in this world are in a state of trial, it is fit
   that their virtue should meet with trials, and consequently that it
   should have opposition and temptation to overcome; not only from
   without, but from within, in the animal passions and appetites; that by
   the conflict and victory our virtue may be refined and established.
   [255] Agreeably to this Dr. T. (p. 253.) says, "Without a right use and
   application of our powers, were they naturally ever so perfect, we
   could not be judged fit to enter into the kingdom of God.--This gives a
   good reason why we are now in a state of trial and temptation, viz. to
   prove and discipline our minds, to season our virtue, and to fit us for
   the kingdom of God; for which, in the judgment of infinite wisdom, we
   cannot be qualified, but by overcoming our present temptations." And,
   (p. 78. S.) "We are upon trial, and it is the will of our Father that
   our constitution should be attended with various passions and
   appetites, as well as our outward condition with various temptations."
   He says the like in several other places. To the same purpose very
   often Dr. Turnbull, particularly Chris. Phil. p. 310. "What merit (he
   says) except from combat? What virtue without the encounter of such
   enemies, such temptations, as arise both from within and from abroad?
   To be virtuous, is to prefer the pleasures of virtue to those which
   come into competition with it, and vice holds forth to tempt us; and to
   dare to adhere to truth and goodness, whatever pains and hardships it
   may cost. There must therefore, in order to the formation and trial, in
   order to the very being of virtue, be pleasures of a certain kind to
   make temptations to vice."

   In reply to these things I would say, either the state of temptation,
   which is supposed to be ordered for men's trial, amounts on the whole
   to a prevailing tendency to that state of general wickedness and ruin,
   which has been proved to take place, or it does not. If it does not
   amount to a tendency to such an effect, then how does it account for
   it? When it is inquired, by what cause such an effect should come to
   pass, is it not absurd to allege a cause, which is owned at the same
   time to have no tendency to such an effect? Which is as much as to
   confess, that it will not account for it. I think it has been
   demonstrated, that this effect must be owing to some prevailing
   tendency.--But if the other part of the dilemma be taken, and it be
   said, that this state of things does imply a prevailing tendency to
   that effect, which has been proved, viz. that all mankind, without one
   exception, sin against God, to their own deserved eternal ruin--and not
   only so, but sin thus immediately, as soon as capable of it, and
   continually, have more sin than virtue, and have guilt that infinitely
   outweighs the value of all the goodness any ever have, and that the
   generality of the world in all ages are extremely stupid and foolish,
   of a wicked character, and actually perish for ever--then I say, if the
   state of temptation implies a natural tendency to such an effect as
   this, it is a very evil, corrupt, and dreadful state of things, as has
   been already largely shown.

   Besides, such a state has a tendency to defeat its own supposed end,
   which is to refine, ripen, and perfect virtue, and so to fit men for
   the greater eternal happiness and glory: whereas, the effect it tends
   to, is the reverse of this, viz. general, eternal infamy and ruin, in
   all generations. It is supposed, that men's virtue must have passions
   and appetites to struggle with, in order to have the glory and reward
   of victory: but the consequence is, a prevailing, continual, and
   generally effectual tendency--not to men's victory over evil appetites
   and passions, and the glorious reward of that victory, but--to the
   victory of evil appetites and lusts over men, utterly and eternally
   destroying them. If a trial of virtue be requisite, yet the question
   is, Whence comes so general a failing in the trial, if there be no
   depravity of nature? If conflict and war be necessary, whence the
   necessity that there should be more cowards than good soldiers? and
   whence is it necessary that the whole world as it were should lie in
   wickedness, and die in cowardice?

   I might also here observe, that Dr. Turnbull is not very consistent, in
   supposing, that combat with temptation is requisite to the very being
   of virtue. For I think it clearly follows from his own notion of
   virtue, that it must have a being prior to any virtuous or praiseworthy
   combat with temptation. For by his principles, all virtue lies in good
   affection, and no actions can be virtuous, but what proceed from good
   affection. [256] Therefore, surely the combat itself can have no virtue
   in it, unless it proceeds from virtuous affection: and therefore virtue
   must have an existence before the combat, and be the cause of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [247] Belsham.

   [248] See p. 81, note.

   [249] See p. 81, note.

   [250] Page 257, 258, 52, 53. S. and many other places.

   [251] See Jer. ii. 2, 3. Psal. lxviii. 14.Josh. xxii. 2.andJosh xxiii.
   8. Deut. iv. 3, 4.Hos. xi. 1. and Hos. ix. 10. Judg. ii. 7,Judg. ii.
   17, Judg. ii. 22. and many other places.

   [252] See Mor. Phil. p. 279 and Chris. Phil. p. 274.

   [253] Chris. Phil. p. 282, 283.

   [254] Mor. Phil. p. 311.

   [255] Belsham.

   [256] Chris. Phil. p. 113, 114, 115.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. II.

   UNIVERSAL MORTALITY PROVES ORIGINAL SIN; PARTICULARLY THE DEATH OF
   INFANTS, WITH ITS VARIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES.

   Theuniversal reign of death over persons of all ages indiscriminately,
   with the awful circumstances and attendants of death, prove that men
   come sinful into the world.--It is needless here particularly to
   inquire, Whether God has not a sovereign right to set bounds to the
   lives of his own creatures, be they sinful or not; and as he gives
   life, so to take it away when he pleases? Or how far God has a right to
   bring extreme suffering and calamity on an innocent moral agent? For
   death, with the pains and agonies with which it is usually brought on,
   is not merely a limiting of existence, but is a most terrible calamity;
   and to such a creature as man--capable of conceiving of immortality,
   made with an earnest desire after it, capable of foresight and
   reflection on approaching death, and having an extreme dread of it--is
   a calamity above all others terrible. I say, it is needless elaborately
   to consider, whether God may not, consistent with his perfections by
   absolute sovereignty, bring so great a calamity on mankind when
   perfectly innocent. It is sufficient, if we have good evidence from
   Scripture, that it is not agreeable to God's manner of dealing with
   mankind so to do.

   It is manifest, that mankind were not originally subjected to this
   calamity: God brought it on them afterwards, on occasion of man's sin,
   when manifesting his great displeasure, and by a sentence pronounced by
   him as a judge; which Dr. T. often confesses. Sin entered into the
   world, as the apostle says, and death by sin. Which certainly leads us
   to suppose, that this affair was ordered, not merely by the sovereignty
   of a creator, but by the righteousness of a judge. And the Scripture
   every where speaks of all great afflictions and calamities, which God
   in his providence brings on mankind, as testimonies of his displeasure
   for sin, in the subjects of those calamities; excepting those
   sufferings which are to atone for the sins of others. He ever taught
   his people to look on such calamities as his rod, the rod of his anger,
   his frown, the hidings of his face in displeasure. Hence such
   calamities are in Scripture so often called by the name of judgments,
   being what God brings on men as a judge, executing a righteous sentence
   for transgression. Yea, they are often called by the name of wrath,
   especially calamities consisting or issuing in death. [257] And hence
   also is that which Dr. T. would have us take so much notice of, that
   sometimes, in the Scripture, calamity and suffering is called by such
   names as sin, iniquity, being guilty, &c. which is evidently by a
   metonymy of the cause for the effect. It is not likely that, in the
   language used of old among God's people, calamity or suffering would
   have been called by the names of sin and guilt, if it had been so far
   from having any connexion with sin, that even death itself, which is
   always spoken of as the most terrible of calamities, is not so much as
   any sign of the sinfulness of the subject, or any testimony of God's
   displeasure for his guilt, as Dr. T. supposes.

   Death is spoken of in Scripture as the chief of calamities, the most
   extreme and terrible of all natural evils in this world. Deadly
   destruction is spoken of as the most terrible destruction (1 Sam. v.
   11.) Deadly sorrow, as the most extreme sorrow (Isa. xvii. 11.
   Matt.xxvi. 38.) And deadly enemies, as the most bitter and terrible
   enemies (Psal. xvii. 9.) The extremity of Christ's sufferings is
   represented by his suffering unto death (Philip. ii. 8. and other
   places). Hence the greatest testimonies of God's anger for the sins of
   men in this world, have been by inflicting death; as on the sinners of
   the old world; on the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah; on Onan,
   Pharaoh, and the Egyptians; on Nadab and Abihu, Korah and his company,
   and the rest of the rebels in the wilderness; on the wicked inhabitants
   of Canaan; on Hophni and Phinehas, Ananias and Sapphira, and the
   unbelieving Jews, upon whom wrath came to the uttermost, in the time of
   the last destruction of Jerusalem. This calamity is often spoken of as
   in a peculiar manner the fruit of guilt. Exod. xxviii. 43."That they
   bear not iniquity and die." Lev. xxii. 9."Lest they bear sin for it and
   die." (So Num. xviii. 22. compared with Lev. x. 1, 2.) The very light
   of nature, or tradition from ancient revelation, led the heathen to
   conceive of death as in a peculiar manner an evidence of divine
   vengeance. Thus we have an account, (Acts xxviii. 4.) That "when the
   barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on Paul's hand, they said among
   themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he hath
   escaped the seas, yet vengeance suffereth not to live."

   Calamities, very small in comparison of the universal temporal
   destruction of mankind by death, are spoken of as manifest indications
   of God's great displeasure for the sinfulness of the subject; such as
   the destruction of particular cities, countries, or numbers of men, by
   war or pestilence. Deut. xxix. 24. "All nations shall say, Wherefore
   hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this
   great anger?" (Compare Deut. xxxii. 30. 1 Kings. ix. 8. and Jer. xxii.
   8, 9.) These calamities, thus spoken of as plain testimonies of God's
   great anger, consisted only in hastening on that death, which
   otherwise, by God's disposal, would most certainly have come in a short
   time. Now to take off thirty or forty years from seventy or eighty,
   supposing it to be so much, one with another, in the time of these
   extraordinary judgments, is but a small matter, in comparison of God
   first making man mortal, cutting off his hope of immortality,
   subjecting him to inevitable death, which his nature so exceedingly
   dreads; and afterwards shortening his life further, by cutting off more
   than eight hundred years of it: so bringing it to be less than a
   twelfth part of what is was in the first ages of the world. Besides
   that innumerable multitudes in the common course of things, without any
   extraordinary judgment, die in youth, in childhood, and infancy.
   Therefore how inconsiderable a thing is the additional or hastened
   destruction, that is sometimes brought on a particular city or country
   by war, compared with that universal havoc which death makes of the
   whole human race, from generation to generation, without distinction of
   sex, age, quality, or condition; with all the infinitely various dismal
   circumstances, torments, and agonies, which attend the death of old and
   young, adult persons and little infants! If those particular and
   comparatively trivial calamities, extending perhaps not to more than
   the thousandth part of one generation, are clear evidences of God's
   great anger; certainly this universal destruction--by which the whole
   world, in all generations, is swallowed up, as by a flood that nothing
   can resist--must be a most glaring manifestation of God's anger for the
   sinfulness of mankind. Yea, the Scripture is express, that it is so: (
   Psal. xc. 3. &c.) "Thou turnest man to destruction, and sayest, Return,
   ye children of men.--Thou carriest them away as with a flood: they are
   as a sleep: in the morning they are like grass, which groweth up; in
   the morning it flourisheth and groweth up; in the evening it is cut
   down and withereth. For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy
   wrath are we troubled. Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our
   secret sins in the light of thy countenance. For all our days are
   passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that is told.
   The days of our years are threescore years and ten: and if by reason of
   strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and
   sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Who knoweth the power
   of thine anger? According to thy fear, so is they wrath. So teach us to
   number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom." How plain
   and full is this testimony, that the general mortality of mankind is an
   evidence of God's anger for the sin of those who are the subjects of
   such a dispensation!

   Abimelech speaks of it as what he had reason to conclude from God's
   nature and perfection, that he would not slay a righteous nation. Gen.
   xx. 4. By righteous evidently meaning innocent. And if so, much less
   will God slay a righteous world--consisting of so many nations,
   repeating the great slaughter in every generation--or subject the whole
   world of mankind to death, when they are considered as innocent, as Dr.
   T. supposes. We have from time to time in Scripture such phrases
   as--worthy of death, and guilty of death: but certainly the righteous
   Judge of all the earth will not bring death on thousands of millions,
   not only that are not worthy of death, but are worthy of no punishment
   at all.

   Dr. T. from time to time speaks of affliction and death as a great
   benefit, as they increase the vanity of all earthly things, and tend to
   excite sober reflections, and to induce us to be moderate in gratifying
   the appetites of the body, and to mortify pride and ambition, &c. [258]
   To this I would say,

   1. It is not denied but God may see it needful for mankind in their
   present state, that they should be mortal, and subject to outward
   afflictions, to restrain their lusts, mortify their pride, &c. But then
   is it not an evidence of man's depravity, that it is so? Is it not an
   evidence of distemper of mind, yea, strong disease, when man stands in
   need of such sharp medicines, such severe and terrible means to
   restrain his lusts, keep down his pride, and to make him willing, and
   obedient to God? It must be owing to a corrupt and ungrateful heart, if
   the riches of divine bounty, in bestowing life and prosperity, things
   comfortable and pleasant, will not engage the heart to God and virtue,
   love and obedience. Whereas he must always have the rod held over him,
   be often chastised, and held under the apprehensions of death, to keep
   him from running wild in pride, contempt, and rebellion; ungratefully
   using the blessings dealt forth from God's hand, in sinning against
   him, and serving his enemies. If man has no natural disingenuity of
   heart, it must be a mysterious thing indeed, that the sweet blessings
   of God's bounty have not as powerful an influence to restrain him from
   sinning against God, as terrible afflictions. If any thing can be a
   proof of a perverse and vile disposition, this must be a proof of it,
   that men should be most apt to forget and despise God, when his
   providence is most kind; and that they should need to have God
   chastising them with great severity, and even killing them, to keep
   them in order. If we were as much disposed to gratitude to God for his
   benefits, as we are to anger at our fellow-creatures for injuries, as
   we must be (so far as I can see) if we are not of a depraved heart;
   then the sweetness of divine bounty, and the height of every enjoyment
   pleasing to innocent human nature, would be as powerful incentives to a
   proper regard for God--tending as much to promote religion and
   virtue--as to have the world filled with calamities, and to have God
   (to use the language of Hezekiah, Isaiah xxviii. 13. describing death
   and its agonies) as a lion, breaking all our bones, and from day even
   to night, making an end of us.

   Dr. T. himself (p. 252.) says, "that our first parents before the fall
   were placed in a condition proper to engage their gratitude, love, and
   obedience." Which is as much as to say, a condition proper to engage
   them to the exercise and practice of all religion. And if the
   paradisaical state was proper to engage to all religion and duty, and
   men still come into the world with hearts as good as the two first of
   the species, why is it not proper to engage them to it still? What need
   of so vastly changing man's state, depriving him of all those
   blessings, and instead of them allotting to him a world full of briers
   and thorns, affliction, calamity, and death, to engage him to it? The
   taking away of life, and all those pleasant enjoyments man had at
   first, by a permanent constitution, would be no stated benefit to
   mankind, unless there was in them a stated disposition to abuse such
   blessings. The taking of them away, is supposed to be a benefit, under
   the notion of their tending to lead men to sin: but they would have no
   such tendency, at least in a stated manner, unless there was in men a
   fixed tendency to make that unreasonable misimprovement of them. Such a
   temper of mind, as amounts to a disposition to make such a
   misimprovement of blessings, is often spoken of in Scripture as most
   astonishingly vile and perverse. So concerning Israel abusing the
   blessings of Canaan, that land flowing with milk and honey; their
   ingratitude in it is spoken of by the prophets, as enough to astonish
   all heaven and earth, and as more than brutish stupidity and
   vileness.Jer. ii. 7. "I brought them into a plentiful country, to eat
   the fruit thereof, and the goodness thereof. But when ye entered, ye
   defiled my land," &c. See the following verses, especially Jer. ii. 12.
   "Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this." So Isa. i. 2-4. "Hear, O
   heavens, and give ear, O earth; I have nourished and brought up
   children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knoweth his owner,
   and the ass his master's crib; but my people doth not know, Israel doth
   not consider. Ah, sinful nation! a people laden with iniquity, a seed
   of evil-doers, children that are corrupters." (Compare Deut. xxxii.
   6-19.) If to be disposed thus to abuse the blessings of so fruitful and
   pleasant a land as Canaan, showed so great depravity, surely it would
   be an evidence of a corruption no less astonishing, to be inclined to
   abuse the blessings of Eden, and the garden of God.

   2. If death be brought on mankind only as a benefit, and in that manner
   which Dr. T. mentions,--to mortify or moderate their carnal appetites
   and affections, wean them from the world, excite them to sober
   reflections, and lead them to the fear and obedience of God, &c.--is it
   not strange that it should fall so heavily on infants, who are not
   capable of making any such improvement of it; so that many more of
   mankind suffer death in infancy, than in any other equal part of the
   age of man? Our author sometimes hints, that the death of infants may
   be for the correction and punishment of parents. But hath God any need
   of such methods to add to parents' afflictions? Are there not other
   ways for increasing their trouble, without destroying the lives of such
   multitudes of those who are perfectly innocent, and who, on the
   supposition, have in no respect any sin belonging to them? On whom
   death comes at an age, when not only the subjects are not capable of
   reflection, or making any improvement of it, either in suffering, or
   the expectation of it: but also at an age, when parents and
   friends--who alone can improve, and whom Dr. T. supposes alone to be
   punished by it--suffer least by being bereaved of them; though the
   infants themselves sometimes suffer to great extremity?

   3. To suppose, as Dr. T. does, that death is brought on mankind in
   consequence of Adam's sin, not at all as a calamity but only as a
   favour and benefit, is contrary to the gospel; which teaches, that when
   Christ, as the second Adam, comes to remove and destroy that death,
   which came by the first Adam, he finds it not as a friend, but an
   enemy. 1 Cor. xv. 22. "For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
   be made alive" (with 1 Cor. xv. 25, 26.) "For he must reign, till he
   hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be
   destroyed, is death."

   Dr. T. urges, that the afflictions to which mankind are subjected, and
   particularly their common mortality, are represented in Scripture as
   the chastisements of our heavenly Father; and therefore are designed
   for our spiritual good, and consequently are not of the nature of
   punishments. (So in p. 68, 69. 38, 39. S.)

   Though I think the thing asserted far from being true, viz. that the
   Scripture represents the afflictions of mankind in general, and
   particularly their common mortality, as the chastisement of a heavenly
   Father; yet it is needless to stand to dispute that matter. For if it
   be so, it will be no argument that the afflictions and death of mankind
   are not evidences of their sinfulness. Those would be strange
   chastisements from the hand of a wise and good Father, which are wholly
   for nothing; especially such severe chastisements, as to break the
   child's bones, when at the same time the father does not suppose any
   guilt, fault, or offense, in any respect, belonging to the child; but
   it is chastised in this terrible manner, only for fear that it will be
   faulty hereafter. I say, these would be a strange sort of
   chastisements; yea, though he should be able to make it up to the child
   afterwards. Dr. T. speaks of representations made by the whole current
   of Scripture; I am certain, it is not agreeable to the current of
   Scripture, to represent divine fatherly chastisements after this
   manner. It is true, the Scripture supposes such chastenings to be the
   fruit of God's goodness; yet at the same time it evermore represents
   them as being for the sin of the subject, and as evidences of the
   divine displeasure for its sinfulness. Thus the apostle (1 Cor. xi.
   30-32. ) speaks of God chastening his people by mortal sickness, for
   their good, that they might not be condemned with the world, and yet
   signifies that it was for their sin; for this causemany are weak and
   sickly among you, and many sleep: that is, for the profaneness and
   sinful disorder before mentioned. So Elihu (Job xxxiii. 16, &c.) speaks
   of the same chastening by sickness, as for men's good; to withdraw man
   from his sinful purpose, and to hide pride from man, and keep back his
   soul from the pit; that therefore God chastens man with pain on his
   bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain. But these
   chastenings are for his sins, as appears by what follows; (Job xxxiii.
   28.) Where it is observed, that when God by this means has brought men
   to repent, and humbly confess their sins, he delivers them. Again, the
   same Elihu, speaking of the unfailing love of God to the righteous,
   even when he chastens them, and they are bound in fetters, and holden
   in cords of affliction (Job xxxvi. 7, &c.) yet speaks of these
   chastenings as being for their sins ( ver. 9.) "Then he showeth them
   their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded." So
   David (Psal. xxx) speaks of God's chastening by some afflictions, as
   being for his good, and issuing joyfully; and yet being the fruit of
   God's anger for his sin (Psal. xxx. 5.) God's anger endureth but for a
   moment, &c. (Compare Psal. cxix. 67, 71, 75.) God's fatherly
   chastisements are spoken of as being for sin. (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15.) "I
   will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I
   will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the
   children of men; but my mercy shall not depart away from him." So the
   prophet Jeremiah speaks of the great affliction that God's people
   suffered in the time of the captivity, as being for their good. (Lam.
   iii. 25, &c.) But yet these chastisements are spoken of as being for
   their SIN, (see especially Lam. iii. 39, 40.) So Christ says, Rev. iii.
   19."As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten." But the words following
   show, that these chastenings from love are for sin that should be
   repented of: "Be zealous therefore, and repent." And though Christ
   tells us, they are blessed that are persecuted for righteousness' sake,
   and have reason to rejoice and be exceeding glad; yet even the
   persecutions of God's people, as ordered in divine providence, are
   spoken of as divine chastenings for sin, like the just corrections of a
   father, when the children deserve them, Heb. xii. The apostle there
   speaking to the Christians concerning the persecutions which they
   suffered, calls their sufferings by the name of divine rebukes; which
   implies testifying against a fault: and that they may not be
   discouraged, puts them in mind, that whom the Lord loves he chastens,
   and scourges every son that he receiveth. It is also very plain, that
   the persecutions of God's people, as they are from the disposing hand
   of God, are chastisements for sin. [259]

   If divine chastisements in general are certain evidences that the
   subjects are not wholly without sin, some way belonging to them, then
   in a peculiar manner is death so; for these reasons:

   (1.) Because slaying, or delivering to death, is often spoken of as, in
   general, a more awful thing than the chastisements which are endured in
   this life. Thus, Psal. cxviii. 17, 18."I shall not die, but live, and
   declare the works of the Lord. The Lord hath chastened me sore; but he
   hath not given me over unto death." So the Psalmist, (Psal. lxxxviii.
   15.) setting forth the extremity of his affliction, represents it as
   what was next to death. "I am afflicted, and ready to die,--while I
   suffer thy terrors, I am distracted." (See 1 Sam. xx. 3.) And so God's
   tenderness towards persons under chastisement, is, from time to time,
   set forth, that he did not proceed so far, as to make an end of them by
   death. [260] God's people often pray, when under great affliction, that
   God would not proceed to this, as the greatest extremity. Psal. xiii.
   3."Consider, and hear me, O Lord, my God; lighten mine eyes, lest I
   sleep the sleep of death." [261]

   Especially may death be looked upon as the most extreme of all temporal
   sufferings, when attended with such dreadful circumstances, and extreme
   pains, as those with which Providence sometimes brings it on infants;
   as on the children that were offered up to Moloch, and some other
   idols, who were tormented to death in burning brass. Dr. T. says (p.
   83, 128. S.) "The Lord of all being can never want time, and place, and
   power, to compensate abundantly any sufferings infants now undergo in
   subserviency to his good providence." But there are no bounds to such a
   license, in evading evidences from fact. It might as well be said, that
   there is not and cannot be any such thing as evidence, from events of
   God's displeasure; which is most contrary to the whole current of
   Scripture, as may appear in part from what has been observed. This
   gentleman might as well go further still, and say, that God may cast
   guiltless persons into hell fire, to remain there in the most
   unutterable torments for ages of ages, (which bear no greater
   proportion to eternity than a quarter of an hour,) and if he does so,
   it is no evidence of God's displeasure; because he can never want time,
   place, and power, abundantly to compensate their sufferings afterwards.
   If it be so, it is not to the purpose, as long as the Scripture so
   abundantly teaches us to look on great calamities and sufferings which
   God brings on men, especially death, as marks of his displeasure for
   sin, and for sin belonging to them who suffer.

   (2.) Another thing--which may well lead us to suppose death, in a
   peculiar manner, above other temporal sufferings, to be intended as a
   testimony of God's displeasure for sin--is, that death is attended with
   that awful appearance, that gloomy and terrible aspect, which naturally
   suggests to our minds God's awful displeasure. Of this Dr. T. himself
   takes particular notice, when (p. 69.) speaking of death; "Herein (says
   he) have we before our eyes a striking demonstration, that sin is
   infinitely hateful to God, and the corruption and ruin of our nature.
   Nothing is more proper than such a sight to give us the utmost
   abhorrence of all iniquity," &c. Now, if death be no testimony of God's
   displeasure for sin--no evidence that the subject is looked upon, by
   him who inflicts it, as any other than perfectly innocent, free from
   all imputation of guilt, and treated only as an object of favour--is it
   not strange, that God should annex to it such affecting appearances of
   his hatred and anger for sin, more than to other chastisements? Which
   yet the Scripture teaches us are always for sin. These gloomy and
   striking manifestations of God's hatred of sin attending death, are
   equivalent to the awful frowns of God attending the stroke of his hand.
   If we should see a wise and just father chastising his child, mixing
   terrible frowns with severe strokes, we should justly argue, that the
   father considered his child as having in him something displeasing, and
   that he did not thus treat his child only under a notion of mortifying
   him, and preventing his being faulty hereafter, and making it up to him
   afterwards, when he had been perfectly innocent, and without fault,
   either of action or disposition.

   We may well argue from these things, that infants are not sinless, but
   are by nature children of wrath, seeing this terrible evil comes so
   heavily on mankind at this early period. But, besides the mortality of
   infants in general, there are some particular cases of their death
   attended with circumstances, which, in a peculiar manner, give evidence
   of their sinfulness, and of their just exposedness to divine wrath.
   Particularly,

   The destroying of the infants in Sodom and the neighbouring cities, may
   be pleaded in evidence; for these cities destroyed in so miraculous and
   awful a manner, are set forth as a signal example of God's dreadful
   vengeance for sin. (Jude, ver. 7.) God did not reprove, but manifestly
   countenanced, Abraham, when he said, with respect to the destruction of
   Sodom, (Gen. xviii.23, 25.) "Wilt thou destroy the righteous with the
   wicked? That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
   righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the
   wicked, that be far from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
   right?" Abraham's words imply that God would not destroy the innocent
   with the guilty. We may well understand innocent as included in the
   word righteous, according to the language usual in Scripture, in
   speaking of such cases of judgment and punishment. [262] Eliphaz says,
   Job iv. 7."Who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the
   righteous cut off?" We see what great care God took that Lot should not
   be involved in that destruction. He was miraculously rescued by angels,
   sent on purpose; who laid hold on him, brought him, set him without the
   gates of the city, and told him that they could do nothing till he was
   out of the way (Gen. xix. 22.) And not only was he thus miraculously
   delivered, but his two wicked daughters for his sake. The whole affair,
   both the destruction and the rescue, was miraculous; and God could as
   easily have delivered the infants which were in those cities. And if
   they had been without sin, their perfect innocence, one should think,
   would have pleaded much more strongly for them, than those lewd women's
   relation to Lot pleaded for them. When in such a case, we must suppose
   these infants much further from deserving to be involved in that
   destruction, than even Lot himself. To say, that God could make it up
   to those infants in another world, must be an insufficient reply. For
   so he could as easily have made it up to Lot, or to ten or fifty
   righteous, if they had been destroyed in the same fire. Nevertheless,
   it is plainly signified, that this would not have been agreeable to the
   wise and holy proceedings of the judge of all the earth.

   Since God declared, that if there had been found but ten righteous in
   Sodom, he would have spared the whole city for their sakes, may we not
   well suppose, if infants are perfectly innocent, that he would have
   spared the old world, in which there were, without doubt, many hundred
   thousand infants, and in general, one in every family, whose perfect
   innocence pleaded for its preservation? Especially when such vast care
   was taken to save Noah and his family, (some of whom, one at least,
   seem to have been none of the best,) that they might not be involved in
   that destruction. If the perfect sinlessness of infants had been a
   notion entertained among the people of God, in the ages next following
   the flood--handed down from Noah and his children, who well knew that
   vast multitudes of infants perished in the flood--is it likely that
   Eliphaz, who lived within a few generations of Shem and Noah, would
   have said to Job (Job iv. 7.) "Who ever perished, being innocent? and
   when were the righteous cut off? Especially, since in the same
   discourse (Job v.1.) he appeals to the tradition of the ancients for a
   confirmation of this very point, (also in Job xv. 7-10. and Job
   xxii.15, 16.) and he mentions the destruction of the wicked by the
   flood, as an instance of that perishing of the wicked, which he
   supposes to be peculiar to them, for Job's conviction; in which the
   wicked were cut down out of time, their foundation being overflown with
   a flood. Where it is also observable, that he speaks of such an
   untimeliness of death as they suffered by the flood, as one evidence of
   guilt; as he also does, Job xv. 32, 33. "It shall be accomplished
   before his time; and his branch shall not be green." But those who were
   destroyed by the flood in infancy, above all the rest, were cut down
   out of time; when instead of living above nine hundred years, according
   to the common period of man's life, at that time, many were cut down
   before they were one year old.

   When God executed vengeance on the ancient inhabitants of Canaan, he
   not only did not spare their cities and families for the sake of their
   infants, nor took care that they should not be involved in the
   destruction; but he often repeated his express commands, that their
   infants should not be spared, but should be utterly destroyed, without
   any pity; while Rahab the harlot (who had been far from innocence,
   though she expressed her faith in entertaining and safely dismissing
   the spies) were preserved, and all her friends for her sake. And when
   God executed his wrath on the Egyptians, by slaying their
   first-born--though the children of Israel, who were most of them wicked
   men, as was before shown, were wonderfully spared by the destroying
   angel, yet--the Egyptian infants were not spared. They not only were
   not rescued by the angel, and no miracle wrought to save them (as was
   observed in the case of the infants of Sodom,) but the angel destroyed
   them by his own immediate hand, and a miracle was wrought to kill them.

   Not to be particular, concerning the command by Moses, respecting the
   destruction of the infants of the Midianites; (Numb. xxxi. 17.) and
   that given to Saul to destroy all the infants of the Amalekites; (1
   Sam. xv. 3.) and what is said concerning Edom, (Psal. cxxxvii. 9.)
   "Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the
   stones;" I proceed to take notice of something remarkable concerning
   the destruction of Jerusalem, represented in Ezek. ix. when command was
   given to destroy the inhabitants, ver. 1-8. And this reason is given
   for it, that their iniquity required it, and it was a just recompense
   of their sin, (Ezek. ix. 9, 10). God, at the same time, was most
   particular and exact in his care, that such as had proved by their
   behavior, that they were not partakers in the abominations of the city,
   should by no means be involved in the slaughter. Command was given to
   the angel to go through the city, and set a mark upon their foreheads,
   and the destroying angel had a strict charge not to come near any man,
   on whom was the mark; yet the infants were not marked, nor a word said
   of sparing them: on the contrary, infants were expressly mentioned as
   those that should be utterly destroyed, without pity, (Ezek. ix. 5, 6.)
   "Go through the city and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye
   pity. Slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children: but
   come not near any man upon whom is the mark."

   And if any should suspect, that such instances as these were peculiar
   to a more severe dispensation, under the Old Testament, let us consider
   a remarkable instance in the days of the glorious gospel of the grace
   of God; even the last destruction of Jerusalem. This was far more
   terrible, and with greater testimonies of God's wrath and indignation,
   that the destruction of Sodom, or of Jerusalem in Nebuchadnezzar's
   time, or anything that ever had happened to any city, or people, from
   the beginning of the world to that time (Agreeable to Matt. xxiv. 21.
   and Luke xxi. 22, 23.) At that time particular care was taken to
   distinguish and to deliver God's people; as foretold, Dan. xii. 1. And
   we have in the New Testament a particular account of the care Christ
   took for the preservation of his followers: he gave them a sign, by
   which they might know when the desolation of the city was nigh, that
   they who were in Jerusalem might flee to the mountains, and escape.
   And, as history relates, the Christians followed the directions given,
   and escaped to a place in the mountains called Pella, and were
   preserved. Yet no care was taken to preserve the infants of the city,
   in general; but according to the predictions of that event, they were
   involved with others in that great destruction. So heavily did the
   calamity fall upon them, that those words were verified, Luke xxiii.
   29. "Behold the days are coming, in which they shall say, Blessed are
   the barren, and the womb that never bare, and the paps which never gave
   suck:" and that prophecy in Deut. xxxii. 21-25. which has undoubtedly a
   special respect to this very time, and is so applied by the best
   commentators;--"I will provoke them to jealousy with those that are not
   a people: for a fire is kindled in mine anger,--and it shall burn to
   the lowest hell. I will heap mischiefs upon them: I will spend mine
   arrows upon them. They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with
   burning heat, and bitter destruction. The sword without, and terror
   within, shall destroy both the young man, and the virgin, the suckling
   also, with the man of grey hairs." And, by the history of that
   destruction appears, that then it was a remarkable fulfillment of Deut.
   xxviii. 53-57, concerning parents eating their children in the
   siege,--and the tender and delicate woman eating her new-born child.
   And here it must be remembered, that these very destructions of that
   city and land are spoken of as clear evidences of God's wrath, to all
   nations who shall behold them. And if so, they were evidences of God's
   wrath towards infants; who, equally with the rest, were the subject of
   the destruction. If a particular kind or rank of persons, which made a
   very considerable part of the inhabitants, were from time to time
   partakers of the overthrow, without any distinction made in Divine
   Providence, and yet this was no evidence at all of God's displeasure
   with any of them; then being the subjects of such a calamity could not
   be an evidence of God's wrath against any of the inhabitants, to the
   reason of all nations, or any nation, or so much as one person.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [257] See Lev. x. 6. Num. i. 53. and Num. xviii. 5. Josh. ix. 20. 2
   Chron. xxiv. 18. and 2 Chron. xix. 2, 10. and 2 Chron. xxviii. 13. and
   2 Chron. xxxii. 25 Ezra vii. 23. Neh. xiii.18. Zech. vii. 12. and many
   other places.

   [258] P 21, 67, and other places.

   [259] See 1 Pet. iv. 17, 18, compared with Prov. xi. 31. See also Psal.
   lxix. 4-9.

   [260] As in Psal. lxxviii. 38, 39. Psal. ciii. 9. with Psal. ciii. 14,
   15. Psal. xxx. 2, 3, 9. and Job xxxiii. 22-24.

   [261] So Job x. 9. Psal. vi. 1-5. Psal. lxxxviii 9, 10, 11. and Psal.
   cxliii. 7.

   [262] Gen. xx. 4. Exod. xxiii. 7. Deut. xxv. 1. 2 Sam. iv. 11. 2 Chron.
   vi. 23. and Prov. xviii. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II.

   containing observations on particular parts of the holy scripture,
   which prove the doctrine of original sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. I.

   OBSERVATIONS RELATING TO THINGS CONTAINED IN THE THREE FIRST CHAPTERS
   OF GENESIS, WITH REFERENCE TO THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Concerning original righteousness; and whether our first parents were
   created with righteousness, or moral rectitude of heart?

   The doctrine of Original Righteousness, or the creation of our first
   parents with holy principles and dispositions, has a close connexion,
   in several respects, with the doctrine of original sin. Dr. T. was
   sensible of this; and accordingly he strenuously opposes this doctrine,
   in his book against original sin. And therefore in handling the
   subject, I would in the first place remove this author's main objection
   against this doctrine, and then show how it may be inferred from the
   account which Moses gives us, in the three first chapters of Genesis.

   Dr. T.s grand objection against this doctrine, which he abundantly
   insists on, is this: that it is utterly inconsistent with the nature of
   virtue, that it should be concreated with any person; because, if so,
   it must be by an act of God's absolute power, without our knowledge or
   concurrence; and that moral virtue, in its very nature, implieth the
   choice and consent of the moral agent, without which it cannot be
   virtue and holiness: that a necessary holiness is no holiness. So p.
   180. where he observes, "That Adam must exist, he must be created, yea
   he must exercise thought and reflection, before he was righteous." (See
   also p. 250, 251.) In p. 161. S. he says, "To say, that God not only
   endowed Adam with a capacity of being righteous, but moreover that
   righteousness and true holiness were created with him, or wrought into
   his nature, at the same time he was made, is to affirm a contradiction,
   or what is inconsistent with the very nature of righteousness." And in
   like manner Dr. Turnbull in many places insists upon it, that it is
   necessary to the very being of virtue, that it be owing to our own
   choice, and diligent culture.

   With respect to this, I would observe, that it consists in a notion of
   virtue quite inconsistent with the nature of things, and the common
   notions of mankind; and also inconsistent with Dr. T.s own notions of
   virtue. Therefore, if to affirm that to be virtue or holiness, which is
   not the fruit of preceding thought, reflection, and choice, is to
   affirm a contradiction, I shall show plainly, that for him to affirm
   otherwise, is a contradiction to himself.

   In the first place, I think it a contradiction to the nature of things,
   as judged of by the common sense of mankind. It is agreeable to the
   sense of men, in all nations and ages, not only that the fruit or
   effect of a good choice is virtuous, but that the good choice itself,
   from whence that effect proceeds, is so; yea, also the antecedent good
   disposition, temper, or affection of mind, from whence proceeds that
   good choice, is virtuous. This is the general notion--not that
   principles derive their goodness from actions, but--that actions derive
   their goodness from the principles whence they proceed; so that the act
   of choosing what is good, is no further virtuous, than it proceeds from
   a good principle, or virtuous disposition of mind. Which supposes, that
   a virtuous disposition of mind may be before a virtuous act of choice;
   and that, therefore, it is not necessary there should first be thought,
   reflection, and choice, before there can be any virtuous disposition.
   If the choice be first, before the existence of a good disposition of
   heart, what is the character of that choice? There can, according to
   our natural notions, be no virtue in a choice which proceeds from no
   virtuous principle, but from mere self-love, ambition, or some animal
   appetites; therefore, a virtuous temper of mind may be before a good
   act of choice, as a tree may be before the fruit, and the fountain
   before the stream which proceeds from it.

   The following things, in Mr. Hutcheson's inquiry concerning moral good
   and evil, are evidently agreeable to the nature of things, and the
   voice of human sense and reason. (Sect. II. p. 132, 133.) " Every
   action which we apprehend as either morally good or evil, is always
   supposed to flow from some affections towards sensitive natures. And
   whatever we call virtue or vice, is either some such affection, or some
   action consequent upon it.--All the actions counted religious in any
   country, are supposed by those who count them so, to flow from some
   affections towards the Deity: and whatever we call social virtue, we
   still suppose to flow from affections towards our
   fellow-creatures.--Prudence, if it is only employed in promoting
   private interest, is never imagined to be a virtue." In these things
   Dr. Turnbull expressly agrees with Mr. Hutcheson, his admired author.
   [263]

   If a virtuous disposition or affection is before its acts, then they
   are before those virtuous acts of choice which proceed from it.
   Therefore, there is no necessity that all virtuous dispositions or
   affections should be the effect of choice : and so, no such supposed
   necessity can be a good objection against such a disposition being
   natural, or from a kind of instinct, implanted in the mind in its
   creation. Agreeably to this Mr. Hutcheson says, (Ibid. sect. III. p.
   196, 197.) "I know not for what reason some will not allow that to be
   virtue, which flows from instinct or passions. But how do they help
   themselves? They say, virtue arises from reason. What is reason, but
   the sagacity we have in prosecuting any end? The ultimate end proposed
   by common moralists, is the happiness of the agent himself. And this
   certainly he is determined to pursue from instinct. Now may not another
   instinct towards the public, or the good of others, be as proper a
   principle of virtue as the instinct towards private happiness? If it be
   said, that actions from instinct are not the effect of prudence and
   choice, this objection will hold full as strongly against the actions
   which flow from self-love."

   And if we consider what Dr. T. declares, as his own notion of the
   essence of virtue, and which he so confidently and often affirms, that
   it should follow choice, and proceed from it, we shall find it is no
   less repugnant to that sentiment, than it is to the nature of things,
   and the general notions of mankind. For it is his notion, as well as
   Mr. Hutcheson's, that the essence of virtue lies in good affection, and
   particularly in benevolence or love: as he very fully declares in these
   words in his Key, [264] "That the word that signifies goodness and
   mercy should also signify moral rectitude in general, will not seem
   strange, if we consider that love is the fulfilling of the law.
   Goodness, according to the sense of Scripture, and the nature of
   things, includes all moral rectitude; which, I reckon, may every part
   of it, where it true and genuine, be resolved into this single
   principle." If it be so indeed, then certainly no act whatsoever can
   have moral rectitude, but what proceeds from this principle. And
   consequently no act of volition or choice can have any moral rectitude,
   that takes place before this principle exists. And yet he most
   confidently affirms, that thought, reflection, and choice must go
   before virtue, and that all virtue or righteousness must be the fruit
   of preceding choice. This brings his scheme to an evident
   contradiction. For no act of choice can be virtuous but what proceeds
   from a principle of benevolence, or love; for he insists that all
   genuine moral rectitude, in every part of it, is resolved into this
   single principle. And yet the principle of benevolence itself cannot be
   virtuous, unless it proceeds from choice; for he affirms, that nothing
   can have the nature of virtue but what comes from choice. So that
   virtuous love as the principle of all virtue, must go before virtuous
   choice, and be the principle or spring of it; and yet virtuous choice
   must go before virtuous benevolence, and be the spring of that. If a
   virtuous act of choice goes before a principle of benevolence, and
   produces it, then this virtuous act is something distinct from that
   principle which follows it, and is its effect. So that here is at least
   one part of virtue, yea the spring and source of all virtue, viz. a
   virtuous choice, that cannot be resolved into that single principle of
   love.

   Here also it is worthy to be observed, that Dr. T. (p. 128.) says, the
   cause of every effect is alone chargeable with the effect it produceth
   or which proceedeth from it, and so he argues, that if the effect be
   bad, the cause alone is sinful. According to which reasoning, when the
   effect is good, the cause alone is righteous or virtuous. To the cause
   is to be ascribed all the praise of the good effect it produceth. And
   by the same reasoning it will follow, that if, as Dr. Taylor says, Adam
   must choose to be righteous, before he was righteous, and if it be
   essential to the nature of righteousness, or moral rectitude, that it
   be the effect of choice, and hence a principle of benevolence cannot
   have moral rectitude, unless it proceeds from choice; then not the
   principle of benevolence, which is the effect, but to the foregoing
   choice alone is to be ascribed all the virtue or righteousness that is
   in the case. And so, instead of all moral rectitude, in every part of
   it, being resolved into that single principle of benevolence, no moral
   rectitude, in any part of it, is to be resolved into that principle;
   but all is to be resolved into the foregoing choice, which is the
   cause.

   But yet it follows from these inconsistent principles, that there is no
   moral rectitude or virtue in that first act of choice, that is the
   cause of all consequent virtue. This follows two ways; 1. Because every
   part of virtue lies in the benevolent principle, which is the effect;
   and therefore no part of it can lie in the cause. 2. The choice of
   virtue, as to the first act at least, can have no virtue or
   righteousness at all; because it does not proceed from any foregoing
   choice. For Dr. T. insists, that a man must first have reflection and
   choice, before he can have righteousness; and that it is essential to
   holiness that it proceed from choice. So that the first choice from
   which holiness proceeds, can have no virtue at all, because, by the
   supposition, it does not proceed from choice, being the first choice.
   Hence, if it be essential to holiness that it proceeds from choice, it
   must proceed from an unholy choice; unless the first holy choice can be
   before itself.

   And with respect to Adam, let us consider how upon Dr. T.s principles,
   it was possible he ever should have any such thing as righteousness, by
   any means at all. In the state wherein God created him, he could have
   no such thing as love to God, or any benevolence in his heart. For if
   so, there would have been original righteousness; there would have been
   genuine moral rectitude; nothing would have been wanting: for our
   author says, True, genuine moral rectitude, in every part of it, is to
   be resolved into this single principle. But if he were wholly without
   any such thing as love to God, or any virtuous love, how should he come
   by virtue? The answer doubtless will be, by act of choice: he must
   first choose to be virtuous. But what if he did choose to be virtuous?
   It could not be from love to God, or any virtuous principle, that he
   chose it; for, by the supposition, he has no such principle in his
   heart. And if he chooses it without such a principle, still, according
   to this author, there is no virtue in his choice; for all virtue, he
   says, is to be resolved into that single principle of love. Or will he
   say, there may be produced in the heart a virtuous benevolence by an
   act or acts of choice, that are not virtuous? But this does not consist
   with what he implicitly asserts, that to the cause alone is to be
   ascribed what is in the effect. So that there is no way that can
   possibly be devised, in consistence with Dr. T.s scheme, in which Adam
   ever could have any righteousness, or could ever either obtain any
   principle of virtue, or perform any one virtuous act.

   These confused inconsistent assertions, concerning virtue and moral
   rectitude, arise from the absurd notions in vogue, concerning freedom
   of will, as if it consisted in the will's self-determining power,
   supposed to be necessary to moral agency, virtue, and vice. The
   absurdities of which, with the grounds of these errors, and what the
   truth is respecting these matters, with its evidences, I have,
   according to my ability, fully and largely considered, in my "Inquiry''
   on that subject; to which I must refer the reader, who desires further
   satisfaction, and is willing to give himself the trouble of reading
   that discourse.

   Having considered this great argument, and pretended demonstration of
   Dr. T. against original righteousness; I proceed to the proofs of the
   doctrine. And, in the first place, I would consider, whether there be
   not evidence of it in the three first chapters of Genesis: or, whether
   the history there delivered does not lead us to suppose, that our first
   parents were created in a state of moral rectitude and holiness.

   I. This history leads us to suppose, that Adam's sin, with relation to
   the forbidden fruit, was the first sin he committed. Which could not
   have been, had he not always, till then, been perfectly righteous,
   righteous from the first moment of his existence; and consequently,
   created or brought into existence righteous. In a moral agent, subject
   to moral obligations, it is the same thing, to be perfectly innocent,
   as to be perfectly righteous. It must be the same, because there can no
   more be any medium between sin and righteousness, or between being
   right and being wrong, in a moral sense, than there can be a medium
   between straight and crooked, in a natural sense. Adam was brought into
   existence capable of acting immediately, as a moral agent; and
   therefore he was immediately under a rule of right action. He was
   obliged as soon as he existed to act aright. And if he was obliged to
   act aright as soon as he existed, he was obliged even then to be
   inclined to act right. Dr. T. says, (p. 166. S.) "Adam could not sin
   without a sinful inclination:" [265] and, just for the same reason, he
   could not do aright, without an inclination to right action. And as he
   was obliged to act rightly from the first moment of his existence, and
   did so, till he sinned in reference to the forbidden fruit, he must
   have had a disposition of heart to do rightly the first moment of his
   existence; and that is the same as to be created, or brought into
   existence, with an inclination to right action, or, which is the same
   thing, a virtuous and holy disposition of heart.

   Here it will be in vain to say, "It is true, that it was Adam's duty to
   have a good disposition or inclination, as soon as it was possible to
   be obtained, in the nature of things; but as it could not be without
   time to establish such a habit, which requires antecedent thought,
   reflection, and repeated right action; therefore all that Adam could be
   obliged to, in the first place, was to reflect, and consider things in
   a right manner, and apply himself to right action, in order to obtain a
   right disposition:" for this supposes, that even the reflection and
   consideration to which he was obliged, was right action. Surely he was
   obliged to it no otherwise than as a thing that was right: and
   therefore he must have an inclination to this right action immediately,
   before he could perform those first right actions. And as the
   inclination to them should be right, the principle, or disposition from
   which he performed even those actions, must be good: otherwise the
   actions would not be right in the sight of him who looks at the heart;
   nor would they answer his obligations, if he had done them for some
   sinister end, and not from a regard to God and his duty. Therefore
   there must have been a regard to God and his duty implanted in him at
   his first existence: otherwise it is certain, he would have done
   nothing from a regard to God and his duty; no, not so much as to
   reflect and consider, and try to obtain such a disposition. The very
   supposition of a disposition to right action being first obtained by
   repeated right action, is grossly inconsistent with itself: for it
   supposes a course of right action, before there is a disposition to
   perform any right action.

   These are no invented quibbles or sophisms. If God expected from Adam
   any obedience, or duty to him at all, when he first made him--whether
   it was in reflecting, considering, or any way exerting his
   faculties--then he was expected immediately to exercise love to God.
   For how could it be expected, that Adam should have a strict and
   perfect regard to God's commands and authority, and his duty to him,
   when he had no love nor regard to him in his heart, nor could it be
   expected he should have any? If Adam from the beginning did his duty to
   God, and had more respect to the will of his Creator, than to other
   things, and as much respect to him as he ought to have; then from the
   beginning he had a supreme and perfect respect and love to God: and if
   so, he was created with such a principle. There is no avoiding the
   consequence. Not only external duties, but internal ones, such as
   summarily consist in love, must be immediately required of Adam, as
   soon as he existed, if any duty at all was required. For it is most
   apparently absurd, to talk of a spiritual being, with the faculties of
   understanding and will, being required to perform external duties,
   without internal. Dr. T. himself observes, that love is the fulfilling
   of the law, and that all moral rectitude, even every part of it, must
   be resolved into that single principle. Therefore, if any morally right
   act at all, reflection, consideration, or any thing else, was required
   of Adam immediately, on his first existence, and was performed as
   required; then he must, the first moment of his existence, have his
   heart possessed of that principle of divine love; which implies the
   whole of moral rectitude in every part of it, according to our author's
   own doctrine; and so the whole of moral rectitude or righteousness must
   begin with his existence: which is the thing taught in the doctrine of
   original righteousness.

   Let us consider how it could be otherwise, than that Adam was always,
   in every moment of his existence, obliged to exercise such respect of
   heart towards every object, as was agreeable to the apparent merit of
   that object. For instance, would it not at any time have become Adam,
   on the exhibition of God's infinite goodness to him, to have exercised
   answerable gratitude; and would not the contrary have been unbecoming
   and odious? And if something had been presented to Adam's view,
   transcendently amiable in itself, for instance, the glorious perfection
   of the divine nature, would it not have become him to love, relish, and
   delight in it? Would not such an object have merited this? And if the
   view of an object so amiable in itself did not affect his mind with
   complacence, would it not, according to the plain dictates of our
   understanding, have shown an unbecoming temper of mind? Time, by
   culture, to form and establish a good disposition, would not have taken
   off the odiousness of the temper. And if there had been never so much
   time, I do not see how it could be expected he should improve it
   aright, in order to obtain a good disposition, if he had not already
   some good disposition to engage him to it.

   That belonging to the will, and disposition of the heart, which is in
   itself either odious or amiable, unbecoming or decent, always would
   have been Adam's virtue or sin, in any moment of his existence; if
   there be any such thing as virtue or vice; by which terms nothing can
   be meant, but something in our moral disposition and behaviour, which
   is becoming or unbecoming, amiable or odious.

   Human nature must be created with some dispositions; a disposition to
   relish some things as good and amiable, and to be averse to other
   things as odious and disagreeable: otherwise, it must be without any
   such thing as inclination or will; perfectly indifferent, without
   preference, without choice, or aversion, towards any thing as agreeable
   or disagreeable. But if it had any concreated dispositions at all, they
   must be either right or wrong, either agreeable or disagreeable to the
   nature of things. If man had at first the highest relish of things
   excellent and beautiful, a disposition to have the quickest and highest
   delight in those things which were most worthy of it, then his
   dispositions were morally right and amiable, and never can be excellent
   in a higher sense. But if he had a disposition to love most those
   things that were inferior and less worthy, then his dispositions were
   vicious. And it is evident there can be no medium between these.

   II. This notion of Adam being created without a principle of holiness
   in his heart, taken with the rest of Dr. T.s scheme, is inconsistent
   with what the history in the beginning of Genesis leads us to suppose
   of the great favours and smiles of Heaven, which Adam enjoyed while he
   remained in innocency. The Mosaic account suggests to us, that till
   Adam sinned, he was in happy circumstances, surrounded with testimonies
   and fruits of God's favour. This is implicitly owned by Dr. T. when he
   says, (p. 252.) "That in the dispensation our first parents were under
   before the fall, they were placed in a condition proper to engage their
   gratitude, love, and obedience." But it will follow, on our author's
   principles, that Adam, while in innocency, was placed in far worse
   circumstances, than he was in after his disobedience, and infinitely
   worse than his posterity are in; under unspeakably greater
   disadvantages for avoiding sin, and the performance of duty. For by
   this doctrine, Adam's posterity come into the world with their hearts
   as free from any propensity to sin as he, and he was made as destitute
   of any propensity to righteousness as they: and yet God, in favour to
   them, does great things to restrain them from sin, and excite them to
   virtue, which he never did for Adam in innocency, but laid him, in the
   highest degree, under contrary disadvantages. God, as an instance of
   his great favour, and fatherly love to man, since the fall, has denied
   him the ease and pleasures of paradise, which gratified and allured his
   senses, and bodily appetites; that he might diminish his temptations to
   sin. And as a still greater means to restrain from sin, and promote
   virtue, has subjected him to labour, toil, and sorrow in the world: and
   not only so, but as a means to promote his spiritual and eternal good
   far beyond this, has doomed him to death. When all this was found
   insufficient, he, in further prosecution of the designs of his love,
   shortened men's lives exceedingly, made them twelve or thirteen times
   shorter than in the first ages. And yet this, with all the innumerable
   calamities which God, in great favour to mankind, has brought on the
   world--whereby their temptations are so vastly cut short, and the
   inducements to virtue heaped one upon another to so great a
   degree--have proved insufficient, now for so many thousand years
   together, to restrain from wickedness in any considerable degree; while
   innocent human nature, all along, comes into the world with the same
   purity and harmless dispositions that our first parents had in
   paradise. What vast disadvantages indeed then must Adam and Eve be in,
   who had no more in their nature to keep them from sin, or incline them
   to virtue, than their posterity, and yet were without all those
   additional and extraordinary means! They were not only without such
   exceeding great means as we now have, when our lives are made so very
   short, but had vastly less advantages than their antediluvian
   posterity, who to prevent their being wicked, and to make them good,
   had so much labour and toil, sweat and sorrow, briers and thorns, with
   a body gradually decaying and returning to the dust. Our first parents
   had the extreme disadvantage of being placed amongst many and exceeding
   great temptations--not only without toil or sorrow, pain or disease, to
   humble and mortify them, and a sentence of death to wean them from the
   world, but--in the midst of the most exquisite and alluring sensitive
   delights; the reverse in every respect, and the highest degree, of that
   most gracious state of requisite means, and great advantages, which
   mankind now enjoy! If mankind now, under these vast restraints, and
   great advantages, are not restrained from general, and as it were
   universal wickedness, how could it be expected that Adam and Eve,
   created with no better hearts than men bring into the world now, and
   destitute of all these advantages, and in the midst of all contrary
   disadvantages, should escape it?

   These things are not agreeable to Moses's account. That represents a
   happy state of peculiar favours and blessings before the fall, and the
   curse coming afterwards; but according to this scheme, the curse was
   before the fall, and the great favours and testimonies of love followed
   the apostasy. And the curse before the fall must be a curse with a
   witness, being to so high a degree the reverse of such means, means so
   necessary for such a creature as innocent man, and in all their
   multitude and fulness proving too little. Paradise therefore must be a
   mere delusion! There was indeed a great show of favour, in placing man
   in the midst of such delights. But this delightful garden, it seems,
   with all its beauty and sweetness, was in its real tendency worse than
   the apples of Sodom. It was but a mere bait, (God forbid the
   blasphemy,) the more effectually enticing by its beauty and
   deliciousness, to Adam's eternal ruin. Which might be the more expected
   to be fatal to him, seeing he was the first man, having no capacity
   superior to his posterity, and wholly without the advantage of their
   observations, experiences, and improvements.

   I proceed now to take notice of an additional proof of the doctrine we
   are upon, from another part of the Holy Scripture. A very clear text
   for original righteousness we have in Eccles. vii. 29. "Lo, this only
   have I found, that God made man upright; but they have sought out many
   inventions."

   It is an observation of no weight which Dr. T. makes on this text, that
   the word man is commonly used to signify mankind in general, or mankind
   collectively taken. It is true, it often signifies the species of
   mankind; but then it is used to signify the species, with regard to its
   duration and succession from its beginning, as well as with regard to
   its extent. The English word mankind is used to signify the species:
   but what then? Would it be an improper way of speaking, to say, that
   when God first made mankind, he placed them in a pleasant paradise,
   (meaning in their first parents,) but now they live in the midst of
   briers and thorns? And it is certain, that to speak thus of God making
   mankind--his giving the species an existence in their first parents, at
   the creation--is agreeable to the scripture use of such an expression.
   As in Deut. iv. 32. "Since the day that God created man upon the
   earth." Job xx. 4. "Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed
   upon the earth." Isa. xlv. 12. "I have made the earth, and created man
   upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens." Jer. xxvii.
   5. "I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the
   ground, by my great power." All these texts speak of God making man,
   signifying the species of mankind; and yet they all plainly have
   respect to God making man at first, when he made the earth, and
   stretched out the heavens. In all these places the same word, Adam, is
   used as in Ecclesiastes; and in the last of them, used with (HE
   emphaticum) the emphatic sign, as here; though Dr. T. omits it, when he
   tells us he gives us a catalogue of all the places in Scripture where
   the word is used. And it argues nothing to the Doctor's purpose, that
   the pronoun they is used;--THEY have sought out many inventions. This
   is properly applied to the species, which God made at first upright;
   the species begun with more than one, and continued in a multitude. As
   Christ speaks of the two sexes, in the relation of man and wife,
   continued in successive generations; Matt. xix. 4. "He that made them
   at the beginning, made them male and female;" having reference to Adam
   and Eve.

   No less impertinent, and also very unfair, is his criticism on the word
   (rSy) translated upright. Because the word sometimes signifies right,
   he would from thence infer, that it does not properly signify moral
   rectitude, even when used to express the character of moral agents. He
   might as well insist, that the English word upright, sometimes, and in
   its most original meaning, signifies right up, or in an erect posture,
   therefore it does not properly signify any moral character, when
   applied to moral agents. And indeed less unreasonably; for it is known,
   that in the Hebrew language, in a peculiar manner, most words used to
   signify moral and spiritual things, are taken from external and natural
   objects. The word (rSy Jashar) is used, as applied to moral agents, or
   to the words and actions of such, (if I have not misreckoned, [266] )
   about an hundred and ten times in Scripture; and about an hundred of
   them, without all dispute, to signify virtue, or moral rectitude,
   (though Dr. T. is pleased to say, the word does not generally signify a
   moral character,) and for the most part it signifies true virtue, or
   virtue in such a sense, as distinguishes it from all false appearances
   of virtue, or what is only virtue in some respects, but not truly so in
   the sight of God. It is used at least eighty times in this sense: and
   scarce any word can be found in the Hebrew language more significant of
   this. It is thus used constantly in Solomon's writings, (where it is
   often found) when used to express a character or property of moral
   agents. And it is beyond all controversy, that he uses it in this
   place, (Eccles. vii.) to signify moral rectitude, or a character of
   real virtue and integrity. For the wise man is speaking of persons with
   respect to their moral character, inquiring into the corruption and
   depravity of mankind, (as is confessed, p. 184.) and he here declares,
   he had not found more than one among a thousand of the right stamp,
   truly and thoroughly virtuous and upright: which appeared a strange
   thing! But in this text he clears God, and lays the blame on man: man
   was not made thus at first. He was made of the right stamp, altogether
   good in his kind, (as all other things were,) truly and thoroughly
   virtuous, as he ought to be; but they have sought out many inventions.
   Which last expression signifies things sinful, or morally evil; (as is
   confessed, p. 185.) And this expression, used to signify those moral
   evils he found in man, which he sets in opposition to the uprightness
   man was made in, shows, that by uprightness he means the most true and
   sincere goodness. The word rendered inventions, most naturally and
   aptly signifies the subtile devices, and crooked deceitful ways, of
   hypocrites, wherein they are of a character contrary to men of
   simplicity and godly sincerity; who, though wise in that which is good,
   are simple concerning evil. Thus the same wise man, in Prov. xii. 2.
   sets a truly good man in opposition to a man of wicked devices, whom
   God will condemn. Solomon had occasion to observe many who put on an
   artful disguise and fair show of goodness; but on searching thoroughly,
   he found very few truly upright. As he says, Prov. xx. 6. "Most men
   will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can
   find?" So that it is exceeding plain, that by uprightness, in this
   place, (Eccles. vii.) Solomon means true moral goodness.

   What our author urges concerning many inventions, whereas Adam's eating
   of the forbidden fruit was but one invention, is of as little weight as
   the rest of what he says on this text. For the many lusts and
   corruptions of man kind, appearing in innumerable ways of sinning, are
   all the consequence of that sin. The great corruption men are fallen
   into by the original apostacy, appears in the multitude of the wicked
   ways to which they are inclined. And therefore these are properly
   mentioned as the fruits and evidences of the greatness of that apostacy
   and corruption.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [263] Mor. Phil. p. 112-115. p. 142 et alibi passim.

   [264] Marginal Note, annexed to § 356.

   [265] This is doubtless true: for although there was no natural sinful
   inclination in Adam, yet an inclination to that sin of eating the
   forbidden fruit, was begotten in him by the delusion and error he was
   led into; and this inclination to eat the forbidden fruit, must precede
   his actual eating.

   [266] Making use of Buxtorf's Concordance, which, according to the
   author's professed design, directs to all the places where the word is
   used.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Concerning the kind of death, threatened to our first parents, if they
   should eat of the forbidden fruit.

   Dr. T. in his observations on the three first chapters of Genesis says,
   (p. 7.) "The threatening to man in case of transgression was, that he
   should surely die.--Death is the losing of life. Death is opposed to
   life, and must be understood according to the nature of that life, to
   which it is opposed. Now the death here threatened can, with any
   certainty, be opposed only to the life God gave Adam, when he created
   him, ( ver. 7.) Any thing besides this must be pure conjecture, without
   solid foundation."

   To this I would say; it is true, Death it opposed to life, and must be
   understood according to the nature of that life, to which it is
   opposed. But does it therefore follow, that nothing can be meant by it
   but the loss of life? Misery is opposed to happiness, and sorrow is in
   Scripture often opposed to joy; but can we conclude from thence, that
   nothing is meant in Scripture by sorrow, but the loss of joy? or that
   there is no more in misery, than the loss or absence of happiness? And
   if the death threatened to Adam can, with certainty, be opposed only to
   the life given to Adam, when God created him; I think, a state of
   perfect, perpetual, and hopeless misery is properly opposed to that
   state Adam was in, when God created him. For I suppose it will not be
   denied, that the life Adam had, was truly a happy life; happy in
   perfect innocency, in the favour of his Maker, surrounded with the
   happy fruits and testimonies of his love. And I think it has been
   proved, that he also was happy in a state of perfect righteousness.
   Nothing is more manifest, than that it is agreeable to a very common
   acceptation of the word life, in Scripture, that it be understood as
   signifying a state of excellent and happy existence. Now that which is
   most opposite to that life and state in which Adam was created, is a
   state of total, confirmed wickedness, and perfect hopeless misery,
   under the divine displeasure and curse; not excluding temporal death,
   or the destruction of the body, as an introduction to it.

   Besides, that which is much more evident, than any thing Dr. T. says on
   this head, is, that the death which was to come on Adam, as the
   punishment of his disobedience, was opposed to that life, which he
   would have had as the reward of his obedience in case he had not
   sinned. Obedience and disobedience are contraries; the threatenings and
   promises which are sanctions of a law, are set in direct opposition;
   and the promises, rewards, and threatened punishments, are most
   properly taken as each others' opposites. But none will deny, that the
   life which would have been Adam's reward, if he had persisted in
   obedience, was eternal life. And therefore we argue justly that the
   death which stands opposed to that life, (Dr. T. himself being judge,
   p. 120. S.) is manifestly eternal death, a death widely different from
   the death we now die--to use his own words. If Adam, for his
   persevering obedience, was to have had everlasting life and happiness,
   in perfect holiness, union with his Maker, and enjoyment of his favour,
   and this was the life which was to be confirmed by the tree of life;
   then, doubtless, the death threatened in case of disobedience, which
   stands in direct opposition to this, was an exposure to everlasting
   wickedness and misery, in separation from God, and in enduring his
   wrath.

   When God first made mankind, and made known to them the methods of his
   moral government towards them, in the revelation he made of himself to
   the natural head of the whole species--and letting him know, that
   obedience to him was expected, and enforcing his duty with the sanction
   of a threatened punishment, called by the name of death--we may with
   the greatest reason suppose, in such a case, that by death was meant
   the most proper punishment of the sin of mankind, and which he speaks
   of under that name throughout the Scripture, as the proper wages of
   sin; and this was always, from the beginning, understood to be so in
   the church of God. It would be strange indeed, if it should be
   otherwise. It would have been strange, if, when the law of God was
   first given, and enforced by the threatening of a punishment, nothing
   at all had been mentioned of that great punishment, ever spoken of
   under the name of death--in the revelations which he has given to
   mankind from age to age--as the proper punishment of the sin of
   mankind. And it would be no less strange, if when the punishment which
   was mentioned and threatened on that occasion, was called by the same
   name, even death, yet we must not understand it to mean the same thing,
   but something infinitely diverse, and infinitely more inconsiderable.

   But now let us consider what that death is, which the Scripture ever
   speaks of as the proper wages of sin, and is spoken of as such by God's
   saints in all ages of the church. I will begin with the New Testament.
   When the apostle Paul says, (Rom. vi. 23.) "The wages of sin is death,"
   Dr. T. tells us, (p. 120. S.) that this means eternal death, the second
   death, a death widely different from the death we now die. The same
   apostle speaks of death as the proper punishment due for sin, Rom. vii.
   5. and Rom. viii. 13. 2 Cor. iii. 7. 1 Cor. xv. 56. In all which
   places, Dr. T. himself supposes the apostle to intend eternal death.
   [267] And when the apostle James speaks of death, as the proper reward,
   fruit, and end of sin, (James i. 15.) "Sin, when it is finished,
   bringeth forth death;" it is manifest, that our author supposes eternal
   destruction to be meant. [268] And the apostle John, agreeably to Dr.
   T.s sense, speaks of the second death as that which sin unrepented of
   will bring all men to at last. Rev. ii. 11. Rev. xx. 6, 14. Rev. xxi.
   8. In the same sense the apostle John uses the word in his first
   epistle, 1 John iii. 14. "We know that we have passed from death to
   life, because we love the brethren. He that hateth his brother, abideth
   in death." In the same manner Christ used the word from time to time,
   when he was on earth, and spake concerning the punishment of sin. John
   v. 24. "He that heareth my word, and believeth, &c. hath everlasting
   life; and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death to
   life." Where, according to Dr. T.s own way of arguing, it cannot be the
   death which we now die, that Christ speaks of, but eternal death,
   because it is set in opposition to everlasting life. John vi. 50. "This
   is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof,
   and not die." John viii. 51. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man
   keep my saying, he shall never see death." John xi. 26."And whosoever
   liveth and believeth in me, shall never die." In which places it is
   plain Christ does not mean that believers shall never see temporal
   death. (See also Matt. x. 28. and Luke x. 28.) In like manner, the word
   was commonly used by the prophets of old, when they spake of death as
   the proper end and recompence of sin. So, abundantly by the prophet
   Ezekiel. Ezek. iii. 18. "When I say unto the wicked man, thou shall
   surely die." In the original it is, Dying thou shalt die: the same form
   of expression, which God used in the threatening to Adam. We have the
   same words again, Ezek. xxxiii. 18.-- In Ezek. xviii. 4. it is said,
   "The soul that sinneth it shall die. [269] And that temporal death is
   not meant in these places is plain, because it is promised most
   absolutely, that the righteous shall not die the death spoken of. Ezek.
   xviii. 21."He shall surely live, he shall not die." (So Ezek. xviii. 9,
   17 ,19, and 22. and Ezek. iii. 21.) And it is evident the prophet
   Jeremiah uses the word in the same sense. Jer. xxxi. 30. "Every one
   shall die for his own iniquity." And the same death is spoken of by the
   prophet Isaiah. Isa. xi. 4. "With the breath of his lips shall he slay
   the wicked." (See also Isa. lxvi. 16. with Isa. lxvi. 24.) Solomon, who
   we must suppose was thoroughly acquainted with the sense in which the
   word was used by the wise, and by the ancients, continually speaks of
   death as the proper fruit, issue, and recompence of sin, using the
   world only in this sense. Prov. xi. 19."As righteousness tendeth to
   life, so he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death" [270] He
   cannot mean temporal death, for he often speaks of it as a punishment
   of the wicked, wherein the righteous shall certainly be distinguished
   from them: as in Prov. xii. 28."In the way of righteousness is life,
   and in the path-way thereof is no death." (So in Prov. x. 2. Prov. xi.
   4. Prov. xiii. 14. Prov. xiv. 27. and many other places.) But we find
   this same wise man observes, that as to temporal death, and temporal
   events in general, there is no distinction, but that they happen alike
   to good and bad. (Eccl. ii. 4-16. Eccl. viii. 14. and Eccl. ix. 2, 3.)
   His words are remarkable in Eccl. vii. 15. "There is a just man that
   perisheth in his righteousness; and there is a wicked man that
   prolongeth his life, in his wickedness." So we find, David in the book
   of Psalms uses the word death in the same sense, when he speaks of it
   as the proper wages and issue of sin, Psal. xxxiv. 21 "Evil shall slay
   the wicked." He speaks of it as a certain thing, Psal. cxxxix. 19."
   Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God." And he speaks of it as a
   thing wherein the wicked are distinguished from the righteous, Psal.
   lxix. 28."Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be
   written with the righteous."--And thus we find the word death used in
   the Pentateuch, where we have the account of the threatening of death
   to Adam. When, in these books, it is spoken of as the proper fruit, and
   appointed reward of sin, it is to be understood of eternal death. Thus,
   Deut. xxx. 15. "See, I have set before thee this day life, and good,
   and death and evil." Deut. xxx. 19. "I call heaven and earth to record
   this day against you, that I have set before you life and death,
   blessing and cursing." The life that is spoken of here, is doubtless
   the same that is spoken of in Lev. xviii. 5 . "Ye shall therefore keep
   my statutes and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in
   them." This the apostle understands of eternal life; as is plain by
   Rom. x. 5. and Gal. iii. 12. But that the death threatened for sin in
   thy law of Moses meant eternal death, is what Dr. T. abundantly
   declares. So in his note on. Rom. v. 20 (Par. p. 291.) "Such a
   constitution the law of Moses was , subjecting those who were under it
   to death for every transgression: meaning by death eternal death."
   These are his words. The like he asserts in many other places. When it
   is said, in the place now mentioned, I have set before thee life and
   death, blessing and cursing, without doubt, the same blessing and
   cursing is meant which God had already set before them with such
   solemnity, in the 27th and 28th chapters where we have the sum of the
   curses in those last words of the 27th chapter, Cursed is every one,
   which confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them. Which the
   apostle speaks of as a threatening of eternal death; and with him Dr.
   T. himself: [271] In this sense also Job and his friends spake of
   death, as the wages and end of sin, who lived before any written
   revelation, and had their religion, and their phraseology about
   religion, from the ancients.

   If any should insist upon it as an objection--against supposing that
   death was intended to signify eternal death in the threatening to
   Adam--that this use of the word is figurative: I reply, that though
   this should be allowed, yet it is by no means so figurative as many
   other phrases used in the history contained in these three chapters: as
   when it is said, God said, Let there be light; God said, let there be
   firmament, &c. as though God spake such words with a voice. So when it
   is said, God called the light, day: God called the firmament, heaven,
   &c. God rested on the seventh day; as though he had been weary, and
   then rested. And when it is said, They heard the voice of God walking;
   as though the Deity had feet, and took steps on the ground. Dr. T.
   supposes, that when it is said of Adam and Eve, Their eyes were opened,
   and they saw that they were naked; by the word naked is meant a state
   of guilt. (P. 12.) Which sense of the word, naked, is much further from
   the common use of the word, than the supposed sense of the word death.
   So this author supposes the promise concerning the seed of the woman
   bruising the serpent's head, while the serpent should bruise his heel,
   is to be understood of the Messiah destroying the power and sovereignty
   of the devil, and receiving some slight hurt from him. (P. 15, 16.)
   Which makes the sentence full of figures. And why might not God deliver
   threatenings to our first parents in figurative expressions, as well as
   promises?

   But indeed, there is no necessity of supposing the word death, or the
   Hebrew word so translated, if used in the manner that has been
   supposed, to have been figurative at all. It does not appear but that
   this word, in its true and proper meaning, might signify perfect
   misery, and sensible destruction; though the word was also applied to
   signify something more external and visible. There are many words in
   our language, such as heart, sense, view, discovery, conception, light,
   and many others, which are applied to signify external things; as that
   muscular part of the body called heart; external feelings, called
   sense; the sight of the bodily eye, called view; the finding of a thing
   by its being uncovered, called discovery; the first beginning of the
   foetus in the womb, called conception; and the rays of the sun, called
   light. Yet these words do as truly and properly signify other things of
   a more spiritual internal nature; such as the disposition, affection,
   perception, and thought of the mind, and manifestation and evidence to
   the soul. Common use, which governs the propriety of language, makes
   the latter things to be as much signified by those words, in their
   proper meaning, as the former. It is especially common in the Hebrew,
   and I suppose, other Oriental languages, that the same word that
   signifies something external, does no less properly and usually signify
   something more spiritual. So the Hebrew words used for breath, have
   such a double signification; (?NOT ENGLISH) Neshama signifies both
   breath and the soul; and the latter as commonly as the former: (NOT
   ENGLISH) Ruach is used for breath or wind, but yet more commonly
   signifies spirit. (NOT ENGLISH) Nephesh is used for breath, but yet
   more commonly signifies soul. So the word (NOT ENGLISH or NOT ENGLISH)
   Lébh, heart, no less properly signifies the soul, especially with
   regard to the will and affections, than that part of the body so
   called. The word (NOT ENGLISH) Shalom, which we render peace, no less
   properly signifies prosperity and happiness, than mutual agreement. The
   word translated life, signifies the natural life of the body, and also
   the perfect and happy state of sensible active being; and the latter as
   properly as the former. So the word death, signifies destruction, as to
   outward sensibility, activity, and enjoyment: but it has most evidently
   another signification, which in the Hebrew tongue is no less proper,
   viz. perfect, sensible, hopeless ruin and misery.

   It is therefore wholly without reason urged, that death properly
   signifies only the loss of this present life; and that therefore
   nothing else was meant by that death which was threatened for eating
   the forbidden fruit. Nor does it at all appear but that Adam--who, from
   what God said concerning the seed of the woman, could understand that
   relief was promised as to the death which was threatened, as Dr. T.
   himself supposes--understood the death which was threatened, in the
   more important sense. Especially seeing temporal death, considered
   originally and in itself, is evermore, excepting as changed by divine
   grace, an entrance into that dismal state of misery which is shadowed
   forth by the awful circumstances of this death; circumstances naturally
   suggesting to the mind the most dreadful state of hopeless, sensible
   ruin.

   As to the objection, that the phrase, Dying thou shalt die, is several
   times used in the books of Moses, to signify temporal death, it can be
   of no force. For it has been shown already, that the same phrase is
   sometimes used in Scripture to signify eternal death, in instances much
   more parallel with this. But indeed nothing can be certainly argued
   concerning the nature of the thing intended, from its being expressed
   in such a manner. For it is evident, that such repetitions of a word in
   the Hebrew language, are no more than an emphasis upon a word in the
   more modern languages, to signify the great degree of a thing, the
   importance or certainty of it, &c. When we would signify and impress
   these, we commonly put an emphasis on our words. Instead of this, the
   Hebrews, when they would express a thing strongly, repeated or doubled
   the word, the more to impress the mind of the hearer; as may be plain
   to every one in the least conversant with the Hebrew Bible. The
   repetition in the threatening to Adam, therefore, only implies the
   solemnity and importance of the threatening. But God may denounce
   either eternal or temporal death with peremptoriness and solemnity, and
   nothing can certainly be inferred concerning the nature of the thing
   threatened, because it is threatened with emphasis, more than this,
   that the threatening is much to be regarded. Though it be true, that it
   might in an especial manner be expected that a threatening of eternal
   death would be denounced with great emphasis, such a threatening being
   infinitely important, and to be regarded above all others.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [267] See p. 78, note on Rom. vii. 5. and note on Rom. vii. 6. Note on
   Rom. vii. 8

   [268] By comparing what he says, p. 126, with what he often says of
   that death and destruction which is the demerit and end of personal
   sin, which he says is the second death or eternal destruction.

   [269] To the like purposes are Ezek. iii. 19, 20. and Ezek. xviii. 4,
   9, 13, 17-21, 24, 26, 28. Ezek. xxxiii 8, 9, 12-14, 19.

   [270] So Prov. v. 5, 6, 23. Prov. vii. 27. Prov. viii. 36. Prov. ix.
   18. Prov. x. 21. Prov. xi. 19. Prov. xiv. 12. Prov. xv. 10. Prov.
   xviii. 21. Prov. xix. 16, 21. and Prov. xxiii. 13, 14.

   [271] Note on Rom. v. 20. Par. p. 291-299
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Wherein it is inquired, whether there be any thing in the history of
   the three first chapters of Genesis, which should lead us to suppose,
   that God, in his constitution with Adam, dealt with mankind in general,
   as included in their first father, and that the threatening of death,
   in case he should eat the forbidden fruit, had respect not only to him,
   but his posterity?

   Dr. T. rehearsing that threatening to Adam, Thou shalt surely die, and
   giving us his paraphrase of it, (p. 7, 8.) concludes thus; "Observe,
   here is not one word relating to Adam's posterity." But it may be
   observed, in opposition to this, that there is scarcely one word that
   we have an account of, which God ever said to Adam or Eve, but what
   does manifestly include their posterity in the meaning and design of
   it. There is as much of a word said about Adam's posterity in that
   threatening, as there is in those words of God to Adam and Eve, Gen. i.
   28. "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue
   it;" and as much in events, to lead us to suppose Adam's posterity to
   be included. There is as much a word of his posterity in that
   threatening, as in those words, (Gen. i. 29.) "Behold, I have given you
   every herb bearing seed,--and every tree in which is the fruit of a
   tree yielding seed," &c. Even when God was about to create Adam, what
   he said on that occasion, had not respect only to Adam, but to his
   posterity. Gen. i. 26. "Let us make man in our image, and let them have
   dominion over the fish of the sea," &c. And, what is more remarkable,
   there is as much of a word said about Adam's posterity in the
   threatening of death, as there is in that sentence (Gen. iii. 19.)
   "Unto dust shalt thou return." Which Dr. T. himself supposes to be a
   sentence pronounced for the execution of that very threatening, Thou
   shalt surely die. This sentence he himself also often speaks of as
   including Adam's posterity: and, what is much more remarkable still, is
   a sentence which Dr. T. himself often speaks of, as including his
   posterity, as a sentence of condemnation, as a judicial sentence, and a
   sentence which God pronounced with regard to Adam's posterity, acting
   the part of a judge, and as such condemning them to temporal
   death.--Though he is therein utterly inconsistent with himself,
   inasmuch as he at the same time abundantly insists, that death is not
   brought on Adam's posterity in consequence of his sin, at all as a
   punishment; but merely by the gracious disposal of a father, bestowing
   a benefit of the highest nature upon him. [272]

   But I shall show, that I do not in any of these things falsely charge
   or misrepresent Dr. T.--He speaks of the sentence in Gen. iii. 19. as
   pronounced in pursuance of the threatening in the former chapter, in
   these words, (p. 17, 18) "The sentence upon the man, ver. 17, 18, 19.
   first affects the earth, upon which he is to subsist: the ground should
   be encumbered with many noxious weeds, and the tillage of it more
   toilsome: which would oblige the man to procure a sustenance by hard
   labour, till he should die, and drop into the ground, from whence he
   was taken. Thus death entered by sin into the world, and man became
   mortal, [273] according to the threatening in the former chapter." Now,
   if mankind became mortal, and must die, according to the threatening in
   the former chapter, then doubtless the threatening in the former
   chapter, Thou shalt die, had respect not only to Adam, but to mankind,
   and included Adam's posterity. Yea, and Dr. T. is express in it, and
   very often so, that the sentence concerning dropping into the ground,
   or returning to the dust, did include Adam's posterity. So, p. 20.
   speaking there of that sentence, "Observe (says he) that we their
   posterity are in fact subjected to the same affliction and mortality,
   here by sentence inflicted on our first parents."--P. 42. Note. "But
   yet men through that long tract, were all subject to death, therefore
   they must be included in the sentence." The same he affirms in
   innumerable other places, some of which I shall have occasion to
   mention presently.

   The sentence which is founded on the threatening, and (as Dr. T. says)
   according to the threatening, extends to as many as were included in
   the threatening, and to no more. If the sentence be upon a collective
   subject, indefinitely, the greatest part of which were not included in
   the threatening, nor were ever threatened at all, then certainly this
   sentence is not according to the threatening, nor built upon it. If the
   sentence be according to the threatening, then we may justly explain
   the threatening by sentence. And if we find the sentence spoken to the
   same person whom the threatening was spoken, and spoken in the second
   person singular in like manner with the threatening, founded on the
   threatening, and according to it; and if we find the sentence includes
   Adam's posterity, then we may certainly infer, that so did the
   threatening. And hence, that both the threatening and the sentence were
   delivered to Adam as the public head and representative of his
   posterity.

   And we may also further infer from it, in another respect, directly
   contrary to Dr. T.s doctrine, that the sentence which included Adam's
   posterity, was to death, as a punishment to that posterity, as well as
   to Adam himself. For a sentence pronounced in execution of a
   threatening, is for punishment. Threatenings are of punishments.
   Neither God nor man are wont to threaten others with favours and
   benefits.

   But lest any of this author's admirers should stand to it, that it may
   very properly be said, God threatened mankind with bestowing great
   kindness upon them, I would observe, that Dr. T. himself often speaks
   of this sentence as pronounced by God on all mankind, as condemning
   them; as a sentence of condemnation judicially pronounced, or a
   sentence which God pronounced on all mankind acting as their judge, and
   in a judicial proceeding. This he affirms in multitudes of places. In
   p. 20. speaking of this sentence, which he there says, subjects us,
   Adam's and Eve's posterity, to affliction and mortality, he calls it a
   judicial act of condemnation. "The judicial act of condemnation (says
   he) clearly implies, a taking him to pieces, and turning him to the
   ground from whence he was taken." And (p. 28, 29. Note.) "In all the
   Scripture from one end to the other, there is recorded but one judgment
   to condemnation, which came upon all men, and that is Gen. iii. 17-19.
   Dust thou art, " &c. P. 40. speaking of the same, he says, "All men are
   brought under condemnation." In p. 27, 28. "By judgment, judgment to
   condemnation, it appeareth evidently to me, he (Paul) means the being
   adjudged to the forementioned death; he means the sentence of death, of
   a general mortality, pronounced upon mankind, in consequence of Adam's
   first transgression. And the condemnation inflicted by the judgment of
   God, answereth to, and is in effect the same thing with, being dead."
   P. 30. "The many, that is mankind, were subject to death by the
   judicial act of God." P. 31. " Being made sinners, may very well
   signify, being adjudged, or condemned to death.--For the Hebrew word,
   &c. signifies to make one a sinner by a judicial sentence, or to
   condemn."--P. 178. Par. on Rom. v. 19. "Upon the account of one man's
   disobedience, mankind were judicially constituted sinners; that is,
   subjected to death, by the sentence of God the Judge."--And there are
   many other places where he repeats the same thing. And it is pretty
   remarkable, that (page 48, 49.) immediately after citing Prov. xvii.
   15. "He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just,
   are both an abomination to the Lord"--and when he is careful in citing
   these words, to put us in mind, that it is meant of a judicial
   act--yet, in the very next words, he supposes that God himself does so,
   since he constantly supposes that Adam's posterity, whom God condemns,
   are innocent. His words are these, "From all this it followeth, that as
   the judgment, that passed upon all men to condemnation, is death's
   coming upon all men, by the judicial act of God, upon the occasion of
   Adam's transgression: so," &c.--And it is very remarkable that (p. 3,
   4, 7. S.) he insists, "That in Scripture no action is said to be
   imputed, reckoned, or accounted to any person for righteousness or
   condemnation, but the proper act and deed of that person."--And yet he
   thus continually affirms, that all mankind are made sinners by a
   judicial act of God the Judge, even to condemnation, and judicially
   constituted sinners, and so subjected to a judicial sentence of
   condemnation, on occasion of Adam's sin; and all according to the
   threatening denounced to Adam, "Thou shalt surely die:" though he
   supposes Adam's posterity were not included in the threatening, and are
   looked upon as perfectly innoncent, and treated wholly as such.

   I am sensible Dr. T. does not run into all this inconsistence, only
   through oversight and blundering; but that he is driven to it, to make
   out his matters in his evasion of that noted paragraph in the fifth
   chapter of Romans; especially those three sentences; (Rom. v. 16.) "The
   judgment was by one to condemnation." (Rom. v. 18.) "By the offence of
   one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation;" and (Rom. v. 19.) "By
   one man's disobedience many were made sinners." And I am also sensible
   of what he offers to salve the inconvenience, viz. "That if the
   threatening had immediately been executed on Adam, he would have had no
   posterity; and that so far the possible existence of Adam's posterity
   fell under the threatening of the law, and into the hands of the judge,
   to be disposed of as he should think fit: and that this is the ground
   of the judgment to condemnation, coming upon all men." [274] But this
   is trifling, to a great degree: for,

   1. Suffering death, and failing of possible existence, are entirely
   different things. If there had never been any such thing as sin
   committed, there would have been infinite numbers of possible beings,
   which would have failed of existence, by God's appointment. God has
   appointed (if the phrase be allowable) not to bring into existence
   numberless possible worlds, each replenished with innumerable possible
   inhabitants. But is this equivalent to God's appointing them all to
   suffer death?

   2. Our author represents, that by Adam's sin, the possible existence of
   his posterity fell into the hands of the Judge, to be disposed of as he
   should think fit. But there was no need of any sin of Adam, or of any
   body else, in order to their being brought into God's hands, in this
   respect. The future possible existence of all created beings is in
   God's hands, antecedently to the existence of any sin. And therefore,
   infinite numbers of possible beings, without any relation to Adam, or
   any other sinning being, fail of their possible existence. And if Adam
   had never sinned, yet it would be unreasonable to suppose, but that
   innumerable multitudes of his possible posterity would have failed of
   existence by God's disposal. For will any be so unreasonable as to
   imagine, that God would and must have brought into existence as many of
   his posterity as it was possible should be, if he had not sinned? Or,
   that then it would not have been possible, that any other persons of
   his posterity should ever have existed, than those individual persons
   who now actually suffer death, and return to the dust?

   3. We have many accounts in Scripture, which imply the actual failing
   of the possible existence of innumerable multitudes of Adam's
   posterity, yea, of many more than ever come into existence. As, of the
   possible posterity of Abel, the possible posterity of all them that
   were destroyed by the flood, and the possible posterity of the
   innumerable multitudes, which we read of in Scripture, destroyed by
   sword, pestilence, &c. And if the threatening to Adam reached his
   posterity, in no other respect than this, that they were liable to be
   deprived by it of their possible existence, then these instances are
   much more property a fulfilment of that threatening, than the suffering
   of death by such as actually come into existence; and so is that which
   is most properly the judgment to condemnation, executed by the sentence
   of the Judge, proceeding on ground of that threatening. But where do we
   ever find this so represented in Scripture? We read of multitudes cut
   off for their personal sins, who thereby failed of their possible
   posterity. And these are mentioned as God's judgments on them, and
   effects of God's condemnation of them: but when are they ever spoken of
   as God judicially proceeding against, and condemning their possible
   posterity?

   4. Dr. T. in what he says concerning this matter, speaks of the
   threatening of the law delivered to Adam, which the possible existence
   of his posterity fell under, as the ground of the judgment to
   condemnation coming upon all men. But herein he is exceeding
   inconsistent with himself: for he affirms in a place forecited, that
   the Scripture never speaks of any sentence of condemnation coming upon
   all men, but that sentence in the third of Genesis, concerning man
   turning to dust. But, according to him, the threatening of the law
   delivered to Adam, could not be the ground of that sentence; for he
   greatly insists upon it, that that law was entirely abrogated before
   that sentence was pronounced, had no existence to have any such
   influence as might procure a sentence of death; and therefore this
   sentence was introduced entirely on another footing, a new dispensation
   of grace. The reader may see this matter strenuously urged, and
   particularly argued by him, p. 113--120. S. So that this sentence could
   not, according to him, have the threatening of that law for its ground,
   as he supposes; for it never stood upon that ground. It could not be
   called a judgment of condemnation, under any such view; for it could
   not be viewed in circumstances where it never existed.

   5. If, as our author supposes, that the sentence of death on all men
   comes under the notion of a judgment to condemnation by this means,
   viz. that the threatening to Adam was in some respect the ground of it;
   then it also comes under the notion of a punishment: for threatenings
   annexed to breaches of laws, are to punishments; and a judgment of
   condemnation to the thing threatened, must be to punishment; and the
   thing condemned to, must have as much the notion of a punishment, as
   the sentence has the notion of a judgment to condemnation. But this Dr.
   T. wholly denies: he denies that death comes as any punishment at all;
   but insists that it comes only as a favour and benefit, and a fruit of
   fatherly love to Adam's posterity, respected not as guilty, but wholly
   innocent. So that his scheme will not admit of its coming under the
   notion of a sentence to condemnation in any respect whatsoever. Our
   author's supposition, that the possible existence of Adam's posterity
   comes under the threatening of the law, and into the hands of the
   Judge, and is the ground of the condemnation of all men to death,
   implies, that death by this sentence is appointed to mankind as an
   evil, at least negatively so; as it is a privation of good: for he
   manifestly speaks of a non-existence as a negative evil. But herein he
   is inconsistent with himself: for he continually insists, that mankind
   are subjected to death only as a benefit, as has been before shown.
   According to him, death is not appointed to mankind, as a negative
   evil, as any cessation of existence, or even diminution of good; but on
   the contrary, as a means of a more happy existence, and a great
   increase of good.

   So that this evasion of Dr. T. is so far from helping the matter, that
   it increases and multiplies the inconsistence. And that the law, with
   the threatening of death annexed, was given to Adam, as the head of
   mankind, and to his posterity as included in him, not only follow from
   some of our author's own assertions--and the plain, full declarations
   of the apostle in the fifth of Romans, which drove Dr. T. into such
   gross inconsistencies--but the account given in the three first
   chapters of Genesis, directly and inevitably lead us to such a
   conclusion.

   Though the sentence, Gen. iii. 19."Unto dust thou shalt return," be not
   of equal extent with the threatening in the foregoing chapter, or an
   execution of the main curse of the law therein denounced--for, that it
   should have been so, would have been inconsistent with the intimations
   of mercy just before given--yet it is plain, this sentence is in
   pursuance of that threatening, being to something that was included in
   it. The words of the sentence were delivered to the same person with
   the words of the threatening, and in the same manner, in like singular
   terms, and as much without any express mention of his posterity. Yet it
   manifestly appears by the consequence, as well as all circumstances,
   that his posterity were included in the words of the sentence; as is
   confessed on all hands. And as the words were apparently delivered in
   the form of the sentence of a judge, condemning for something that he
   was displeased with, and ought to be condemned, viz. sin; and as the
   sentence to him and his posterity was but one, dooming to the same
   suffering, under the same circumstances, both the one and the other
   sentenced in the same words, spoken but once, and immediately to but
   one person, we hence justly infer, that it was the same thing to both;
   and not as Dr. T. suggests, (p. 67.) a sentence to a proper punishment
   to Adam, but a mere promise of favour to his posterity.

   Indeed, sometimes our author seems to suppose, that God meant the thing
   denounced in this sentence, as a favour both to Adam and his posterity.
   [275] But to his posterity, or mankind in general, who are the main
   subject, he ever insists, that it was purely intended as a favour. And
   therefore, one would have thought, the sentence should have been
   delivered, with manifestations and appearances of favour, and not of
   anger. How could Adam understand it as a promise of great favour,
   considering the manner and circumstances of the denunciation? How could
   he think, that God would go about to delude him, by clothing himself
   with garments of vengeance, using words of displeasure and rebuke,
   setting forth the heinousness of his crime, attended with cherubim and
   a flaming sword; when all that he meant was only higher testimonies of
   favour than he had before in a state of innocence, and to manifest
   fatherly love and kindness, in promises of great blessings? If this was
   the case, God's words to Adam must be understood thus: "Because thou
   hast done so wickedly, hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and
   hast eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, thou shalt
   not eat of it; therefore I will be more kind to thee than I was in thy
   state of innocence, and do now appoint for thee the following great
   favours; Cursed be the ground for thy sake," &c. And thus Adam must
   understand what was said, unless any will say, (and God forbid that any
   should be so blasphemous,) that God clothed himself with appearances of
   displeasure, to deceive Adam, and make him believe the contrary of what
   he intended, and lead him to expect a dismal train of evils on his
   posterity, contrary to all reason and justice, implying the most
   horribly unrighteous treatment of millions of perfectly innocent
   creatures. It is certain, there is not the least appearance in what God
   said, or the manner of it, as Moses gives us the account, of any other,
   than that God was now testifying displeasure, condemning the subject of
   the sentence he was pronouncing, as justly exposed to punishment for
   sin, and for that sin which he mentions.

   When God was pronouncing this sentence, Adam doubtless understood, that
   God had respect to his posterity, as well as himself; though God spake
   wholly in the second person singular, Because thou hast eaten,--In
   sorrow thou shalt eat,--Unto the dust shalt thou return. But he had as
   much reason to understand God as having respect to his posterity, when
   he directed his speech to him in like manner in the threatening, Thou
   shalt surely die. The sentence plainly refers to the threatening, and
   results from it. The threatening says, If thou eat, thou shalt die: the
   sentence says, Because thou hast eaten thou shalt die. And Moses, who
   wrote the account, had no reason to doubt but that the affair would be
   thus understood by his readers; for such a way of speaking was well
   understood in those days: the history he gives us of the origin of
   things, abounds with it. Such a manner of speaking to the heads of the
   race, having respect to the progeny, is not only used in almost every
   thing that God said to Adam and Eve, but even in what he said to the
   very birds and fishes, Gen. i. 22. And also in what he said afterwards
   to Noah, Gen. ix. to Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and Canaan, Gen. ix.
   25-27. So in promises made to Abraham, God directed his speech to him,
   and spake in the second person singular, from time to time, but meant
   chiefly his posterity: To thee will I give this land. In thee shall all
   the families of the earth be blessed, &c. &c. And in what is said of
   Ishmael, as of his person, but meant chiefly of his posterity, Gen.
   xvi. 12. and Gen. xvii. 20. Thus in what Isaac said to Esau and Jacob,
   in his blessing he spake to them in the second person singular; but
   meant chiefly their posterity. And so for the most part in the promises
   made to Isaac and Jacob; and in Jacob blessing Ephraim and Manasseh,
   and his twelve sons.

   But I shall take notice of one or two things further, showing that
   Adam's posterity were included in God's establishment with him, and the
   threatening denounced for his sin; and that the calamities which come
   upon them in consequence of his sin, are brought on them as
   punishments.

   This is evident from the curse on the ground; which if it be any curse
   at all, comes equally on Adam's posterity with himself. And if it be a
   curse, then against whomsoever it is designed, and on whomsoever it
   terminates, it comes as a punishment, and not as a blessing, so far as
   it comes in consequence of that sentence.

   Dr. T. (p. 19.) says, "A curse is pronounced upon the ground, but no
   curse upon the woman and the man." And (p. 45, 46. S.) he insists, that
   the ground only was cursed, and not the man: as though a curse could
   terminate on lifeless, senseless earth! To understand this curse
   otherwise than as terminating upon man through the ground, would be as
   senseless as to suppose the meaning to be, The ground shall be punished
   and shall be miserable for thy sake. Our author interprets the curse on
   the ground, of its being encumbered with noxious weeds: but would these
   weeds have been any curse on the ground, if there had been no
   inhabitants, or if the inhabitants had been of such a nature, that
   these weeds should not have been noxious, but useful to them? It is
   said, Deut. xxviii. 17."Cursed shall be thy basket, and thy store:" and
   would he not be thought to talk very ridiculously, who should say,
   "Here is a curse upon the basket; but not a word of any curse upon the
   owner: and therefore we have no reason at all to look upon it as any
   punishment upon him, or any testimony of God's displeasure towards
   him." How plain is it, that when lifeless things, not capable either of
   benefit or suffering, are said to be cursed or blessed with regard to
   sensible beings--who use or possess these things, or have connexion
   with them--the meaning must be, that these sensible beings are cursed
   or blessed in the other, or with respect to them! In Exod. xxiii. 25.
   it is said, "He shall bless thy bread and thy water." And I suppose,
   never any body yet proceeded to such a degree of subtilty in
   distinguishing, as to say, "Here is a blessing on the bread and the
   water, which went into the possessor's mouth, but no blessing on him."
   To make such a distinction, with regard to the curse God pronounced on
   the ground, would in some respects be more unreasonable; because God is
   express in explaining the matter, declaring that it was for man's sake,
   expressly referring this curse to him, as being for the sake of his
   guilt; and as consisting in the sorrow and suffering he should have
   from it: "In sorrow shalt thou eat of it.--Thorns and thistles shalt it
   bring forth to thee." So that God's own words tell us where the curse
   terminates. The words are parallel with those in Deut. xxviii. 16. but
   only more plain and explicit, "Cursed shalt thou be in the field, or in
   the ground."

   If this part of the sentence was pronounced under no notion of any
   curse or punishment at all upon mankind, but, on the contrary, as
   making an alteration for the better, as to them--that instead of the
   sweet, but tempting, pernicious fruit of paradise, it might produce
   wholesome fruits, more for the health of the soul; that it might bring
   forth thorns and thistles, as excellent medicines, to prevent or cure
   moral distempers, diseases which would issue in eternal death--then it
   was a blessing on the ground, and not a curse; and it might more
   properly have been said, "blessed shall the ground be for thy sake.--I
   will make a happy change in it, that it may be a habitation more fit
   for a creature so infirm, and so apt to be overcome with temptation, as
   thou art."

   The event makes it evident, that in pronouncing this curse, God had as
   much respect to Adam's posterity, as to himself. And so it was
   understood by his pious posterity before the flood; as appears by what
   Lamech, the father of Noah, says, Gen. v. 29. "And he called his name
   Noah; saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work, and the
   toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed,"

   Another thing which argues, that Adam's posterity were included in the
   threatening of death--and that our first parents understood, when
   fallen, that the tempter, in persuading them to eat the forbidden
   fruit, had aimed at the punishment and ruin of both them and their
   posterity, and had procured it--is Adam immediately giving his wife
   that new name, Eve or Life, on the promise or intimation of the
   disappointment and overthrow of the tempter in that matter, by her
   seed. This Adam understood to be by his procuring life; not only for
   themselves, but for many of their posterity; and thereby delivering
   them from that death and ruin which the serpent had brought upon them.
   Those that should be thus delivered, and obtain life, Adam calls the
   living. And because he observed, by what God had said, that
   deliverance, or life, was to be by the seed of the woman, he therefore
   remarks, that she is the mother of all living, and thereupon gives her
   a new name, hwx LIFE . Gen. iii. 20.

   There is a great deal of evidence, that this is the occasion of Adam
   giving his wife her new name. This was her new honour, and the greatest
   honour, at least in her present state, that the Redeemer was to be of
   her seed. New names were wont to be given for something that was the
   person's peculiar honour. So it was with regard to the new names of
   Abraham, Sarah, and Israel. Dr. T. himself observes, [276] that they
   who are saved by Christ, are called, (NOT ENGLISH). 2 Cor. iv. 11.) the
   living or they that live. Thus we find in the Old Testament, the
   righteous are called by the name of the living, Psal. lxix. 28."Let
   them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with
   the righteous." If what Adam meant by her being the mother of all
   living, was only her being the mother of mankind; and gave her the name
   life upon that account; it were much the most likely that he would have
   given her this name at first; when God first united them, under that
   blessing, be fruitful and multiply, and when he had a prospect of her
   being the mother of mankind in a state of immortality, living indeed,
   living and never dying. But that Adam should at that time give her only
   the name of (NOT ENGLISH) Isha, and then immediately on that melancholy
   change, by their coming under the sentence of death, with all their
   posterity--having now a new awful prospect of her being the mother of
   nothing but a dying race, all from generation to generation turning to
   dust, through her folly--he should change her name into life, calling
   her now the mother of all living, is (on that supposition) perfectly
   unaccountable. Besides, it is manifest, that it was not her being the
   mother of all mankind--or her relation, as a mother, to her
   posterity--but the quality of those of whom she was to be the mother,
   Adam had in view, in giving his wife this new name; as appears by the
   name itself, which signifies life. And if it had been only a natural
   and mortal life he had in view, this was nothing to distinguish her
   posterity from the brutes; for the very same name of living ones, or
   living things, is given from time to time to them [277] . Besides, if
   by life the quality of her posterity was not meant, there was nothing
   in it to distinguish her from Adam; for thus she was no more the mother
   of all living, than he was the father of all living; and she could no
   more properly be called by the name of life on any such account, than
   he: but names are given for distinction. Doubtless Adam took notice of
   something distinguishing concerning her, that occasioned his giving her
   this new name. And I think it is exceeding natural to suppose, that as
   Adam had given her the first name from the manner of her creation, so
   he gave her the new name from redemption, and as it were new creation,
   through a Redeemer, of her seed. And, it is equally probable, that he
   should give her this name from that which comforted him, with respect
   to the curse that God had pronounced on him and the earth, as Lamech
   named Noah, Gen. v. 29."Saying, this same shall comfort us concerning
   our work, and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord
   hath cursed." Accordingly he gave her this new name, not at her first
   creation, but immediately after the promise of a Redeemer. (See Gen.
   iii. 15-20.)

   Now, as to the consequence which I infer from Adam giving his wife this
   name, on the intimation which God had given--that Satan should by her
   seed be overthrown and disappointed, as to his malicious design in
   tempting the woman--it is, that great numbers of mankind should be
   saved, whom he calls the living; they should be saved from the effects
   of this malicious design of the old serpent, and from that ruin which
   he had brought upon them by tempting their first parents to sin; and so
   the serpent would be, with respect to them, disappointed and overthrown
   in his design. But how is any death, or indeed any calamity at all,
   brought upon their posterity by Satan's malice in that temptation, if
   instead of that, all the consequent death and sorrow was the fruit of
   God's fatherly love? an instance of his free and sovereign favour? And
   if multitudes of Eve's posterity are saved from either spiritual or
   temporal death, by a Redeemer, one of her seed, how is that any
   disappointment of Satan's design, in tempting our first parents? How
   came he to have any such thing in view, as the death of Adam's and
   Eve's posterity, by tempting them to sin, or any expectation that their
   death would be the consequence, unless he knew that they were included
   in the threatening?

   Some have objected, against his posterity being included in the
   threatening delivered to Adam, that the threatening itself was
   inconsistent with his having any posterity: it being that he should die
   on the day that he sinned. To this I answer, that the threatening was
   not inconsistent with his having posterity, on two accounts:

   I. Those words, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die,
   according to the use of such like expressions among the Hebrews, do not
   signify immediate death, or that the execution shall be within
   twenty-four hours from the commission of the fact; nor did God by those
   words limit himself as to the time of executing the threatened
   punishment; but that was still left to God's pleasure. Such a phrase,
   according to the idiom of the Hebrew tongue, signifies no more than
   these two things:

   1. A real connexion between the sin and the punishment. So Ezek.
   xxxiii. 12, 13."The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver
   him in the day of his transgression. As for the wickedness of the
   wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his
   wickedness: neither shall the righteous be able to live in the day that
   he sinneth: but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die
   for it." Here it is said, that in the day he sinneth, he shall not be
   able to live, but he shall die; not signifying the time when death
   shall be executed upon him, but the connexion between his sin and
   death; such a connexion as in our present common use of language is
   signified by the adverb of time, when; as if one should say, "According
   to the laws of our nation, so long as a man behaves himself as a good
   subject, he may live; but when he turns rebel, he must die:" not
   signifying the hour, day, or month, in which he must be executed, but
   only the connexion between his crime and death.

   2. Another thing which seems to be signified by such an expression, is,
   that Adam should be exposed to death by one transgression, without
   waiting to try him the second time. If he eat of that tree, he should
   immediately fall under condemnation, though afterwards he might abstain
   ever so strictly. In this respect the words are much of the same force
   with those words of Solomon to Shimei; 1 Kings ii. 37. "For it shall be
   that on the day that thou goest out, and passest over the brook Kidron,
   thou shalt know for certain, that thou shalt surely die" Not meaning,
   that he should certainly be executed on that day, but that he should be
   assuredly liable to death for the first offence, and that he should not
   have another trial to see whether he would go over the brook Kidron a
   second time.--Besides,

   II. If the words had implied, that Adam should die that very day
   (within twenty-four or twelve hours) or that moment in which he
   transgressed, yet it will by no means follow, that God obliged himself
   to execute the punishment in its utmost extent on that day. The
   sentence was in great part executed immediately; he then dies
   spiritually; he lost his innocence and original righteousness, and the
   favour of God; a dismal alteration was made in his soul, by the loss of
   that holy divine principle, which was in the highest sense the life of
   the soul. In this he was truly ruined and undone that very day;
   becoming corrupt, miserable, and helpless. And I think it has been
   shown, that such a spiritual death was one great thing implied in the
   threatening. And the alteration then made in his body and external
   state, was the beginning of temporal death. Grievous external calamity
   is called by the name of death in Scripture, Exod x. 17.--"Entreat the
   Lord that he may take away this death." Not only was Adam's soul ruined
   that day, but his body was ruined; it lost its beauty and vigour, and
   became a poor, dull, decaying, dying thing.

   And besides all this, Adam was that day undone in a more dreadful
   sense; he immediately fell under the curse of the law, and condemnation
   to eternal perdition. In the language of Scripture, he is dead, that
   is, in a state of condemnation to death; even as our author often
   explains this language in his exposition upon Romans. In scripture
   language, he that believes in Christ, immediately receives life. He
   passes at that time from death to life, and thenceforward (to use the
   apostle John's phrase) "has eternal life abiding in him." But yet, he
   does not then receive eternal life in its highest completion; he has
   but the beginning of it; and receives it in a vastly greater degree at
   death. The proper time for the complete fulness, is not till the day of
   Judgment. When the angels sinned, their punishment was immediately
   executed in a degree; but their full punishment is not till the end of
   the world. And there is nothing in God's threatening to Adam that bound
   him to execute his full punishment at once; nor any thing which
   determines, that he should have no posterity. The constitution which
   God established and declared, determined, that IF he sinned, and had
   posterity, he and they should die. But there was no constitution
   determining the actual being of his posterity in this case; what
   posterity he should have, how many, or whether any at all. All these
   things God had reserved in his own power; the law and its sanction
   intermeddled not with the matter.

   It may be proper in this place also to take some notice of that
   objection of Dr. T. against Adam being supposed to be a federal head
   for his posterity, that it gives him greater honour than Christ, as it
   supposes that all his posterity would have had eternal life by his
   obedience, if he had stood; and so a greater number would have had the
   benefit of his obedience, than are saved by Christ. [278] --I think, a
   very little consideration is sufficient to show, that there is no
   weight in this objection. For the benefit of Christ's merit may
   nevertheless be vastly beyond that which would have been by the
   obedience of Adam. For those that are saved by Christ, are not merely
   advanced to happiness by his merits, but saved from the infinitely
   dreadful effects of Adam's sin, and many from immense guilt, pollution,
   and misery, by personal sins. They are also brought to a holy and happy
   state through infinite obstacles; and exalted to a far greater degree
   of dignity, felicity, and glory, than would have been due for Adam's
   obedience; for aught I know, many thousand times so great. And there is
   enough in the gospel-dispensation, clearly to manifest the sufficiency
   of Christ's merits for such effects in all mankind. And how great the
   number will be, that shall actually be the subjects of them, or how
   great a proportion of the whole race, considering the vast success of
   the gospel that shall be in that future, extraordinary, and glorious
   season, often spoken of, none can tell. And the honour of these two
   federal heads arises not so much from what was proposed to each for his
   trial, as from their success, and the good actually obtained; and also
   the manner of obtaining. Christ obtains the benefits men have through
   him by proper merit of condignity, and a true purchase by an
   equivalent; which would not have been the case with Adam if he had
   obeyed.

   I have now particularly considered the account which Moses gives us, in
   the beginning of the Bible, of our first parents, and God's dealings
   with them; the constitution he established with them, their
   transgression, and what followed. And on the whole, if we consider the
   manner in which God apparently speaks to Adam from time to time; and
   particularly, if we consider how plainly and undeniably his posterity
   are included in the sentence of death pronounced on him after his fall,
   founded on the foregoing threatening; and consider the curse denounced
   on the ground for his sake, for his sorrow, and that of his posterity;
   and also consider, what is evidently the occasion of his giving his
   wife the new name of Eve, and his meaning in it--and withal consider
   apparent fact in constant and universal events, with relation to the
   state of our first parents and their posterity from that time forward,
   through all ages of the world--I cannot but think, it must appear to
   every impartial person, that Moses's account does, with sufficient
   evidence, lead all mankind, to whom his account is communicated, to
   understand, that God, in his constitution with Adam, dealt with him as
   a public person--as the head of the human species--and had respect to
   his posterity, as included in him. And it must appear, that this
   history is given by divine direction, in the beginning of the first
   written revelation, in order to exhibit to our view the origin of the
   present sinful, miserable state of mankind, that we might see what that
   was, which first gave occasion for all those consequent wonderful
   dispensations of divine mercy and grace towards mankind, which are the
   great subject of the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament; and
   that these things are not obscurely and doubtfully pointed forth, but
   delivered in a plain account of things, which easily and naturally
   exhibits them to our understandings.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [272] Page 27. S.

   [273] The subsequent part of the quotation the reader will not meet
   with in the third edition of Dr. T. but the second, of 1711.

   [274] Page 95, 90, 91. S

   [275] Page 25, 45, 46. S.

   [276] Note annexed to § 267.

   [277] As in Gen. i. 21, 24, 28. Gen. ii. 19. Gen. vi. 19. Gen. vii. 23.
   and Gen. viii. 1. and many other places in the Bible.

   [278] Page 120, &c. S.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. II.

   OBSERVATIONS ON OTHER PARTS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, CHIEFLY IN THE OLD
   TESTAMENT, THAT PROVE THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.

   Original depravity may well be argued, from wickedness being often
   spoken of in Scripture, as a thing belonging to the race of mankind,
   and as if it were a property of the species. So in Psal. xiv. 2, 3.
   "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
   there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone
   aside; they are altogether become filthy: there is none that doeth
   good; no, not one." The like we have again, Psal. liii. 2, 3.--Dr. T.
   says (p. 104, 105), "The Holy Spirit does not mean this of every
   individual; because in the very same psalm, he speaks of some that were
   righteous, ver. 5. God is in the generation of the righteous." But how
   little is this observation to the purpose? For who ever supposed, that
   no unrighteous men were ever changed by divine grace, and afterwards
   made righteous? The psalmist is speaking of what men are as they are
   the children of men, born of the corrupt human race; and not as born of
   God, whereby they come to be the children of God, and of the generation
   of the righteous. The apostle Paul cites this place in Rom. iii. 10-12.
   to prove the universal corruption of mankind; but yet in the same
   chapter he supposes the same persons spoken of as wicked, may become
   righteous, through the righteousness and grace of God.

   Wickedness is spoken of in other places in the book of Psalms, as a
   thing that belongs to men, as of the human race, as sons of men. Thus,
   in Psal. iv. 2. "O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into
   shame? How long will ye love vanity?" &c. Psal. lvii. 4. "I lie among
   them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears
   and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword." Psal. lviii. 1, 2. "Do ye
   indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye
   sons of men? Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weight out the
   violence of your hands in the earth." Our author mentioning these
   places, says (p. 105. note), "There was a strong party in Israel
   disaffected to David's person and government, and sometimes he chooseth
   to denote them by the sons or children of men." But it would have been
   worth his while to have inquired, Why the psalmist should choose to
   denote the worst men in Israel by this name? Why he should choose thus
   to disgrace mankind, as if the compellation of sons of men most
   properly belonged to such as were of the vilest character, and as if
   all the sons of men, even every one of them, were of such a character,
   and none of them did good; no, not one? Is it not strange, that the
   righteous should not be thought worthy to be called sons of men, and
   ranked with that noble race of beings, who are born into the world
   wholly right and innocent? It is a good, easy, and natural reason, why
   he chooseth to call the wicked, sons of men, as a proper name for them,
   That by being of the sons of men, or of the corrupt, ruined race of
   mankind, they come by their depravity. And the psalmist himself leads
   us to this very reason, Psal. lviii . "Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons
   of men? yea, in heart ye work wickedness, ye weigh out the violence of
   your hands. The wicked are estranged from the womb," &c. Of which I
   shall speak more by and by.

   Agreeable to these places is Prov. xxi. 8.. "The way of man is froward
   and strange; but as for the pure, his work is right." He that is
   perverse in his walk, is here called by the name of man, as
   distinguished from the pure: which I think is absolutely unaccountable,
   if all mankind by nature are pure, and perfectly innocent, and all such
   as are froward and strange in their ways, therein depart from the
   native purity of all mankind. The words naturally lead us to suppose
   the contrary; that depravity and perverseness properly belong to
   mankind as they are naturally, and that a being made pure, is by an
   after-work, by which some are delivered from native pollution, and
   distinguished from mankind in general: which is perfectly agreeable to
   the representation in Rev. xiv. 4. where we have an account of a number
   that were not defiled, but were pure, and followed the Lamb; of whom it
   is said, "These were redeemed from among men."

   To these things agree Jer. xvii. 5, 9. In ver. 5. it is said, Cursed is
   he that trusteth in man." And in ver. 9. this reason is given, "The
   heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can
   know it?" What heart is this so wicked and deceitful? Why, evidently
   the heart of him, who, it was said before, we must not trust; and that
   is man. It alters not the case as to the present argument, whether the
   deceitfulness of the heart here spoken of, be its deceitfulness to the
   man himself, or to others. So Eccl. ix. 3 . "Madness is in the heart of
   the sons of men, while they live." And those words of Christ to Peter,
   Matt. xvi. 23 , "Get thee behind me, Satan--for thou savourest not the
   things that be of God, but the things that be of men. Signifying
   plainly, that to be carnal and vain, and opposite to what is spiritual
   and divine, is what properly belongs to men in their present state. The
   same thing is supposed in that of the apostle, 1 Cor. iii. 3, "For ye
   are yet carnal. For whereas there is among you envying and strife, are
   ye not carnal, and walk as men?" And that in Hos. vi. 7. "But they,
   like men, have transgressed the covenant." To these places may be added
   Matt. vii. 11. "If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts." Jam.
   iv. 5. "Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, the spirit that
   dwelleth in us, lusteth to envy?"--1 Pet. iv. 2. "That he no longer
   should live the rest of his time in the lusts of men, but to the will
   of God."--Yet above all, that in Job xv. 16. "How much more abominable
   and filthy is man, who drinketh iniquity like water?" Of which more
   presently.

   Now what account can be given of these things, on Dr. T.'s scheme? How
   strange is it, that we should have such descriptions, all over the
   Bible, of man, and the sons of men! Why should man be so continually
   spoken of as evil, carnal, perverse, deceitful, and desperately wicked,
   if all men are by nature as perfectly innocent, and free from any
   propensity to evil, as Adam was the first moment of his creation, all
   made right, as our author would have us understand Eccl. vii. 29? Why,
   on the contrary, is it not said, at least as often, and with equal
   reason, that the heart of man is right and pure; that the way of man is
   innocent and holy; and that he who savours true virtue and wisdom,
   savours the things that be of men? Yea, and why might it not as well
   have been said, the Lord looked down from heaven on the sons of men, to
   see if there were any that did understand, and did seek after God; and
   they were all right, altogether pure, there was none inclined to do
   wickedness, no, not one?

   Of the like import with the texts mentioned are those which represent
   wickedness as what properly belongs to the WORLD; and that they who are
   otherwise, are saved from the world, and called out of it. As John vii.
   7, "The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth; because I testify of
   it, that the works thereof are evil." John viii. 23. "Ye are of this
   world: I am not of this world." John xiv. 17. "The spirit of truth,
   whom the world cannot receive; because it seeth him not, neither
   knoweth him: but ye know him." John xv. 18, 19."If the world hate you,
   ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world,
   the world would love its own: but because ye are not of the world, but
   I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you."
   Rev. xiv. 3, 4. "These are they which were redeemed for the
   earth,--redeemed from among men." John xvii. 9. "I pray not for the
   world, but for them which thou hast given me." John xvii. 14. "I have
   given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are
   not of the world, even as I am not of the world." 1 John iii. 13,
   "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you." 1 John iv. 5. "They
   are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
   heareth them." 1 John. v. 19. "We are of God, and the whole world lieth
   in wickedness." It is evident, that in these places, by the world is
   meant the world of mankind; not the habitation, by the inhabitants:
   for, it is the world spoken of as loving, hating, doing evil works,
   speaking, hearing, &c.

   The same thing is shown, when wickedness is often spoken of as being
   man's own, in contradistinction from virtue and holiness. So men's
   lusts are often called their own hearts' lusts, and their practicing
   wickedness is called walking in their own ways, walking in their own
   counsels, in the imagination of their own heart, and in the sight of
   their own eyes, according to their own devices, &c. These things denote
   wickedness to be a quality belonging properly to the character and
   nature of mankind in their present state: as, when Christ would
   represent that lying is remarkably the character and the very nature of
   the devil in his present state, he expresses it thus, John viii. 44.
   "When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and
   the father of it."

   And that wickedness belongs to the very nature of men in their present
   state, may be argued from those places which speak of mankind as being
   wicked in their childhood, or from their childhood. So Prov. xxii. 15.
   "Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
   correction shall drive it far from him." Nothing is more manifest, than
   that the wise man in this book continually uses the word folly, or
   foolishness, for wickedness; and that this is what he means in this
   place, the words themselves explain. For the rod of correction is
   proper to drive away no other foolishness, but that which is of a moral
   nature. The word rendered bound, signifies (as observed in Pool's
   Synopsis) a close and firm union. The same word is used in Prov. vi.
   21. "Bind them continually upon thine heart." And Prov. vii. 3."Bind
   them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart." [279]
   The same verb is used, 1 Sam. xviii. 1, "The soul of Jonathan was knit,
   or bound, to the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own
   soul."--But how comes wickedness to be so firmly bound, and strongly
   fixed, in the hearts of children, if it be not there naturally? They
   have had no time firmly to fix habits of sin, by long custom in actual
   wickedness, as those who have lived many years in the world.

   The same thing is signified in that noted place, Gen. viii. 21. "For
   the imagination of man's heart is evil, from his youth." It alters not
   the case, whether it be translated for or though the imagination of
   man's heart is evil from his youth, as Dr. T. would have it. The word
   translated youth, signifies the whole of the former part of the age of
   man, which commences from the beginning of life. The word in its
   derivation, has reference to the birth or beginning of existence. It
   comes from (rvn) a word meaning to shake off, as a tree shakes off its
   ripe fruit, or a plant its seed; the birth of children being commonly
   represented by a tree yielding fruit, or a plant yielding seed. So that
   the word here translated youth, comprehends not only what we in English
   most commonly call the time of youth, but also childhood and infancy,
   and is very often used to signify these latter. [280]

   Dr. T. says (p. 124, note), that he "conceives, from the youth, is a
   phrase signifying the greatness or long duration of a thing." But if by
   long duration he means any thing else than what is literally expressed,
   viz. from the beginning of life, he has no reason to conceive so,
   neither has what he offers so much as the shadow of a reason for his
   conception. There is no appearance in the words of the two or three
   texts he mentions, of their meaning any thing else than what is most
   literally signified. And it is certain, that what he suggests is not
   the ordinary import of such a phrase among the Hebrews; but that
   thereby is meant from the beginning, or the early time of life, or
   existence; as may be seen in the places following, where the same word
   in the Hebrew is used, as in the eighth of Genesis. 1 Sam. xii. 2. "I
   am old and grey-headed--and I have walked before you from my childhood
   unto this day." Ps. lxxi. 5, 6."Thou are my trust from my youth: by
   thee have I been holden up from the womb. Thou art he that took me out
   of my mother's bowels." Ps. lxxi. 17, 18. "O God, thou hast taught me
   from my youth; and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works: now
   also, when I am old and grey-headed, forsake me not." Ps. cxxix. 1, 2.
   "Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:
   many a time have they afflicted me from my youth; yet have they not
   prevailed against me." Isa. xlvii. 12. "Stand now with the multitude of
   thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth" (So also Isa.
   xlvii.15). 2 Sam. xix. 7. "That will be worse unto thee, than all the
   evil that befell thee from thy youth until now." Jer. iii. 24, 25.
   "Shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers, from our youth.--We
   have sinned against the Lord our God from our youth, even to this day."
   [281]

   And it is to be observed, that according to the manner of the Hebrew
   language, when it is said, such a thing has been from youth, or the
   first part of existence, the phrase is to be understood as including
   that first time of existence. So Josh. vi. 21 "They utterly destroyed
   all, from the young to the old," (so in the Hebrew), i.e. including
   both. (So Gen. xix. 4. and Esther iii.13.)

   And as mankind are represented in Scripture, as being of a wicked heart
   from their youth, so in other places they are spoken of as being thus
   from the womb. Psal. lviii. 3. "The wicked are estranged from the womb:
   they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies." It is
   observable, that the psalmist mentions this as what belongs to the
   wicked, as the SONS OF MEN: for, these are the preceding words; "Do ye
   judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? Yea, in heart ye work wickedness."
   [282] Then it follows, the wicked are estranged from the womb, &c. The
   next verse is, their poison is like the poison of a serpent . Serpents
   are poisonous as soon as they come into the world; they derive a
   poisonous nature by their generation. Dr. T. (p. 134, 135.) says, "It
   is evident that this is a scriptural figurative way of aggravating
   wickedness on the one hand, and of signifying early and settled habits
   of virtue on the other, to speak of it as being from the womb." And as
   a probable instance of the latter, he cites that in Isa. xlix. 1. "The
   Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he
   made mention of my name." But I apprehend, that in order to seeing this
   to be either evident or probable, a man must have eyes peculiarly
   affected. I humbly conceive that such phrases as that in the 49th of
   Isaiah, of God's calling the prophet from the womb, are evidently not
   of the import which he supposes; but mean truly from the beginning of
   existence, and are manifestly of like signification with that which is
   said of the prophet Jeremiah, Jer. i. 5. "Before I formed thee in the
   belly, I knew thee: before thou camest out of the womb, I sanctified
   thee, and ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." Which surely means
   something else besides a high degree of virtue: it plainly signifies
   that he was, from his first existence, set apart by God for a prophet.
   And it would be as unreasonable to understand it otherwise, as to
   suppose the angel meant any other than that Samson was set apart to be
   a Nazarite from the beginning of his life, when he says to his mother,
   "Behold, thou shalt conceive and bear a son: and now drink no wine, nor
   strong drink, &c. For the child shall be a Nazarite to God, from the
   womb, to the day of his death." [283] By these instances it is plain,
   that the phrase, from the womb, as the other, from the youth, as used
   in Scripture, properly signifies from the beginning of life.

   Very remarkable is that place, Job xv. 14-16."What is man, that he
   should be clean? And he that is born of a woman, that he should be
   righteous? Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens
   are not clean in his sight: how much more abominable and filthy is man,
   which drinketh iniquity like water!" And no less remarkable is our
   author's method of managing it. The 16th verse expresses an exceeding
   degree of wickedness, in as plain and emphatical terms, almost, as can
   be invented; every word representing this in the strongest manner: "How
   much more abominable and filthy is man, that drinketh iniquity like
   water!" I cannot now recollect, where we have a sentence equal to it in
   the whole Bible, for an emphatical, lively, and strong representation
   of great wickedness of heart. Any one of the words, as such words are
   used in Scripture, would represent great wickedness: if it had been
   only said, "How much more abominable is man! Or, how much more filthy
   is man! Or, man that drinketh iniquity." But all these are accumulated
   with the addition of--like water,--the further to represent the
   boldness or greediness of men in wickedness. Though iniquity be the
   most deadly poison, yet men drink it as boldly as they drink water, are
   as familiar with it as with their common drink, and drink it with like
   greediness, as he that is thirsty drinks water. That boldness and
   eagerness in persecuting the saints, by which the great degree of the
   depravity of man's heart often appears, as thus represented, Psal. xiv.
   4. "Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as
   they eat bread?" And the greatest eagerness of thirst is represented by
   thirsting as an animal thirsts after water, Psal. xlii.1.

   Now let us see the soft, easy, light manner, in which Dr. T. treats
   this place. (p. 143), "How much more abominable and filthy is man, in
   comparison of the divine purity, who drinketh iniquity like water! who
   is attended with so many sensual appetites, and so apt to indulge them.
   You see the argument, man in his present weak and fleshly state, cannot
   be clean before God. Why so? Because he is conceived and born in sin,
   by reason of Adam's sin? No such thing. But because, if the purest
   creatures are not pure, in comparison of God, much less a being subject
   to so many infirmities as a mortal man. Which is a demonstration to me,
   not only that Job and his friends did not intend to establish the
   doctrine we are now examining, but that they were wholly strangers to
   it." Thus he endeavors to reconcile this text with his doctrine of the
   perfect native innocence of mankind; in which we have a notable
   specimen of his demonstrations, as well as of that great impartiality
   and fairness in examining and expounding the Scripture, of which he so
   often makes a profession!

   In this place we are not only told, how wicked man's heart is, but also
   how men come by such wickedness; even by being of the race of mankind,
   by ordinary genetion: What is man, that he should be clean? and he that
   is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? Our author (p. 141,
   142.) represents man being born of a woman, as a periphrasis, to
   signify man; and that there is no design in the words to give a reason,
   why man is not clean and righteous. But the case is most evidently
   otherwise, if we may interpret the book of Job by itself. It is most
   plain, that man's being born of a woman is given as a reason of his not
   being clean; Job xiv. 4. "Who can bring a clean thing out of an
   unclean?" Job is speaking there expressly of man's being born of a
   woman, as appears in ver. 1. And here how plain is it, that this is
   given as a reason of man's not being clean! Concerning this Dr. T.
   says, That this has no respect to any moral uncleanness, but only
   common frailty, &c. But how evidently is this also otherwise! when that
   uncleanness, which a man has by being born of a woman, is expressly
   explained of unrighteousness, in the next chapter at the 14th verse,
   "What is man that he should be clean? and he that is born of a woman,
   that he should be righteous?" Also in Job xxv. 4. "How then can man be
   justified with God? And how can he be clean that is born of a woman?"
   It is a moral cleanness Bildad is speaking of, which a man needs in
   order to his being justified. His design is, to convince Job of his
   moral impurity, and from thence of God's righteousness in his severe
   judgments upon him; and not of his natural frailty.

   And, without doubt, David has respect to this way of derived wickedness
   of heart, when he says, Psal. li. 5. "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity,
   and in sin did my mother conceive me." It alters not the case, as to
   the argument we are upon, whether the word (yntmxy) conceive me,
   signifies to conceive, or to nurse; which latter, our author takes so
   much pains to prove: for, when he has done all, he speaks of it as a
   just translation of the words to render them thus, I was born in
   iniquity, and in sin did my mother nurse me. (p. 135) If it is owned
   that man is born in sin, it is not worth the while to dispute, whether
   it is expressly asserted, that he is conceived in sin. But Dr. T. after
   his manner, insists, that such expressions, as being born in sin, being
   transgressors from the womb, and the like, are only phrases
   figuratively to denote aggravation, and a high degree of wickedness.
   But the contrary has been already demonstrated, from many plain
   scripture instances. Nor is one instance produced, in which there is
   any evidence that such a phrase is used in such a manner. A poetical
   sentence out of Virgil's AEneid, has here been produced, and made much
   of by some, as parallel with this, in what Dido says to AEneas, in
   these lines:

   Nec tibi diva parens, generis nec dardanus auctor, Perfide: Sed duris
   genuit te cautibus horrens Caucasus, hyrcanaeque admôrunt ubera tygres.

   In which she tells AEneas, that not a goddess was his mother, nor
   Anchises his father; but that he had been brought forth by a horrid
   rocky mountain, and nursed at the dugs of tigers, to represent the
   greatness of his cruelty to her. But how unlike and unparallel is this!
   Nothing could be more natural, than for a woman overpowered with the
   passion of love, and distracted with raging jealousy and
   disappointment, thinking herself treated with brutish perfidy and
   cruelty, by a lover whose highest fame had been his being the son of a
   goddess, to aggravate his inhumanity and hard-heartedness with this,
   that his behavior was not worthy the son of a goddess, nor becoming one
   whose father was an illustrious prince: and that he acted more as if he
   had been brought forth by hard unrelenting rocks, and had sucked the
   dugs of tigers. But what is there in the case of David parallel, or at
   all in like manner leading him to speak of himself as born in sin, in
   any such figurative sense? He is not speaking himself, nor any one
   speaking to him, of any excellent and divine father and mother, of whom
   he was born: nor is there any appearance of his aggravating his sin, by
   its being unworthy of his high birth. There is nothing else visible in
   David's case to lead him to take notice of his being born in sin, but
   only his having such experience of the continuance and power of
   indwelling sin, after so long a time, and so many and great means to
   engage him to holiness; which showed that sin was inbred, and in his
   very nature.

   Dr. T. often objects to these and other texts, brought by divines to
   prove original sin, that there is no mention made in them of Adam, nor
   of his sin. He cries out, Here is not the least mention, or intimation
   of Adam, or any ill effects of his sin upon us.--Here is not one word,
   nor the least hint of Adam, or any consequences of his sin, &c. &c.
   [284] He says, [285] "If Job and his friends had known and believed the
   doctrine of a corrupt nature, derived from Adam's sin only, they ought
   in reason and truth to have given this as the true and only reason of
   the human imperfection and uncleanness they mention." But these
   objections and exclamations are made no less impertinently, than
   frequently. It is no more a proof, that corruption of nature did not
   come by Adam's sin, because many times when it is mentioned, his sin is
   not expressly mentioned as the cause of it; than that death did not
   come by Adam's sin, as Dr. T. says it did. For though death, as
   incident to mankind, is mentioned so often in the Old Testament, and by
   our Savior in his discourses, yet Adam's sin is not once expressly
   mentioned, after the three first chapters of Genesis, any where in all
   the Old Testament, or the four Evangelists, as the occasion of it.

   What Christian has there ever been, that believed the moral corruption
   of human nature, who ever doubted that it came in the way, of which the
   apostle speaks, when he says, "By one man sin entered into the world,
   and death by sin?" Nor indeed have they any more reason to doubt of it,
   than to doubt of the whole history of our first parents, because Adam's
   name is so rarely mentioned, on any occasion in Scripture, after that
   first account of him, and Eve's never at all; and because we have no
   more any express mention of the particular manner, in which mankind
   were first brought into being, either with respect to the creation of
   Adam or Eve. It is sufficient, that the abiding, most visible effects
   of these things, remain in the view of mankind in all ages, and are
   often spoken of in Scripture; and that the particular manner of their
   being introduced, is once plainly set forth in the beginning of the
   Bible, in that history which gives us an account of the origin of all
   things. And doubtless it was expected, by the great author of the
   Bible, that the account in the three first chapters of Genesis should
   be taken as a plain account of the introduction of both natural and
   moral evil into the world. The history of Adam's sin, with its
   circumstances, God's threatening, the sentence pronounced upon him
   after his transgression and the immediate consequences, consisting in
   so vast an alteration in his state--and the state of the world, with
   respect to all his posterity--most directly and sufficiently lead us to
   understand the rise of calamity, sin, and death, in this sinful,
   miserable world.

   It is fit we all should know, that it does not become us to tell the
   Most High, how often he shall particularly explain and give the reason
   of any doctrine which he teaches, in order to our believing what he
   says. If he has at all given us evidence that it is a doctrine
   agreeable to his mind, it becomes us to receive it with full credit and
   submission; and not sullenly to reject it, because our notions and
   humours are not suited in the manner, and number of times, of his
   particularly explaining it. How often is pardon of sins promised in the
   Old Testament to repenting and returning sinners! How many hundred
   times is God's special favour there promised to the sincerely
   righteous, without any express mention of these benefits being through
   Christ! Would it therefore become us to say, that inasmuch as our
   dependence on Christ for these benefits is a doctrine, which, if true,
   is of such importance, God ought expressly to have mentioned Christ's
   merits as the reason and ground of the benefits, if he knew they were
   the ground of them; and should have plainly declared it sooner, and
   more frequently, if ever he expected we should believe him, when he did
   tell us of it? How oft is vengeance and misery threatened in the Old
   Testament to the wicked, without any clear and express signification of
   any such thing intended, as that everlasting fire, where there is
   wailing and gnashing of teeth, in another world, which Christ so often
   speaks of as the punishment appointed for all the wicked! Would it now
   become a Christian, to object and say, that if God really meant any
   such thing, he ought in reason and truth to have declared it plainly
   and fully; and not to have been so silent about a matter of such vast
   importance to all mankind, for four thousand years together?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [279] To the like purpose in Prov. iii. 3. and Deut. xi. 18. where this
   word is used.

   [280] A word of the same root is used to signify a young child, or a
   little child, in the following places; 1 Sam. i. 24, 25, 27. 1 Kings
   iii. 7. and 1 Kings xi. 17. 2 Kings ii. 23. Job xxxiii. 25. Prov. xxii.
   6. Prov. xxiii. 13. and Prov. xxix. 21. Isa. x. 19. Isa. xi. 6. and
   Isa. lxv. 20. Hos. xi.1. The same word is used to signify an infant, in
   Exod. ii. 6. and Exod. x. 9. Judg. xiii. 5, 7, 8, 24. 1 Sam. i. 22. and
   1 Sam. iv. 21. 2 Kings v. 14. Isa. vii. 16. and Isa viii. 4.

   [281] So Gen. xlvi. 34. Job xxxi.18. Jer. xxxii. 30. and Jer. xlviii.
   11. Ezek. iv. 14. Zech. xiii.5.

   [282] A phrase of the like import with that in Gen. viii. 21. The
   imagination, or, as it might have been rendered, the operation, of his
   heart is evil.

   [283] Judges xiii. 5.

   [284] Page 5, 64, 96, 97, 98, 102, 108, 112, 118, 120, 122, 127, 128,
   136, 142, 143, 149, 152, 155, 229.

   [285] 142.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. III.

   OBSERVATIONS ON VARIOUS OTHER PLACES OF SCRIPTURE, PRINCIPALLY OF THE
   NEW TESTAMENT, PROVING THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Observations on John iii. 6. in connexion with some other passages in
   the New Testament.

   Those words of Christ, giving a reason to Nicodemus, why we must be
   born again, John iii. 6. "That which is born of the flesh, is flesh,
   and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit," have not without good
   reason been produced by divines, as a proof of the doctrine of original
   sin: supposing, that by flesh here is meant the human nature in a
   debased and corrupt state. Yet Dr. T. (p. 144) thus explains these
   words, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh; "that which is born
   by natural descent and propagation, is a man consisting of body and
   soul, or the mere constitution and powers of a man in their natural
   state." But the constant use of these terms, flesh and spirit, in other
   parts of the New Testament, when thus set in opposition, and the latter
   said to be produced by the Spirit of God, as here--and when expressive
   of the same thing, which Christ is here speaking of to Nicodemus, viz.
   the requisite qualifications to salvation--will fully vindicate the
   sense, of our divines. Thus in the 7th and 8th chapters of Romans,
   where these terms flesh and spirit (NOT ENGLISH and NOT ENGLISH) are
   abundantly repeated, and set in opposition, as here. So Rom. vii. 14.
   The law is (NOT ENGLISH) spiritual, but I am (NOT ENGLISH) carnal, sold
   under sin. He cannot only mean, "I am a man consisting of body and
   soul, and having the powers of a man." Rom. vii. 18. "I know that in
   me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing." He does not mean to
   condemn his frame, as consisting of body and soul; and to assert, that
   in his human constitution, with the powers of a man, dwells no good
   thing. And when he says in the last verse of the chapter, "With the
   mind, I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of
   sin;" he cannot mean, "I myself serve the law of God; but with my
   innocent human constitution, as having the powers of a man, I serve the
   law of sin." And when he says in the next words, the beginning of the
   8th chapter, "there is no condemnation to them,--that walk not after
   the flesh, but after the spirit;" and Rom. viii. 4., "The righteousness
   of the law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh;" he cannot
   mean, "there is no condemnation to them that walk not according to the
   powers of a man," &c. And when he says (Rom. viii. 5, 6.) "They that
   are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; and to be
   carnally minded is death;" he does not intend, "they that are according
   to the human constitution, and the powers of a man, do mind the things
   of the human constitution and powers; and to mind these is death." And
   when he says, (Rom. viii. 7, 8.) "The carnal (or fleshly) mind is
   enmity against God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither
   indeed can be: so that they that are in the flesh, cannot please God;"
   he cannot mean, that to mind the things which are agreeable to "the
   powers and constitution of a man," who as our author says, is
   constituted or made right, is enmity against God; and that a mind which
   is agreeable to this right human constitution, as God hath made it, is
   not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be; and that they who are
   according to such a constitution, cannot please God. And when it is
   said, Rom. viii. 9. "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit;" the
   apostle cannot mean, "ye are not in the human nature, as constituted of
   body and soul, and with the powers of a man." It is most manifest, that
   by the flesh here the apostle means a nature that is corrupt, of an
   evil tendency, and directly opposite to the law and holy nature of God;
   so that to walk according to it, and to have a mind so conformed, is to
   be an utter enemy to God and his law; in a state of perfect
   inconsistency with subjection to God, and of being pleasing to him; and
   in a sure and infallible tendency to death, and utter destruction. And
   it is plain, that here by walking after, or according to, the flesh, is
   meant the same thing as walking according to a corrupt and sinful
   nature; and to walk according to the spirit, is to walk according to a
   holy and divine nature, or principle: and to be carnally minded, is the
   same as being viciously and corruptly minded; and to be spiritually
   minded, is to be of a virtuous and holy disposition.

   When Christ says,John iii. 6."That which is born of the flesh, is
   flesh," he represents the flesh not merely as a quality; for it would
   be incongruous to speak of a quality as a thing born. Therefore man, as
   in his whole nature corrupt, is called flesh; which is agreeable to
   other scripture representations, where the corrupt nature is called the
   old man, the body of sin, and the body of death. Agreeable to this are
   those representations in the 7th and 8th chapters of Romans. There,
   flesh is figuratively represented as a person, according to the
   apostle's manner. This is observed by Mr. Locke, and after him by Dr.
   T. who takes notice, that the apostle, in the 6th and 7th of Romans,
   represents sin as a person; and that he figuratively distinguishes in
   himself two persons, speaking of flesh as his person. For I know that
   in ME, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing. And it may be
   observed, that in the 8th chapter he still continues this
   representation, speaking of the flesh as a person. Accordingly, in the
   Rom. viii. 6, 7 , he speaks of the mind of the flesh NOT ENGLISH) and
   of the mind of the spirit (NOT ENGLISH) as if the flesh and spirit were
   two opposite persons, each having a mind contrary to that of the other.
   Dr. T. interprets this mind of the flesh, and mind of the spirit, as
   though the flesh and the spirit were the different objects, about which
   the mind is conversant. But this is plainly beside the apostle's
   meaning; who speaks of the flesh and spirit as the subjects in which
   the mind is; and in a sense the agents, but not the objects, about
   which it acts. We have the same phrase again. Rom. viii. 27."He that
   searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the spirit" (NOT
   ENGLISH). The mind of the spiritual nature in the saints is the same
   with the mind of the Spirit of God himself, who imparts and actuates
   that spiritual nature; and here the spirit is the subject and agent;
   but not the object. The same apostle, in a similar manner, uses the
   word (NOT ENGLISH) mind. Col. ii. 18."Vainly puffed up by his fleshly
   mind (NOT ENGLISH) by the mind of his flesh." And this agent so often
   called flesh, represented by the apostle as altogether evil, without
   any good thing dwelling in it, or belonging to it--yea perfectly
   contrary to God and his law, and tending only to death and ruin, and
   directly opposite to the spirit--is what Christ speaks of to Nicodemus
   as born in the first birth, and furnishing a reason why there is a
   necessity of a new birth, in order to a better production.

   One thing is particularly observable in that discourse of the
   apostle--in which he so often uses the term flesh, as opposite to
   spirit--that he expressly calls it sinful flesh, Rom. viii. 3. It is
   manifest, that by sinful flesh he means the same thing with that flesh
   spoken of in all the context: and that when it is said, Christ was made
   in the likeness of sinful flesh, the expression is equipollent with
   those that speak of Christ as made sin, and made a curse for us.

   Flesh and spirit are opposed to one another in Gal. v. in the same
   manner as in the 8th of Romans. And there, assuredly, by flesh cannot
   be meant only the human nature of body and soul, or the mere
   constitution and powers of a man, as in its natural state, innocent and
   right. In Gal. v. 16 the apostle says, "Walk in the spirit, and ye
   shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh:" the flesh, is something of an
   evil inclination, desire, or lust. But this is more strongly signified
   in the next words; "For the flesh lusteth against the spirit and the
   spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other."
   What could have been said more plainly, to show that what the apostle
   means by flesh, is something very evil in its nature, and an
   irreconcilable enemy to all goodness? And it may be observed, that in
   these words, and those that follow, the apostle still figuratively
   represents the flesh as a person or agent, desiring, acting, having
   lusts, and performing works. And by works of the flesh, and fruits of
   the spirit, which are opposed to each other (from Gal. v.19-26., to the
   end), are plainly meant the same as works of a sinful nature, and
   fruits of a holy renewed nature. "Now the works of the flesh are
   manifest, which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
   lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, wrath, strife,
   seditions, heresies," &c. "But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy,
   peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, " &c. The apostle, by
   flesh, does not mean anything that is innocent and good in itself,
   which only needs to be restrained, and kept in proper bounds; but
   something altogether evil, which is to be destroyed. 1 Cor. v. 5. "To
   deliver such an one to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh." We
   must have no mercy on it; we cannot be too cruel to it; it must even be
   crucified. Gal. v. 24. "They that are Christ's, have crucified the
   flesh with the affections and lusts."

   The apostle John--the same apostle that writes the account of what
   Christ said to Nicodemus--by the spirit means the same thing as a new,
   divine, and holy nature, exerting itself in a principle of divine love,
   which is the sum of all christian holiness. 1 John iii. 23, 24. "And
   that we should love one another, as he gave us commandment; and he that
   keepeth his commandments, dwelleth in him, and he in him: and hereby we
   know that he abideth in us, by the spirit that he hath given us. 1
   John. iv. 12, 13 "If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his
   love is perfected in us: hereby know we, that we dwell in him, because
   he hath given us of his Spirit." The spiritual principle in us being as
   it were a communication of the Spirit of God to us.

   And as by (NOT ENGLISH) spirit, is meant a holy nature, so by the
   epithet (NOT ENGLISH) spiritual, is meant the same as truly virtuous
   and holy. Gal. vi. 1. "Ye that are spiritual, restore such an one in
   the spirit of meekness." The apostle refers to what he had just said at
   the end of the foregoing chapter, where he had mentioned meekness as a
   fruit of the spirit. And so by carnal, or fleshly (NOT ENGLISH) is
   meant the same as sinful. Rom. vii. 14. "The law is spiritual (i.e.
   holy), but I am carnal, sold under sin."

   And it is evident, that by flesh, as the word is used in the New
   Testament, and opposed to spirit, when speaking of the qualifications
   for eternal salvation, is meant-- not only what is now vulgarly called
   the sins of the flesh, consisting in inordinate appetites of the body,
   and their indulgence; but--the whole body of sin, implying those lusts
   that are most subtle, and farthest from any relation to the body; such
   as pride, malice, envy, &c. When the works of the flesh are enumerated,
   Gal. v.19-21. they are vices of the latter kind chiefly that are
   mentioned; "idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
   strife, seditions, heresies, envyings." So, pride of heart is the
   effect or operation of the flesh. Col. ii. 18. "Vainly puffed up by his
   fleshly mind:" in the Greek (as before observed), by the mind of the
   flesh. So, pride, envying, and strife, and division, are spoken of as
   works of the flesh, 1 Cor. iii. 3, 4. "For ye are yet carnal (NOT
   ENGLISH, fleshly). For whereas there is envying, and strife, and
   division, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? For while one saith, I am
   of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal?" Such kind of
   lusts do not depend on the body, or external senses; for the devil
   himself has them in the highest degree, who has not, nor ever had, any
   body or external senses to gratify.

   Here, if it should be inquired, how corruption or depravity in general,
   or the nature of man as corrupt and sinful, came to be called flesh,
   and not only that corruption which consists in inordinate bodily
   appetites? I think, what the apostle says in the last cited place, "Are
   ye not carnal, and walk as men?" leads us to the true reason. It is
   because a corrupt and sinful nature is what properly belongs to
   mankind, or the race of Adam, as they are in themselves, and as they
   are by nature. The word flesh is often used in both the Old and the New
   Testament to signify mankind in their present state. To enumerate all
   the places, would be very tedious; I shall therefore only mention a few
   in the New Testament. Matt. xxiv. 22. "Except those days should be
   shortened, no flesh should be saved." Luke iii. 6. "All flesh shall see
   the salvation of God." John xvii. 2. "Thou hast given him power over
   all flesh." [286] Man's nature, being left to itself, forsaken of the
   Spirit of God, as it was when man fell, and consequently forsaken of
   divine and holy principles, of itself became exceeding corrupt, utterly
   depraved and ruined: and so the word flesh, which signifies man, came
   to be used to signify man as he is in himself, in his natural state,
   debased, corrupt, and ruined. On the other hand, the word spirit came
   to be used to signify a divine and holy principle, or new nature;
   because that is not of man, but of God, by the indwelling and vital
   influence of his Spirit. And thus to be corrupt ,and to be carnal, or
   fleshly, and to walk as men, are the same thing. And so in other parts
   of Scripture, to savour the things that be of man, and to savour things
   which are corrupt, are the same; and, sons of men, and wicked men, also
   are the same, as observed before. And on the other hand, to savour the
   things that be of God, and to receive the things of the Spirit of God,
   are phrases that signify as much as relishing and embracing true
   holiness or divine virtue.

   All these things confirm what we have supposed to be Christ's meaning
   in saying, "That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which
   is born of the Spirit, is spirit." His speech implies, that what is
   born in the first birth of man, is nothing but man as he is of himself,
   without anything divine in him; depraved, debased, sinful, ruined man,
   utterly unfit to enter into the kingdom of God, and incapable of the
   spiritual divine happiness of that kingdom. But that which is born, in
   the new birth, of the Spirit of God, is a spiritual principle, a holy
   and divine nature, meet for the heavenly kingdom. It is no small
   confirmation of this being the true meaning, that the words understood
   in this sense, contain the proper and true reason, why a man must be
   born again, in order to enter into the kingdom of God; the reason given
   every where in other parts of Scripture for the necessity of a
   renovation, a change of mind, a new heart, &c. in order to salvation:
   to give a reason of which to Nicodemus, is plainly Christ's design in
   the words which have been insisted on.--Before I proceed, I would
   observe one thing as a corollary from what has been said.

   Corol. If by flesh and spirit, when spoken of in the New Testament, and
   opposed to each other, in discourses on the necessary qualifications
   for salvation, we are to understand what has been now supposed, it will
   not only follow, that men by nature are corrupt, but wholly corrupt,
   without any good thing. If by flesh is meant man's nature, as he
   receives it in his first birth, then therein dwelleth no good thing; as
   appears by Rom. vii. 18. It is wholly opposite to God, and to
   subjection to his law, as appears by Rom. viii. 7, 8. It is directly
   contrary to true holiness, and wholly opposes it, as appears by Gal.
   v.17. So long as men are in their natural state, they not only have no
   good thing, but it is impossible they should have or do any good thing;
   as appears by Rom. viii. 8. There is nothing in their nature, as they
   have it by the first birth, whence should arise any true subjection of
   God; as appears by Rom. viii. 7. If there were any thing truly good in
   the flesh, or in man's nature, or natural disposition, under a moral
   view, then it should only be amended; but the Scripture represents as
   though we were to be enemies to it, and were to seek nothing short of
   its entire destruction, as before observed. And elsewhere the apostle
   directs not to the amending of the old man, but putting it off, and
   putting on the new man; and seeks not to have the body of death made
   better, but to be delivered from it; and says, "that if any man be in
   Christ, he is a new creature (which doubtless means the same as a man
   new born), old things are (not amended, but) passed away, and all
   things are become new."

   But this will be further evident, if we particularly consider the
   apostle's discourse in the latter part of the second chapter and the
   beginning of the third. There the apostle speaks of the natural man,
   and the spiritual man; where natural and spiritual are opposed just in
   the same manner as carnal and spiritual often are. In 1 Cor. ii. 14,
   15. he says, "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
   God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
   because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual,
   judgeth all things." And not only does the apostle here oppose natural
   and spiritual, just as he elsewhere does carnal and spiritual, but his
   following discourse evidently shows, that he means the very same
   distinction, the same two distinct and opposite things. For immediately
   on his thus speaking of the difference between the natural and the
   spiritual man, he says, 1 Cor. iii. 1 "And I, brethren, could not speak
   unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal." Referring manifestly
   to what he had been saying, in the immediately preceding discourse,
   about spiritual and natural men, and evidently using the word, carnal,
   as synonymous with natural. By which it is put out of all reasonable
   dispute, that the apostle by natural men means the same as men in that
   carnal, sinful state, that they are in by their first
   birth;--notwithstanding all the glosses and criticisms, by which modern
   writers have endeavored to palm upon us another sense of this phrase;
   and so to deprive us of the clear instruction the apostle gives in that
   14th verse, concerning the sinful miserable state of man by nature. Dr.
   T. says, by NOT ENGLISH, is meant the animal man, the man who maketh
   sense and appetite the law of his action. If he aims to limit the
   meaning of the word to external sense, and bodily appetite, his meaning
   is certainly not the apostle's. For the apostle in his sense includes
   the more spiritual vices of envy, strife, &c. as appears by the four
   first verses of the next chapter; where, as I have observed, he
   substitutes the word carnal in the place of NOT ENGLISH . So the
   apostle Jude used the word in like manner, opposing it to spiritual, or
   having the Spirit, Jude 19 "These are they that separate themselves,
   sensual (NOT ENGLISH),not having the Spirit." The vices he had been
   just speaking of, were chiefly of the more spiritual kind, Jude 16.
   "These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and
   their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in
   admiration, because of advantage." The vices mentioned are much of the
   same kind with those of the Corinthians, for which he calls them
   carnal; envy, strife, divisions, saying, I am of Paul, and I of
   Apollos; and being puffed up for one against another. We have the same
   word again, James iii. 14, 15 "If ye have bitter envying and strife,
   glory not, and lie not against the truth: this wisdom descendeth not
   from above, but is earthly, sensual (NOT ENGLISH) and devilish;" where
   also the vices the apostle speaks of are of the more spiritual kind.

   So that on the whole, there is sufficient reason to understand the
   apostle, when he speaks of the natural man, in 1 Cor. ii. 14. as
   meaning man in his native corrupt state. And his words represent him as
   totally corrupt, wholly a stranger and enemy to true virtue or
   holiness, and things appertaining to it, which it appears are commonly
   intended in the New Testament by things spiritual, and are doubtless
   here meant by things of the Spirit of God. These words also represent,
   that it is impossible man should be otherwise, while in his natural
   state. The expressions are very strong: The natural man receiveth not
   the things of the Spirit of God, is not susceptible of things of that
   kind, neither can he know them, can have no true sense or relish of
   them, or notion of their real nature and true excellency; because they
   are spiritually discerned; they are not discerned by means of any
   principle in nature, but altogether by a principle that is divine,
   something introduced by the grace of God's Holy Spirit, which is above
   all that is natural. The words are in a considerable degree parallel
   with those of our Savior, John xiv. 16, 17."He shall give you the
   Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him
   not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you,
   and shall be in you."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [286] See also Acts ii.17. Rom iii. 20. 1 Cor. i. 29. Gal. ii.16.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II

   Observations on Rom. iii. 9-24

   If the Scriptures represent all mankind as wicked in their first state,
   before they are made partakers of the benefits of Christ's redemption,
   then they are wicked by nature: for doubtless men's first state is
   their native state, or that in which they come into the world. But the
   Scriptures do thus represent all mankind.

   Before I mention particular texts to this purpose, I would observe,
   that it alters not the case, as to the argument in hand, whether we
   suppose these texts speak directly of infants, or only of such as
   understand something of their duty and state. For if all mankind, as
   soon as ever they are capable of reflecting, and knowing their own
   moral state, find themselves wicked, this proves that they are wicked
   by nature; either born so, or born with an infallible disposition to be
   wicked as soon as possible, if there be any difference between these;
   and either of them will prove men to be born exceedingly depraved. I
   have before proved, that a native propensity to sin certainly follows
   from many things said of mankind in the Scripture; but what I intend
   now, is to prove by direct scripture testimony, that all mankind, in
   their first state, are really of a wicked character.

   To this purpose, exceeding full, express, and abundant is that passage
   of the apostle, in Rom. iii. 9-24. which I shall set down at large,
   distinguishing the universal terms which are here so often repeated, by
   a distinct character. The apostle having in the first chapter (Rom.
   i.16, 17.) laid down his proposition, that none can be saved in any
   other way than through the righteousness of God, by faith in Jesus
   Christ, he proceeds to prove this point, by showing particularly that
   all are in themselves wicked, and without any righteousness of their
   own. First, he insists on the wickedness of the Gentiles, in the first
   chapter; next, on the wickedness of the Jews, in the second chapter.
   And then, in this place, he comes to sum up the matter, and draw the
   conclusion in the words following: "What then, are we better than they?
   No, in no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that
   they are ALL under sin: as it is written, there is none righteous, no,
   not one; there is none that understandeth; there is none that seeketh
   after God; they are ALL gone out of the way; they are together become
   unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Their throat
   is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the
   poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and
   bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery
   are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known; there is
   no fear of God before their eyes. Now we know, that whatsoever things
   the law saith, it saith to them that are under the law, that every
   mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.
   Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in
   his sight; for by the law is the knowledge of sin. But now the
   righteousness of God without the law, is manifest, being witnessed by
   the law and the prophets; even the righteousness of God, which is by
   faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon ALL them that believe; for
   there is no difference. for all have sinned, and come short of the
   glory of God. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
   redemption which is in Jesus Christ."

   Here the thing which I would prove, viz. that mankind in their first
   state, before they are interested in the benefits of Christ's
   redemption, are universally wicked, is declared with the utmost
   possible fullness and precision. So that if here this matter be not set
   forth plainly, expressly, and fully, it must be because no words can do
   it, and it is not in the power of language, or any manner of terms and
   phrases, however contrived and heaped up one upon another,
   determinately to signify any such thing.

   Dr. T. to take off the force of the whole, would have us to understand
   (p. 104-107.) that these passages quoted from the Psalms, and other
   parts of the Old Testament, do not speak of all mankind, nor of all the
   Jews; but only of them of whom they were true. He observes, there were
   many that were innocent and righteous; though there were also many, a
   strong party, that were wicked, corrupt, &c. of whom these texts were
   to be understood. Concerning which I would observe the following
   things:

   1. According to this, the universality of the terms in these places,
   which the apostle cites from the Old Testament, to prove that all the
   world, both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin, is nothing to his
   purpose. The apostle uses universal terms in his proposition, and in
   his conclusion, thatallare under sin, that every mouth is stopped, all
   the world guilty,--that by the deeds of the law no flesh can be
   justified. And he chooses out a number of universal sayings or clauses
   out of the Old Testament, to confirm this universality; as, There is
   none righteous; no, not one: they are all gone out of the way; there is
   none that understandeth, &c. But yet the universal terms found in them
   have no reference to any such universality, either in the collective,
   or personal sense; no universality of the nations of the world, or of
   particular persons in those nations, or in any one nation in the world:
   "but only of those of whom they are true!" That is, there is none of
   them righteous, of whom it is true, that they are not righteous: no,
   not one; there is none that understand, of whom it is true, that they
   understand not: they are all gone out of the way, of whom it is true,
   that they are gone out of the way, &c. Or these expressions are to be
   understood concerning that strong party in Israel, in David and
   Solomon's days, and in the prophets' days; they are to be understood of
   them universally. And what is that to the apostle's purpose? How does
   such an universality of wickedness--that all were wicked in Israel, who
   were wicked; or, that there was a particular evil party, all of which
   were wicked--confirm that universality which the apostle would prove,
   viz. That all Jews and Gentiles, and the whole world, were wicked, and
   every mouth stopped, and that no flesh could be justified by their own
   righteousness.

   Here nothing can be said to abate the nonsense, but this, that the
   apostle would convince the Jews, that they were capable of being
   wicked, as well as other nations; and to prove it, he mentions some
   texts, which show that there was a wicked party in Israel a thousand
   years ago. And as to the universal terms which happened to be in these
   texts, the apostle had no respect to them; but his reciting them is as
   it were accidental, they happened to be in some texts which speak of an
   evil party in Israel, and the apostle cites them as they are, not
   because they are any more to his purpose for the universal terms, which
   happen to be in them. But let the reader look on the words of the
   apostle, and observe the violence of such a supposition. Particularly
   let the words of the 9th and 10th verses, and their connection, be
   observed. All are under sin: as it is written, There is none righteous;
   no, not one. How plain it is, that the apostle cites that latter
   universal clause out of the 14th Psalm, to confound the preceding
   universal words of his own proposition! And yet it will follow from
   what Dr. T. supposes, that the universality of the terms in the last
   words, there is none righteous; no, not one, hath no relation at all to
   that universality he speaks of in the preceding clause, to which they
   are joined, all are under sin: and is no more a confirmation of it,
   than if the words were thus, "There are some or there are many in
   Israel, that are not righteous."

   2. To suppose, the apostle's design in citing these passages, was only
   to prove to the Jews, that of old there was a considerable number of
   their nation that were wicked men, is to suppose him to have gone about
   to prove what none of the Jews denied, or made the least doubt of, even
   the Pharisees, the most self-righteous sect of them, who went furthest
   in glorying in the distinction of their nation from other nations, as a
   holy people, knew it, and owned it; they openly confessed that their
   forefathers killed the prophets, Matt. xxiii. 29-31. And if the
   apostle's design had been only to refresh their memories, to put them
   in mind of the ancient wickedness of their nation, to lead to
   reflection on themselves as guilty of the like wickedness, as Stephen
   does, (Acts vii.) what need had he to go so far about to prove
   this--gathering up many sentences here and there which prove, that
   their scriptures speak of some as wicked men--and then to prove, that
   the wicked men spoken of must be Jews, by this argument, that what
   things soever the law saith, it saith to them that are under the law,
   or that whatsoever the books of the Old Testament said, it must be
   understood of that people who had the Old Testament? What need had the
   apostle of such an ambages as this, to prove to the Jews, that there
   had been many of their nation in past ages, which were wicked men; when
   the Old Testament was full of passages that asserted this expressly,
   not only of a strong party, but of the nation in general? How much more
   would it have been to such a purpose, to have put them in mind of the
   wickedness of the people in general in worshipping the golden calf; of
   the unbelief, murmuring, and perverseness of the whole congregation in
   the wilderness, for forty years, as Stephen does! Which things he had
   no need to prove to be spoken of their nation, by any such indirect
   argument as this, Whatsoever things the law saith, it saith to them
   that are under the law.

   3. It would have been impertinent to the apostle's purpose, even as our
   author understands his purpose, for him to have gone about to convince
   the Jews, that there had been a strong party of bad men in the time of
   David and Solomon, and the prophets, For Dr. T. supposes, that
   apostle's aim is to prove the great corruption of both Jews and
   Gentiles when Christ came into the world. [287]

   In order the more fully to evade the clear and abundant testimonies to
   the doctrine of original sin, contained in this part of the Holy
   Scripture, our author says, the apostle is here speaking of bodies of
   people, of Jews and Gentiles in a collective sense, as two great bodies
   into which mankind are divided; speaking of them in their collective
   capacity, and not with respect to particular persons; that the
   apostle's design is to prove, that neither of these two great bodies,
   in their collective sense, can be justified by law, because both were
   corrupt; and so that no more is implied, than that the generality of
   both were wicked. [288] On this I observe,

   (1.) That this supposed sense disagrees extremely with the terms and
   language which the apostle here makes use of. For according to this, we
   must understand, either,

   First, that the apostle means no universality at all, but only the far
   greater part. But if the words which the apostle uses, do not most
   fully and determinately signify an universality, no words ever used in
   the Bible are sufficient to do it. I might challenge any man to produce
   any one paragraph in the Scripture, from the beginning to the end,
   where there is such a repetition and accumulation of terms, so
   strongly, and emphatically, and carefully, to express the most perfect
   and absolute universality; or any place to be compared to it. What
   instance is there in the Scripture, or indeed in any other writing,
   when the meaning is only the much greater part, where this meaning is
   signified in such a manner, They are all,--They are all,--They are
   all--together,--every one,--all the world; joined to multiplied
   negative terms, to show the universality to be without exception;
   saying, There is no flesh,--there is none,--there is none,--there is
   none,--there is none, four times over; besides the addition of No, not
   one,--no, not one,--once and again! Or,

   Secondly, if any universality at all be allowed, it is only of the
   collective bodies spoken of: and these collective bodies but two, as
   Dr. T. reckons them, viz. the Jewish nation, and the Gentile world;
   supposing the apostle is here representing each of these parts of
   mankind as being wicked. But is this the way of men using language,
   when speaking of but two things, to express themselves in such
   universal terms, when they mean no more than that the thing affirmed is
   predicated of both of them? If a man speaking of his two feet as both
   lame, should say, All my feet are lame--They are all lame--All together
   are become weak--None of my feet are strong--None of them are
   sound--No, not one; would not he be thought to be lame in his
   understanding, as well as his feet? When the apostle says, That every
   mouth may be stopped, must we suppose, that he speaks only of these two
   great collective bodies, figuratively ascribing to each of them a
   mouth, and means that these two mouths are stopped? Besides, according
   to our author's own interpretation, the universal terms used in these
   texts, cited from the Old Testament, have no respect to those two great
   collective bodies, nor indeed to either of them; but to some in Israel,
   a particular disaffected party in that one nation, which was made up of
   wicked men. So that his interpretation is every way absurd and
   inconsistent.

   (2.) If the apostle is speaking only of the wickedness or guilt of
   great collective bodies, then it will follow, that also the
   justification he here treats of, is no other than the justification of
   such collective bodies. For, they are the same of whom he speaks as
   guilty and wicked, and who cannot be justified by the works of the law,
   by reason of their being wicked. Otherwise his argument is wholly
   disannulled. If the guilt he speaks of be only of collective bodies,
   then what he argues from that guilt, must be only, that collective
   bodies cannot be justified by the works of the law, having no respect
   to the justification of particular persons. And indeed this is Dr. T.'s
   declared opinion. He supposes the apostle here, and in other parts of
   this epistle, is speaking of men's justification considered only as in
   their collective capacity. [289] But the contrary is most manifest. The
   26th and 28th verses of this third chapter, cannot, without the utmost
   violence, be understood otherwise than of the justification of
   particular persons. "That he might be just, and the justifier of him
   that believeth in Jesus.--Therefore we conclude that a man is justified
   by faith, without the deeds of the law." So in Rom. iv. 5. "But to him
   that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his
   faith is counted for righteousness." And what the apostle cites in the
   6th, 7th, and 8th verses from the book of Psalms, evidently shows, that
   he is speaking of the justification of particular persons. "Even as
   David also describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth
   righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
   are forgiven, and whose sins are covered." David says these things in
   Psal. xxxii. , with a special respect to his own particular case; there
   expressing the great distress he was in, while under a sense of
   personal sin and guilt, and the great joy he had when God forgave him.

   And what can be plainer, that in the paragraph we have been upon (Rom.
   iii. 20.) it is the justification of particular persons of which the
   apostle speaks. "Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no
   flesh be justified in his sight." He refers to Psal. cxliii. 2. "Enter
   not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no man
   living be justified." Here the psalmist is not speaking of the
   justification of a nation, as a collective body, or of one of the two
   parts of the world, but of a particular man. And it is further
   manifest, that the apostle is here speaking of personal justification,
   inasmuch as this place is evidently parallel with Gal. iii.10, 11. "For
   as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is
   written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things that are
   written in the book of the law to do them. But that no man is justified
   by the works of the law, is evident; for, The just shall live by
   faith." It is plain, that this place is parallel with that in Rom. iii.
   , not only as the thing asserted is the same, and the argument by which
   it is proved--that all are guilty, and exposed to condemnation by the
   law.--But the same saying of the Old Testament is cited (Gal. ii. 16.)
   Many other things demonstrate, that the apostle is speaking of the same
   justification in both places, which I omit for brevity's sake.

   And besides all these things, our author's interpretation makes the
   apostle's argument wholly void another way. The apostle is speaking of
   a certain subject which cannot be justified by the works of the law;
   and his argument is, that the same subject is guilty, and is condemned
   by the law. If he means, that one subject, suppose a collective body or
   bodies, cannot be justified by the law, because another subject,
   another collective body, is condemned by the law, it is plain, the
   argument would be quite vain and impertinent. Yet thus the argument
   must stand according to Dr. T.'s interpretation. The collective bodies
   which he supposes are spoken of as wicked, and condemned by the law,
   considered as in their collective capacity, are those two, the Jewish
   nation, and the heathen world: but the collective body which he
   supposes the apostle speaks of as justified without the deeds of the
   law, is neither of these, but the christian church, or body of
   believers; which is a new collective body, a new creature, and a new
   man (according to our author's understanding of such phrases), which
   never had any existence before it was justified, and therefore never
   was wicked or condemned, unless it was with regard to the individuals
   of which it was constituted; and it does not appear, according to our
   author's scheme, that these individuals had before been generally
   wicked. For according to him, there was a number both among the Jews
   and Gentiles, that were righteous before. And how does it appear, but
   that the comparatively few Jews and Gentiles, of which this new-created
   collective body was constituted, were chiefly of the best of each?

   So that in every view, this author's way of explaining the passage
   appears vain and absurd. And so clearly and fully has the apostle
   expressed himself, that it is doubtless impossible to invent any other
   sense to put upon his words, than that which will imply, that all
   mankind, even every individual of the whole race, but their Redeemer
   himself, are in their first original state corrupt and wicked.

   Before I leave this passage (Rom. iii. 9-24.) it may be proper to
   observe, that it not only is a most clear and full testimony to the
   native depravity of mankind, but also plainly declares that natural
   depravity to be total and exceeding great. It is the apostle's manifest
   design in these citations from the Old Testament, to show these three
   things. 1. That all mankind are by nature corrupt. 2. That every one is
   altogether corrupt, and, as it were, depraved in every part. 3. That
   they are in every part corrupt in an exceeding degree. With respect to
   the second of these, it is plain the apostle puts together those
   particular passages of the Old Testament, wherein most of those members
   of the body are mentioned, that are the soul's chief instruments or
   organs of external action. The hands (implicitly) in those expressions,
   "They are together become unprofitable, There is none that doth good."
   [290] The throat, tongue, lips, and mouth, the organs of speech, in
   those words; "Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues
   they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose
   mouth is full of cursing and bitterness." [291] The feet in those
   words, verse 15, "Their feet are swift to shed blood." These things
   together signify, that man is as it were all over corrupt in every
   part. And not only is the total corruption thus intimated, by
   enumerating the several parts, but also by denying all good; any true
   understanding or spiritual knowledge, any virtuous action, or so much
   as a truly virtuous desire, or seeking after God. [292] "There is none
   that understandeth; there is none that seeketh after God; there is none
   that doth good; the way of peace have they not known." And in general,
   by denying all true piety or religion in men in their first state,
   verse 18, "There is no fear of God before their eyes."--The expressions
   also are evidently chosen to denote a most extreme and desperate
   wickedness of heart. An exceeding depravity is ascribed to every part:
   to the throat, the scent of an open sepulchre; to the tongue and lips,
   deceit, and the poison of asps; to the mouth, cursing and bitterness;
   of their feet it is said, they are swift to shed blood: and with regard
   to the whole man, it is said, destruction and misery are in their ways.
   The representation is very strong of each of these things, viz. That
   all mankind are corrupt; that every one is wholly and altogether
   corrupt; and also extremely and desperately corrupt. And it is plain,
   it is not accidental, that we have here such a collection of such
   strong expressions, so emphatically signifying these things; but that
   they are chosen of the apostle on design, as being directly and fully
   to his purpose; which purpose appears in all his discourse in the whole
   of this chapter, and indeed from the beginning of the epistle.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [287] See Key, § 307, 310.

   [288] Page 102, 104, 117, 119, 120. and note on Rom. iii.10-19.

   [289] See note on Rom. iii.10-19 Rom. v.11. and Rom. ix. 30, 31

   [290] Rom. iii. 12.

   [291] Rom. iii. 13.

   [292] Rom. iii. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Observations on Rom. v. 6-10 and Eph. ii. 3 with the context, and Rom.
   vii.

   Another passage of this apostle, which shows that all who are made
   partakers of the benefits of Christ's redemption, are in their first
   state wicked, desperately wicked, is Rom. v. 6-10. "For when we were
   yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. For
   scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet peradventure for a good
   man some would even dare to die. But God commendeth his love towards
   us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more
   then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
   through him. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God
   through the death of his Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be
   saved by his life."--Here all for whom Christ died, and who are saved
   by him, are spoken of as being in their first state sinners, ungodly,
   enemies to God, exposed to divine wrath, and without strength, without
   ability to help themselves, or deliver their souls from this miserable
   state.

   Dr. T. says, the apostle here speaks of the Gentiles only in their
   heathen state, in contradistinction to the Jews; and that not of
   particular persons among the heathen Gentiles, or as to the state they
   were in personally; but only of the Gentiles collectively taken, or of
   the miserable state of that great collective body, the heathen world:
   and that these appellation, sinners, ungodly, enemies, &c. were names
   by which the apostles in their writings were wont to signify and
   distinguish the heathen world, in opposition to the Jews; and that in
   this sense these appellations are to be taken in their epistles, and in
   this place in particular. [293] And it is observable, that this way of
   interpreting these phrases in the apostolic writings is become
   fashionable with many late writers; whereby they not only evade several
   clear testimonies to the doctrine of original sin, but make void great
   part of the New Testament; on which account it deserves the more
   particular consideration.

   It is allowed to have been long common and customary among the Jews,
   especially the sect of the Pharisees, in their pride, and confidence in
   their privileges as the peculiar people of God, to exalt themselves
   exceedingly above other nations, and greatly to despise the Gentiles,
   calling them by such names as sinners, enemies, dogs, &c. Themselves
   they accounted, in general (excepting the publicans, and the
   notoriously profligate), as the friends, the special favourites and
   children, of God; because they were the children of Abraham, were
   circumcised, and had the law of Moses, as their peculiar privilege, and
   as a wall of partition between them and the Gentiles.

   But it is very remarkable, that a christian divine, who has studied the
   New Testament, and the epistle to the Romans in particular, so
   diligently as Dr. T. has done, should so strongly imagine that the
   apostles of Jesus Christ countenance and cherish these self-exalting,
   uncharitable dispositions and notions of the Jews which gave rise to
   such a custom, so far as to fall in with that custom, and adopt that
   language of their pride and contempt; and especially that the apostle
   Paul should do it. It is a most unreasonable imagination on many
   accounts.

   1. The whole gospel dispensation is calculated entirely to overthrow
   and abolish every thing to which this self-distinguishing,
   self-exalting language of the Jews was owing. It was calculated wholly
   to exclude such boasting, and to destroy the pride and
   self-righteousness which were the causes of it. It was calculated to
   abolish the enmity, and break down the partition-wall between Jews and
   Gentiles, and of twain, to make one new man, so making peace: to
   destroy all dispositions in nations and particular persons to despise
   one another, or to say one to another, Stand by thyself, come not near
   to me; for I am holier than thou; and to establish the contrary
   principles of humility, mutual esteem, honour and love, and universal
   union, in the most firm and perfect manner.

   2. Christ, when on earth, set himself, through the whole course of his
   ministry, to militate against this pharisaical spirit, practice, and
   language of the Jews; by which they showed so much contempt of the
   Gentiles, publicans, and such as were openly lewd and vicious, and thus
   exalted themselves above them; calling them sinners and enemies, and
   themselves holy, and God's children; not allowing the Gentile to be
   their neighbour, &c. He condemned the Pharisees for not esteeming
   themselves sinners, as well as the publicans; trusting in themselves
   that they were righteous, and despising others. He militated against
   these things in his own treatment of some Gentiles, publicans, and
   others, whom they called sinners, and in what he said on those
   occasions. [294]

   He opposed these notions and manners of the Jews in his parables, [295]
   and in his instructions to his disciples how to treat the unbelieving
   Jews; [296] and in what he says to Nicodemus about the necessity of a
   new birth, even for the Jews, as well as the unclean Gentiles with
   regard to their proselytism, which some of the Jews looked upon as a
   new birth. And in opposition to their notions on their being the
   children of God, because the children of Abraham, but the Gentiles by
   nature sinners and children of wrath, he tells them that even they were
   children of the devil. [297]

   3. Though we should suppose the apostles not to have been thoroughly
   brought off from such notions, manners, and language of the Jews, till
   after Christ's ascension; yet after the pouring out of the Spirit on
   the day of Pentecost, or at least, after the calling of the Gentiles,
   begun in the conversion of Cornelius, they were fully instructed in
   this matter, and effectually taught no longer to call the Gentiles
   unclean, as a note of distinction from the Jews, Acts x. 28. which was
   before any of the apostolic epistles were written.

   4. Of all the apostles, none were more perfectly instructed in this
   matter, than Paul, and none so abundant in instructing others in it, as
   this great apostle of the Gentiles. None of the apostles had so much
   occasion to exert themselves against the forementioned notions and
   language of the Jews, in opposition to Jewish teachers and judaizing
   Christians who strove to keep up the separation-wall between Jews and
   Gentiles, and to exalt the former, and set at nought the latter.

   5. This apostle, in his epistle to the Romans, above all his other
   writings, exerts himself in a most elaborate manner, and with his
   utmost skill and power, to bring the Jewish Christians off from every
   thing of this kind. He endeavors by all means that there might no
   longer be in them any remains of these old notions, in which they had
   been educated, of such a great distinction between Jews and Gentiles,
   as were expressed in the names they used to distinguish them by; the
   Jews, holy children of Abraham, friends and children of God; but the
   Gentiles, sinners, unclean, enemies, and the like. He makes it almost
   his whole business, from the beginning of the epistle, Rom. v. 6. &c.
   to convince them that there was no ground for any such distinction, and
   to prove that in common, both Jews and Gentiles, all were desperately
   wicked, and none righteous, no not one. He tells them, Rom. iii. 9.
   that the Jews were by no means better than the Gentiles; and (in what
   follows in that chapter) that there was no difference between Jews and
   Gentiles; and represents all as without strength, or any sufficiency of
   their own in the affair of justification and redemption. And in the
   continuation of the same discourse, in Rom. iv., he teaches that all
   who were justified by Christ, were in themselves ungodly; and that
   being the children of Abraham was not peculiar to the Jews. In Rom.
   v.still in continuation of the same discourse--on the same subject and
   argument of justification through Christ, and by faith in him--he
   speaks of Christ dying for the ungodly and sinners, and those who were
   without strength or sufficiency for their own salvation, as he had done
   all along before. But now, it seems, the apostle by sinners and
   ungodly, must not be understood according as he used these words
   before; but must be supposed to mean only the Gentiles as distinguished
   from the Jews; adopting the language of those self-righteous,
   self-exalting, disdainful judaizing teachers, whom he was with all his
   might opposing: countenancing the very same thing in them, which he had
   been from the beginning of the epistle discountenancing, and
   endeavoring to discourage, and utterly to abolish, with all his art and
   strength.

   One reason why the Jews looked on themselves better than the Gentiles,
   and called themselves holy, and the Gentiles sinners, was, that they
   had the law of Moses. They made their boast of the law. But the apostle
   shows them, that this was so far from making them better, that it
   condemned them, and was an occasion of their being sinners, in a higher
   degree, and more aggravated manner, and more effectually and dreadfully
   dead in sin. [298]

   It cannot be justly objected here, that this apostle did, in fact, use
   this language, and call the gentiles sinners, in contradistinction to
   the Jews, in what he said to Peter, Gal. ii. 15, 16. "We who are Jews
   by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not
   justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ." It is
   true, that the apostle here refers to this distinction, as what was
   usually made by the self-righteous Jews, between themselves and the
   Gentiles; but not in such a manner as to adopt, or favour it; but on
   the contrary, so as plainly to show his disapprobation of it; q.d.
   "Though we were born Jews, and by nature are of that people which are
   wont to make their boast of the law, expecting to be justified by it,
   and trust in themselves that they are righteous, despising others,
   calling the Gentiles sinners, in distinction from themselves; yet we
   being now instructed in the gospel of Christ, know better; we now know
   that a man is not justified by the works of the law; that we are all
   justified only by faith in Christ, in whom there is no difference, no
   distinction of Greek or Gentile, and Jew, but all are one in Christ
   Jesus." And this is the very thing he there speaks of, which he blamed
   Peter for; that by his withdrawing and separating himself from the
   Gentiles, refusing to eat with them, &c. he had countenanced this
   self-exalting, self-distinguishing, separating spirit and custom of the
   Jews, whereby they treated the Gentiles, as in a distinguishing manner
   sinners and unclean, and not fit to come near them who were a holy
   people.

   6. The very words of the apostle in this place, show plainly, that he
   uses the term sinners, not as signifying Gentiles, in opposition to
   Jews, but as denoting the morally evil, in opposition to such as are
   righteous or good. This latter distinction between sinners and
   righteous is here expressed in plain terms. "Scarcely for a righteous
   man will one die; yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare
   to die; but God commended his love towards us, in that while we were
   yet sinners, Christ died for us." [299] By righteous men are doubtless
   meant the same that are meant by such a phrase, throughout this
   apostle's writings, throughout the New Testament, and throughout the
   Bible. Will anyone pretend, that by the righteous man, for whom men
   would scarcely die, and by the good man, for whom perhaps some might
   even dare to die, is meant a Jew? Dr. T. himself does not explain it
   so, in his exposition of this epistle; and therefore is not very
   consistent with himself, in supposing, that in the other part of the
   distinction the apostle means Gentiles, as distinguished from the Jews.
   The apostle himself had been labouring abundantly, in the preceding
   part of the epistle, to prove, that the Jews were sinners in opposition
   to righteous; that all had sinned, that all were under sin, and
   therefore could not be justified, could not be accepted as righteous,
   by their own righteousness.

   7. Another thing which makes it evident that the apostle, when he
   speaks in this place of the sinners and enemies for whom Christ died,
   does not mean only the Gentiles, is, that he includes himself among
   them, saying, while we were sinners, and when we were enemies.

   Our author from time to time says, the apostle, though he speaks only
   of the Gentiles in their heathen state, yet puts himself with them,
   because he was the apostle of the Gentiles. But this is very
   unreasonable. There is no more sense in it, than there would be in a
   father ranking himself among his children, when speaking to his
   children of the benefits they have by being begotten by himself; and
   saying, We children. Or in a physician ranking himself with his
   patients, when talking to them of their diseases and cure; saying, We
   sick folks. Paul being the apostle of the Gentiles to save them from
   their heathenism, is so far from being a reason for him to reckon
   himself among the heathen, that on the contrary, it is the very thing
   that would render it in a peculiar manner unnatural and absurd for him
   so to do. Because, as the apostle of the Gentiles, he appears as their
   healer and deliverer from heathenism; and therefore in that capacity,
   in a peculiar manner, appears in his distinction from the heathen, and
   in opposition to the state of heathenism. For it is by the most
   opposite qualities only, that he is fitted to be an apostle of the
   heathen, and recoverer from heathenism. As the clear light of the sun
   is what makes it a proper restorative from darkness; and, therefore,
   the sun being spoken of as such a remedy, none would suppose to be a
   good reason why it should be ranked among dark things. Besides, the
   apostle, in this epistle, expressly ranks himself with the Jews when he
   speaks of them as distinguished from the Gentiles; as in Rom. iii. 9.
   "What then? are we better than they?" That is, are we Jews better than
   the Gentiles?

   It cannot justly be alleged in opposition to this, that the apostle
   Peter puts himself with the heathen, 1 Pet. iv. 3. "For the time past
   of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles;
   when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
   banquetings, and abominable idolatries." For the apostle Peter (who by
   the way was not an apostle of the Gentiles) here does not speak of
   himself as one of the heathen, but as one of the church of Christ in
   general, made up of those who had been Jews, proselytes, and heathens,
   who were now all one body, of which body he was a member. It is this
   society, therefore, and not the Gentiles, that he refers to in the
   pronoun US. He is speaking of the wickedness that the members of this
   body or society had lived in before their conversion; not that every
   member had lived in all those vices here mentioned, but some in one,
   others in another. Very parallel is the passage with that of the
   apostle Paul to Titus; Titus iii. 3. "For we ourselves also" (i.e. we
   of the christian church) "were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
   deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures," (some one lust and
   pleasure, others another), "living in malice, envy, hateful, and hating
   one another," &c. There is nothing in this, but what is very natural.
   That the apostle, speaking to the christian church, and of that church,
   confessing its former sins, should speak of himself as one of that
   society, and yet mention some sins that he personally had not been
   guilty of, and among others, heathenish idolatry, is quite a different
   thing from what it would have been for the apostle, expressly
   distinguishing those of the Christians, which had been heathen, from
   those which had been Jews, to have ranked himself with the former,
   though he was truly of the latter.

   If a minister in some congregation in England, speaking in a sermon of
   the sins of the nation, being himself of the nation should say, "We
   have greatly corrupted ourselves, and provoked God by our deism,
   blasphemy, profane swearing, lasciviousness, venality," &c. speaking in
   the first person plural, though he himself never had been a deist, and
   perhaps none of his hearers, and they might also have been generally
   free from other sins he mentioned; yet there would be nothing unnatural
   in his thus expressing himself. But it would be quite a different
   thing, if one part of the British dominions, suppose our king's
   American dominions, had universally apostatized from Christianity to
   deism, and had long been in such a state, and if one who had been born
   and brought up in England among Christians, the country being
   universally Christian, should be sent among them to show them the folly
   and great evil of deism, and convert them to Christianity; and this
   missionary, when making a distinction between English Christians, and
   these deists, should rank himself with the latter, and say, WE American
   deists, WE foolish blind infidels, &c. This indeed would be very
   unnatural and absurd.

   Another passage of the apostle, to the like purpose with that which we
   have been considering in the 5th of Romans, is that in Eph. ii.
   3.--"And were by nature children of wrath, even as others." This
   remains a plain testimony to the doctrine of original sin, as held by
   those who used to be called orthodox Christians, after all the pains
   and art used to torture and pervert it. This doctrine is here not only
   plainly and fully taught, but abundantly so, if we take the words with
   the context; where Christians are once and again represented as being,
   in their first state, dead in sin, and as quickened and raised up from
   such a state of death, in a most marvelous display of free rich grace
   and love, and exceeding greatness of God's power, &c.

   With respect to those words (NOT ENGLISH ) We were by nature children
   of wrath, Dr. T. Says, p. 112-114.) "The apostle means no more by this,
   than truly or really children of wrath; using a metaphorical
   expression, borrowed from the word that is used to signify a true and
   genuine child of a family, in distinction from one that is a child only
   by adoption." In which it is owned, that the proper sense of the phrase
   is, being a child by nature, in the same sense as a child by birth or
   natural generation; but only he supposes, that here the word is used
   metaphorically. The instance he produces as parallel, to confirm his
   supposed metaphorical sense of the phrase, as meaning only truly,
   really, or properly children of wrath, viz. the apostle Paul's calling
   Timothy his own son in faith, (NOT ENGLISH ) is so far from confirming
   his sense, that it is rather directly against it. For doubtless the
   apostle uses the word here (NOT ENGLISH) in its original signification,
   meaning his begotten son; NOT ENGLISH being the adjective from NOT
   ENGLISH, offspring, or the verb, NOT ENGLISH to beget; as much as to
   say, Timothy my begotten son in the faith. For as there are two ways of
   being begotten, one natural, and the other spiritual; the first
   generation, and regeneration; so the apostle expressly signifies which
   of these he means in this place, Timothy my begotten son IN THE FAITH,
   in the same manner as he says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. iv. 15. "In
   Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel." To say, the
   apostle uses the word, NOT ENGLISH , in Eph. ii. 3 only as signifying
   real, true, and proper, is a most arbitrary interpretation, having
   nothing to warrant it in the whole Bible. The word NOT ENGLISH is no
   where used in this sense in the New Testament. [300]

   Another thing which our author alleges to evade the force of this, is,
   that the word rendered nature, sometimes signifies habit contracted by
   custom, or an acquired nature. But this is not its proper meaning. And
   it is plain, the word in its common use, in the New Testament,
   signifies what we properly express in English by the word nature. There
   is but one place where there can be the least pretext for supposing it
   to be used otherwise; and that is 1 Cor. xi. 14. "Doth not even nature
   itself teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto
   him?" And even here there is, I think, no manner of reason for
   understanding nature otherwise than in the proper sense. The emphasis
   used, (NOT ENGLISH ) nature itself, shows that the apostle does not
   mean custom, but nature in the proper sense. It is true, it was long
   custom which made having the head covered a token of subjection, and a
   feminine appearance; as it is custom that makes any outward action or
   word a sign or signification of anything. But nature itself, nature in
   its proper sense, teaches, that it is a shame for a man to appear with
   the established signs of the female sex, and with significations of
   inferiority, &c. As nature itself shows it to be a shame for a father
   to bow down or kneel to his own child or servant, or for men to bow to
   an idol, because bowing down is by custom an established token or sign
   of subjection and submission. Such a sight therefore would be
   unnatural, shocking to a man's very nature. So nature would teach, that
   it is a shame for a woman to use such and such lascivious words or
   gestures, though it be custom that establishes the unclean
   signification of those gestures and sounds.

   It is particularly unnatural and unreasonable, to understand the
   phrase, (NOT ENGLISH ) in this place, any otherwise than in the proper
   sense, on the following accounts. 1. It may be observed, that both the
   words, NOT ENGLISH and NOT ENGLISH , in their original signification,
   have reference to birth or generation. So the word NOT ENGLISH , from
   NOT ENGLISH , which signifies to beget or bring forth young, or to bud
   forth, as a plant, that brings forth young buds and branches. And so
   the word NOT ENGLISH comes from NOT ENGLISH , which signifies to bring
   forth children.--2. As though the apostle took care by the word used
   here, to signify what we are by birth, he changes the word he used
   before for children. In the preceding verse he used NOT ENGLISH,
   speaking of the children of disobedience; but here NOT ENGLISH , which
   is a word derived, as observed, from NOT ENGLISH , to bring forth a
   child, and more properly signifies a begotten or born child.--3. It is
   natural to suppose that the apostle here speaks in opposition to the
   pride of some, especially the Jews (for the church in Ephesus was made
   up partly of Jews, as well as the church in Rome), who exalted
   themselves in the privileges they had by birth, because they were born
   the children of Abraham, and were Jews by nature, NOT ENGLISH , as the
   phrase is, Gal. ii. 15. In opposition to this proud conceit, he teaches
   the Jews, that notwithstanding this they were by nature children of
   wrath, even as others, i.e. as well as the Gentiles, which the Jews had
   been taught to look upon as sinners, and out of favour with God by
   nature, and born children of wrath.--4. It is more plain, that the
   apostle uses the word nature in its proper sense here, because he sets
   what they were by nature in opposition to what they are by grace. In
   this verse, the apostle shows what they are by nature, viz. children of
   wrath; and in the following verses he shows, how very different their
   state is by grace; saying, Eph. ii. 5. "By grace ye are saved;"
   repeating it again, Eph. ii. 8., "By grace ye are saved." But if, by
   being children of wrath by nature, were meant no more than only their
   being really and truly children of wrath, as Dr. T. supposes, there
   would be no opposition in the signification of these phrases; for in
   this sense they were by nature in a state of salvation, as much as by
   nature children of wrath; for they were truly, really, and properly in
   a state of salvation.

   If we take these words with the context, the whole abundantly proves,
   that by nature we are totally corrupt, without any good thing in us.
   For if we allow the plain scope of the place, without attempting to
   hide it by doing extreme violence to the apostle's words, the design
   here is strongly to establish this point; that what Christians have
   that is good in them, or in their state, is in no part of it naturally
   in themselves, or from themselves, but is wholly from divine grace, all
   the gift of God, and his workmanship, the effect of his power, his free
   and wonderful love. None of our good works are primarily from
   ourselves, but with respect to them all, we are God's workmanship,
   created unto good works, as it were out of nothing. Not so much as
   faith itself, the first principle of good works in Christians, is of
   themselves, but that is the gift of God. Therefore the apostle compares
   the work of God, in forming Christians to true virtue and holiness, not
   only to a new creation, but a resurrection, or raising from the dead.
   Eph. ii. 1. "You hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
   sins." And again, Eph. ii. 5., "Even when we were dead in sins, hath
   quickened us together with Christ." In speaking of Christians being
   quickened with Christ, the apostle has reference to what he had said
   before, in the latter part of the foregoing chapter, of God manifesting
   the exceeding greatness of his power towards christian converts in
   their conversion, agreeable to the operation of his mighty power, when
   he raised Christ from the dead. So that it is plain by everything in
   this discourse, the apostle would signify, that by nature we have no
   goodness; but are as destitute of it as a dead corpse is of life. And
   that all goodness, all good works, and faith the principle of all, are
   perfectly the gift of God's grace, and the work of his great, almighty,
   and exceeding excellent power. I think, there can be need of nothing
   but reading the chapter, and minding what is read, to convince all who
   have common understanding, of this; whatever any of the most subtle
   critics have done, or ever can do, to twist, rack, perplex, and pervert
   the words and phrases here used.

   Dr. T. here again insists, that the apostle speaks only of the Gentiles
   in their heathen state, when he speaks of those that were dead in sin,
   and by nature children of wrath; and that though he seems to include
   himself among those, saying, WE were by nature children of wrath, WE
   were dead in sins; yet he only puts himself among them because he was
   the apostle of the Gentiles. The gross absurdity of this may appear
   from what was said before. But besides the things which have been
   already observed, there are some things which make it peculiarly
   unreasonable to understand it so here. It is true, the greater part of
   the church of Ephesus had been heathens, and therefore the apostle
   often has reference to their heathen state, in this epistle. But the
   words in Eph. ii. 3. plainly show, that he means himself and other Jews
   in distinction from the Gentiles; for the distinction is fully
   expressed. After he had told the Ephesians, who had been generally
   heathen, that they had been dead in sin, and had walked according to
   the course of this world, &c. (ver. 1 and 2) he makes a distinction,
   and says, "among whom we also had our conversation, &c. and were by
   nature children of wrath, even as others." Here first he changes the
   person; whereas, before he had spoken in the second person, "ye were
   dead,--ye in time past walked," &c. now he changes style, and uses the
   first person, in a most manifest distinction, among whomwe also, that
   is, we Jews, as well as ye Gentiles: not only changing the person, but
   adding a particle of distinction, also; which would be nonsense, if he
   meant the same without distinction. And besides all this, more fully to
   express the distinction, the apostle further adds a pronoun of
   distinction; we also, even as others, or we as well as others: most
   evidently having respect to the notions, so generally entertained by
   the Jews, of their being much better than the Gentiles, in being Jews
   by nature, children of Abraham, and children of God; when they supposed
   the Gentiles to be utterly cast off, as born aliens, and by nature
   children of wrath: in opposition to this, the apostle says, "We Jews,
   after all our glorying in our distinction, were by nature children of
   wrath, as well as the rest of the world." And a yet further evidence,
   that the apostle here means to include the Jews, and even himself, is
   the universal term he uses, Among whom also we all had our
   conversation, &c. Though wickedness was supposed by the Jews to be the
   course of this world, as to the generality of mankind, yet they
   supposed themselves an exempt people, at least the Pharisees, and the
   devout observers of the law of Moses and traditions of the elders;
   whatever might be thought of publicans and harlots. But in opposition
   to this, the apostle asserts, that they all were no better by nature
   than others, but were to be reckoned among the children of
   disobedience, and children of wrath.

   Besides, if the apostle chooses to put himself among the Gentiles,
   because he was the apostle of the Gentiles, I would ask, why does he
   not do so in the 11th verse of the same chapter (Eph.ii. 11), where he
   speaks of the Gentile state expressly? "Remember that ye being in time
   past Gentiles in the flesh." Why does he here make a distinction
   between the Gentiles and himself? Why did he not say, Let us remember,
   that we being in time past Gentiles? And why does the same apostle,
   even universally, make the same distinction, speaking either in the
   second or third person, and never in the first, where he expressly
   speaks of the Gentilism of those of whom he wrote, or of whom he
   speaks, with reference to their distinction from the Jews? So every
   where in this same epistle; as in Eph. i. 12, 13. where the distinction
   is made just in the same manner as here, by the change of the person,
   and by the distinguishing particle, also: "That we should be to the
   praise of his glory who first trusted in Christ, (the first believers
   in Christ being of the Jews, before the Gentiles were called), in whom
   ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of
   your salvation." And in all the following part of this second chapter,
   as Eph. ii. 11, 17, 19, 22. in which last verse the same distinguishing
   particle again is used; "In whom ye also are builded together for an
   habitation of God through the Spirit." [301]

   Though I am far from thinking our author's exposition of the 7th chap.
   of Romans to be in any wise agreeable to the true sense of the apostle,
   yet it is needless here to stand particularly to examine it; because
   the doctrine of original sin may be argued not the less strongly,
   though we should allow the thing wherein he mainly differs from such as
   he opposes in his interpretation, viz. That the apostle does not speak
   in his own name, or to represent the state of a true Christian, but as
   representing the state of the Jews under the law. For even on this
   supposition, the drift of the place will prove, that every one who is
   under the law, and with equal reason every one of mankind, is carnal,
   sold under sin, in his first state, and till delivered by Christ. For
   it is plain, that the apostle's design is to show the insufficiency of
   the law to give life to anyone whatsoever. This appears by what he says
   when he comes to draw his conclusion, in the continuation of this
   discourse, Rom. viii. 3. [302] "For what the law could not do in that
   it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son," &c. Our author
   supposes what is here spoken of, viz. "that the law cannot give life,
   because it is weak through the flesh," is true with respect to every
   one of mankind. [303] And when the apostle gives this reason, in that
   it is weak through the flesh, it is plain, that by the flesh, which
   here he opposes to the spirit, he means the same thing which in the
   preceding part of the same discourse, in the foregoing chapter, he had
   called by the name flesh, Rom. vii. 5, 14, 18 and the law of the
   members, Rom. vii. 23. and the body of death, Rom. vii. 24. . This is
   what, through this chapter, he insists on as the grand hindrance why
   the law could not give life; just as he does in his conclusion, Rom.
   viii. 3. Which, in his last place, is given as a reason why the law
   cannot give life to any of mankind. And it being the same reason of the
   same thing, spoken of in the same discourse, in the former part of
   it--this last place being the conclusion, of which that former part is
   the premises--and inasmuch as the reason there given is being in the
   flesh, and being carnal, sold under sin: therefore, taking the whole of
   the apostle's discourse, this is justly understood to be a reason why
   the law cannot give life to any of mankind; and consequently, that all
   mankind are in the flesh, and are carnal, sold under sin, and so remain
   till delivered by Christ: and consequently, all mankind in their first
   original state are very sinful; which was the thing to be proved.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [293] Page 114-120. See also Dr. T.'s Paraph. and notes on the place.

   [294] Matt. viii. 5-13. Matt. ix. 9-13. Matt. xi. 19-24. Matt. xv.
   21-28. Luke vii. 37 to the end; Luke xvii.12-19. Luke. xix.1-10. John
   iv. 9, 39. &c. Compare Luke x. 29. &c.

   [295] Matt. xxi. 28-32. Matt. xxii.1-10. Luke xiv.16-24. Compare Luke
   xiii. 28, 29, 30.

   [296] Matt. x.14, 15

   [297] John viii. 33-44. It may be observed, that John the Baptist
   greatly contradicted the Jew's opinion of themselves, as being a holy
   people, and accepted of God, because they were children of Abraham--and
   on that account better than the heathen whom they called sinners,
   enemies, unclean, &c.--in baptizing the Jews as a polluted people, and
   sinners, as the Jews used to baptize proselytes from among the heathen;
   calling them to repentance as sinners, saying, Think not to say within
   yourselves, We have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God
   is able, of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham; and
   teaching the Pharisees, that instead of their being a holy generation,
   and children of God, as they call themselves, they were a generation of
   vipers.

   [298] See Rom. vii. 4-13. agreeably to those words of Christ, John v.
   45.

   [299] Rom. iv. 7, 8.

   [300] The following are all the other places where the word is used,
   Rom. i. 26. Rom. ii. 14, 27. and Rom. xi. 21, 24. thrice in that verse;
   1 Cor. xi.14. Gal. ii.15. Gal. iv. 8. Jam.iii.7.twice in that verse;
   and 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [301] See also the following chapters, Eph. iii. 6. and Eph. iv.17. And
   not only in this epistle, but constantly in other epistles; as Rom. i.
   12, 13. Rom. xi.13, 14, 17-25, 28, 30, 31. Rom. xv. 15, 16. 1 Cor. xii.
   2. Gal. iv. 8. Col. i. 27; Col. ii. 13 1 Thess. i. 5, 6, 9; 1 Thess.
   ii. 13, 14, 15, 16.

   [302] Dr. T. himself reckons this a part of the same discourse or
   paragraph, in the division he makes of the epistle, in his paraphrase,
   and notes upon it.

   [303] See note on Rom. v. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. IV.

   CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS ON ROM. V. 12, TO THE END.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Remarks on Dr. T.'s way of explaining this text.

   The following things are worthy of notice, concerning our author's
   exposition of this remarkable passage.

   I. He greatly insists, that by death in this place no more is meant,
   than that death which we all die, when this present life is
   extinguished, and the body returns to the dust. That no more is meant
   in Rom. v.12, 14, 15, 17, (p. 27.) he declares as evidently, clearly,
   and infallibly so, because the apostle is till discoursing on the same
   subject; plainly implying, that infallibly the apostle means no more by
   death, throughout this paragraph on the subject. But as infallible as
   this is, if we believe what Dr. T. says elsewhere, it must needs be
   otherwise: for (p. 120. S) speaking of those words in Rom. vi. 23."The
   wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
   Jesus Christ our Lord," he says, "Death in this place is widely
   different from the death we now die; as it stands there opposed to
   eternal life, which is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, it
   manifestly signifies eternal death, the second death, or that death
   which they shall hereafter die, who live after the flesh." But the
   death (in the conclusion of the paragraph we are upon) that comes by
   Adam, and the life that comes by Christ (in the last verse of the
   chapter), is opposed to eternal life just in the same manner as in the
   last verse of the next chapter: "That as sin has reigned unto death,
   even so might grace reign through righteousness, unto eternal life, by
   Jesus Christ our Lord." So that by our author's own argument, death in
   this place also, is manifestly widely different from the death we now
   die, as it stands here opposed to eternal life, through Jesus Christ;
   and signifies eternal death, the second death. And yet this is a part
   of the same discourse, begun in Rom. v. 12; as reckoned by Dr. T.
   himself in his division of paragraphs, in his paraphrase and notes on
   the epistle. So that if we will follow him, and admit his reasonings in
   the various parts of his book, here is manifest proof, against
   infallible evidence! So that it is true, the apostle throughout this
   whole passage on the same subject, by death, evidently, clearly, and
   infallibly means no more than that death we now die, when this life is
   extinguished; and yet by death, in some part of this passage, is meant
   something widely different from the death we now die--manifestly
   eternal death, the second death.

   But had our author been more consistent with himself, in laying it down
   as certain and infallible, that because the apostle has a special
   respect to temporal death, in "Death reigned from Adam to Moses," [304]
   therefore he means no more in the several consequent parts of this
   passage, yet he is doubtless too confident and positive in this matter.
   This is no more evident, clear, and infallible, than that Christ meant
   by perishing--in Luke xiii. 5. when he says, I tell you, Nay, but
   except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish--no more than such a
   temporal death, as came on those who died by the fall of the tower of
   Siloam, spoken of in the preceding words of the same speech; and no
   more infallible, than that by life, Christ means no more than this
   temporal life, in each part of that one sentence--Matt. x. 39."He that
   findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my
   sake, shall find it"--because in the first part of each clause he has
   respect especially to temporal life. [305]

   The truth of the case, with respect to what the apostle here intends by
   the word death, is this, viz. The whole of that death which he, and the
   Scripture everywhere, speaks of as the proper wages and punishment of
   sin, including death temporal, spiritual, and eternal; though in some
   parts of this discourse he has a more special respect to one part of
   this whole, in others to another, as his argument leads him; without
   any more variation than is quite common in the same discourse. That
   life, which the Scripture speaks of as the reward of righteousness, is
   a whole containing several parts, viz. The life of the body, union of
   soul and body, and the most perfect sensibility, activity, and felicity
   of both, which is the chief thing. In like manner the death, which the
   Scripture speaks of as the punishment of sin, is a whole including the
   death of the body and the death of the soul, and the eternal, sensible,
   perfect destruction and misery of both. It is this latter whole, that
   the apostle speaks of by the name of death in this discourse, in Rom.
   v. though in some sentences he has a more special respect to one part,
   in others to another: and this, without changing the signification of
   the word. For having respect to several things included in the
   extensive signification of the word, is not the same thing as using the
   word in several distinct significations. As for instance, the
   appellative, man, or the proper name of any particular man, is the name
   of a whole, including the different parts of soul and body. And if any
   one in speaking of James or John, should say, he was a wise man, and a
   beautiful man; in the former part of the sentence, respect would be had
   more especially to his soul, in the latter to his body, in the word
   man: but yet without any proper change of the signification of the name
   to distinct senses. In John xxi. 7. it is said, Peter was naked, and in
   the following part of the same story it is said, Peter was grieved. In
   the former proposition, respect is had especially to his body, in the
   latter to his soul: but yet here is no proper change of the meaning of
   the name, Peter. And as to the apostle's use of the word death in the
   passage now under consideration, on the supposition that he in general
   means the whole of that death which is the wages of sin, there is
   nothing but what is perfectly natural in supposing that--in order to
   evince that death, the proper punishment of sin, comes on all mankind
   in consequence of Adam's sin--he should take notice of that part of
   this punishment which is visible in this world, and which every body
   therefore sees does in fact come on all mankind ( as in ver. 14). And
   is it not equally natural from thence to infer, that all mankind are
   exposed to the whole of that death which is the proper punishment of
   sin, whereof temporal death is a part, and a visible image of the
   whole, and (unless changed by divine grace) an introduction to the
   principal, and infinitely the most dreadful, part?

   II. Dr. T.'s explanation of this passage makes wholly insignificant
   those first words, By one man sin entered into the world, and leaves
   this proposition without any sense at all. The apostle had been largely
   and elabourately representing, how the whole world was full of sin,
   both among Jews and Gentiles, and all exposed to death and
   condemnation. It is plain, that in these words he would tell us how
   this came to pass, namely, that the sorrowful event came by one man,
   even the first man. That the world was full of sin, and full of death,
   were two great and notorious facts, deeply affecting the interests of
   mankind; and they seemed very wonderful facts, drawing the attention of
   the more thinking part of mankind every where, who often asked this
   question. Whence comes evil, moral and natural evil? It is manifest,
   the apostle here means to tell us, how these came into the world, and
   came to prevail in it as they do. But all that is meant, according to
   Dr. T.'s interpretation, is, "He began transgression". [306] As if all
   that the apostle meant, was, to tell us who happened to sin first; not
   how such a malady came upon the world, or how anyone in the world,
   besides Adam himself, came by such a distemper. The words of the
   apostle, "By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,"
   show the design to be, to tell us how these evils came, as affecting
   the state of the world; and not only as reaching one man in the world.
   If this were not plain enough in itself, the words immediately
   following demonstrate it; "And so death passed upon all men, for that
   all have sinned." By sin being in the world, the apostle does not mean
   being in the world only in that one instance of Adam's first
   transgression, but being abroad in the world, among the inhabitants of
   the earth, in a wide extent, and continued series of wickedness; as is
   plain in the first words of the next verse, "For until the law, sin was
   in the world." And therefore when he gives us an account how it came to
   be in the world, or, which is the same thing, how it entered into the
   world, he does not mean only coming in one instance.

   If the case were as Dr. T. represents, that the sin of Adam, either in
   its pollution or punishment, reached none but himself, any more than
   the sin of any other man, it would be no more proper to say, that by
   one man sin entered into the world, than if--were it inquired, how
   mankind came into America, and there had anciently been a ship of the
   Phoenicians wrecked at sea, and a single man of the crew was driven on
   this continent, and here died as soon as he reached the shore--it
   should be said, By that one man mankind came into America.

   Besides, it is not true, that by one man, or by Adam, sin entered into
   the world, in Dr. T.'s sense: for it was not he but Eve that began
   transgression. By one man Dr. T. understands Adam, as the figure of
   Christ. And it is plain, that it was for his transgression, and not
   Eve's, that the sentence of death was pronounced on mankind after the
   fall, Gen. iii. 19. It appears unreasonable to suppose the apostle
   means to include Eve, when he speaks of Adam; for he lays great stress
   on it, that it was BY ONE, repeating it several times.

   III. In like manner this author brings to nothing the sense of the
   causal particles, in such phrases as these, so often repeated, Rom. v.
   12 "Death by sin," Rom. v. 15 "If through the offence of one, many be
   dead," Rom. v. 16 "by one that sinned,--judgment was by one to
   condemnation," Rom. v. 17 "By one man's offence, death reigned by one,"
   Rom. v. 18 "By the offence of one, judgment came upon all," &c., Rom.
   v. 19 "By one man's disobedience." These causal particles, so variously
   repeated, unless we make mere nonsense of the discourse, signify some
   connexion and dependence, by some sort of influence of that sin of one
   man, or some tendency to that effect, which is so often said to come by
   it. But according to Dr. T. there can be no real dependence or
   influence in the case, of any sort whatsoever. There is no connexion by
   any natural influence of that one act to make all mankind mortal. Our
   author does not pretend to account for this effect in any such manner,
   but in another most diverse, viz. A gracious act of God, laying mankind
   under affliction, toil, and death, from special favour and kindness.
   Nor can there be any dependence of this effect on that transgression of
   Adam, by any moral influence, as deserving such a consequence, or
   exposing to it on any moral account: for he supposes, that mankind are
   not in this way exposed to the least degree of evil. Nor has this
   effect any legal dependence on that sin, or any connexion by virtue of
   any antecedent constitution, which God had established with Adam: for
   he insists, that in that threatening, "In the day thou eatest thou
   shalt die," there is not a word said of his posterity (p. 8). And death
   on mankind, according to him, cannot come by virtue of that legal
   constitution with Adam; because the sentence by which it came was after
   the annulling and abolishing that constitution (p. 113. S.) And it is
   manifest, that this consequence cannot be through any kind of tendency
   of that sin to such an effect; because the effect comes only as a
   benefit, and is the fruit of mere favour: but sin has no tendency,
   either natural or moral, to benefits, and divine favours. And thus that
   sin of Adam could neither be the efficient cause, nor the procuring
   cause; neither the natural, moral, nor legal cause; nor an exciting and
   moving cause, any more than Adam's eating of any other tree of the
   garden. And the only real relation that the effect can have to that
   sin, is a relation as to time, viz. that it is after it. And when the
   matter is closely examined, the whole amounts to no more than this,
   that God is pleased, of his mere good will and pleasure, to bestow a
   greater favour upon us, than he did upon Adam in innocency, after that
   sin of his eating the forbidden fruit; which sin we are no more
   concerned in, than in the sin of the king of Pegu, or the emperor of
   China.

   IV. It is altogether inconsistent with the apostle's scope, and the
   import of what he says, to suppose that the death of which he here
   speaks, as coming on mankind by Adam's sin, comes not as a punishment,
   but only as a favour. It quite makes void the opposition, in which the
   apostle sets the consequences of Adam's sin, and the consequences of
   the grace and righteousness of Christ. They are set in opposition to
   each other, as opposite effects, arising from opposite causes,
   throughout the paragraph: one, as the just consequence of an offence;
   the other, a free gift, Rom. v. 15-18. Whereas, according to this
   scheme, there is no such opposition in the case; both are benefits, and
   both are free gifts. A very wholesome medicine to save from perishing,
   ordered by a kind father, or a shield to preserve from an enemy,
   bestowed by a friend, is as much a free gift as pleasant food. The
   death that comes by Adam, is set in opposition to the life and
   happiness that comes by Christ, as being the fruit of sin, and judgment
   for sin: when the latter is the fruit of divine grace, Rom. v. 15, 17,
   20, 21. Whereas, according to our author, both came by grace. Death
   comes on mankind by the free kindness and love of God, much more truly
   and properly than by Adam's sin. Dr. T. speaks of it as coming by
   occasion of Adam's sin: but, as I have observed, it is an occasion
   without any influence. Yet the proper cause is God's grace. So that the
   true cause is wholly good. Which, by the way, is directly repugnant to
   the apostle's doctrine in Rom. vii. 13."Was then that which is good
   made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin,
   working death in me by that which is good." Where the apostle utterly
   rejects any such suggestion, as though that which is good were the
   proper cause of death; and signifies that sin is the proper cause, and
   that which is good, only the occasion. But according to this author,
   the reverse is true: that which is good in the highest sense, even the
   love of God, and a divine gracious constitution, is the proper cause of
   death, and sin only the occasion.

   But to return, it is plain, that death by Adam, and life and happiness
   by Christ, are here set in opposition: the latter being spoken of as
   good, the other as evil; one as the effect of righteousness, the other
   of an offence; one of the fruit of obedience, the other of
   disobedience; one as the fruit of God's favour, in consequence of what
   was pleasing and acceptable to him, but the other the fruit of his
   displeasure, in consequence of what was displeasing and hateful to him;
   the latter coming by justification, the former by the condemnation of
   the subject. But according to the scheme of our author, there can be no
   opposition in any of these respects: the death here spoken of, neither
   comes as an evil, nor from an evil cause; either an evil efficient
   cause, or procuring cause, nor at all as any testimony of God's
   displeasure to the subject, but as properly the effect of his favour,
   no less than that which is spoken of as coming by Christ; yea, as much
   as an act of justification of the subject; as he understands and
   explains the word justification; for both are made by a grant of
   favour, and are instances of mercy and goodness. And he abundantly
   insists upon it, that "any grant of favour, any instance of mercy and
   goodness, whereby God delivers and exempts from any kind of danger,
   suffering, or calamity, or confers any favour, blessing, or privilege,
   is called justification in the scripture-sense and use of the word.
   [307]

   Moreover, our author makes void the grand and fundamental
   opposition--to illustrate which is the chief scope of this whole
   passage--between the first and second Adam; in the death that comes by
   one, and the life and happiness by the other. For, according to his
   doctrine, both come by Christ the second Adam; both by his grace,
   righteousness, and obedience: the death to which God sentenced mankind
   (Gen. iii. 19.) being a great deal more properly and truly by Christ,
   than by Adam. For, according to him, that sentence was not pronounced
   on the basis of the covenant with Adam; because that was abrogated, and
   entirely set aside, as he largely insists for many pages together, (p.
   113-120. S.) "This covenant with Adam was disannulled immediately after
   Adam sinned. Even before God passed sentence upon Adam, grace was
   introduced." "The death that mankind are the subjects of now, stands
   under the covenant of grace.--In the counsel and appointment of God, it
   stood in this very light, even before the sentence of death was
   pronounced upon Adam: and consequently, death is no proper and legal
   punishment of sin." And he often insists, that it comes only as a
   favour and benefit; and standing, as he says, under the covenant of
   grace, which is by Christ, therefore is truly one of the benefits of
   the new covenant, which comes by Christ, the second Adam. For he
   himself is decided, to use his own words, [308] "That all the grace of
   the gospel is dispensed to us, in, by, or through The Son of God."
   "Nothing is clearer (says he [309] ) from the whole current of
   Scripture, than that all the mercy and love of God, and all the
   blessings of the gospel, from first to last, are in, by, and through
   Christ, and particularly by his blood, by the redemption that is in
   him. This can bear no dispute among Christians." What then becomes of
   all this discourse of the apostle's, about the great difference and
   opposition between Adam and Christ; as death is by one, and eternal
   life and happiness by the other? This grand distinction between the two
   Adams, it seems, and the other instances of opposition and difference
   here insisted on--as between the effects of sin and righteousness, the
   consequences of obedience and disobedience, of the offence and the free
   gift, judgment and grace, condemnation and justification--all come to
   nothing. And this whole discourse of the apostle, wherein he seems to
   labour much, as if it were to set forth some very grand and most
   important distinction and oppositions in the state of things, as
   derived from the two great heads of mankind, proves nothing but a
   multitude of words without meaning, or rather a heap of
   inconsistencies.

   V. Our author's own doctrine entirely makes void what he supposes to be
   the apostle's argument, in Rom. v. 13, 14 , in these words; "For until
   the law, sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed where there is no
   law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that
   had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression."

   What he supposes the apostle would prove here, is, that the mortality
   of mankind comes only by Adam's sin, and not by men's personal sins,
   because there was no law threatening death to Adam's posterity for
   personal sins, before the law of Moses; but death, or the mortality of
   Adam's posterity, took place many ages before the law was given;
   therefore death could not be by any law threatening death for personal
   sins, and consequently could be by nothing but Adam's sin. [310] On
   this I would observe,

   1. That which he supposes the apostle to take for a truth in this
   argument, viz. That there was no law of God in being, by which men were
   exposed to death for personal sin, during the time from Adam to Moses,
   is neither true, nor agreeable to this apostle's own doctrine.

   First, The assertion is not true. For the law of nature, written in
   men's hearts, was then in being, and was a law by which men were
   exposed to death for personal sin. That there was a divine
   establishment, fixing the death and destruction of the sinner as the
   consequence of personal sin, which was well known before the giving of
   the law by Moses, is plain by many passages in the book of Job, as
   fully and clearly implying a connexion between such sin and such a
   punishment, as any passage in the law of Moses: such as that in Job
   xxiv. 19."Drought and heat consume the snow-waters; so doth the grave
   them that have sinned." (Compare Job. xxiv. 20, 24.) Also Job xxxvi. 6.
   "He preserveth not the life of the wicked." Job xxi. 29-32, "Have ye
   not asked them that go by the way ? and do ye not know their tokens?
   That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be
   brought forth to the day of wrath." Job xxi. 32. "He shall be wrought
   to the grave." [311]

   Secondly. To suppose that there is no law in being, by which men are
   exposed to death for personal sin, when a revealed law of God is not in
   being, is contrary to our apostle's own doctrine in this epistle. Rom.
   ii. 12, 14, 15. " For as many as have sinned without law (i. e. the
   revealed law) shall perish without law." But how they can be exposed to
   die and perish, who have not the law of Moses, nor any revealed law,
   the apostle shows us in Rom. ii. 14,15. ; viz. in that they have the
   law of nature, by which they fall under sentence to this punishment.
   "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
   contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law to
   themselves; which show the work of the law written in their hearts;
   their conscience also bearing witness." --Their conscience not only
   bore witness to the duty prescribed by this law, but also to the
   punishment before spoken of, at that which they who sinned without law,
   were liable to suffer, viz. that they should perish. In which the
   apostle is yet more express, Rom. i. 32. speaking more especially of
   the heathen, "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit
   such things are worthy of death." Dr. T. often calls the law the rule
   of right; and this rule of right sentenced those sinners to death, who
   were not under the law of Moses, according to this author's own
   paraphrase of this verse, in these words, "The heathen were not
   ignorant of the rule of right, which God had implanted in the human
   nature; and which shows that they which commit such crimes, are
   deserving of death." And he himself supposes Abraham, who lived between
   Adam and Moses, to be under law, by which he would have, been exposed
   to punishment without hope, were it not for the promise of
   grace.--(Paraph. on Rom. iv. 15.)

   So that in our author's way of explaining the passage before us, the
   grand argument which the apostle insists upon here to prove his main
   point, viz. that death does not come by men's personal sin, but by
   Adam's sin, because it came before the law was given, that threatened
   death for personal sin; I say, this argument which Dr T. supposes so
   clear and strong, [312] is brought to nothing more then a mere shadow
   without substance; the very foundation of the argument having no truth.
   To say, there was no such law actually expressed in any standing
   revelation, would be mere trifling. For it no more appears, that God
   would not bring temporal death for personal sins without a standing
   revealed law threatening it, than that he would not bring eternal death
   before there was a revealed law threatening that: which yet wicked men
   that lived in Noah's time, were exposed to, as appears by 1 Pet. iii.
   19, 20. and which Dr. T. supposes all mankind are exposed to by their
   personal sins; and he himself says. [313] " Sin in its own unalterable
   nature leads to death." Yea, it might be argued with as much strength
   of reason, that God could bring on men no punishment at all for any
   sin, that was committed from Adam to Moses, because there was no
   standing revealed law then extant threatening any punishment. It may
   here be properly observed, that our author supposes, the shortening of
   man's days, and hastening of death, entered into the world by the sin
   of the antediluvians, in the same sense as death and mortality entered
   into the world by Adam's sin. [314] But where was there any standing
   revealed law for that, though, the event was so universal? If God might
   bring this on all mankind, on occasion of other men's sins, for which
   they deserved nothing, without a revealed law, what could there be to
   hinder God bringing death on men for their personal sins, for which
   their own consciences tell them they deserve death without a revealed
   law?

   2. If from Adam to Moses there had been no law in being, of any kind,
   revealed or natural, by which men could be properly exposed to temporal
   death for personal sin, yet the mention of Moses law would have been
   wholly impertinent, and of no signification in the argument, according
   to our author. He supposes that what the apostle would prove, is, that
   temporal death comes by Adam; and not by any law threatening such a
   punishment for personal sin; because this death prevailed before the
   law of Moses was in being, which is the only law threatening death for
   personal sin. And yet he himself supposes, that the law of Moses, when
   it was in being, threatened no such death for personal sin. For he
   abundantly asserts, that the death which the law of Moses threatened
   for personal sin, was eternal death, as has been already noted: and he
   says in express terms, that eternal death is of a nature widely
   different from the death we now die;|| [315] as was also observed
   before.

   How impertinently therefore does Dr. T- make an inspired writer argue,
   when, according to him, the apostle would prove, that this kind of
   death did not come by any law threatening this kind of death, because
   it came before the existence of a law threatening another kind of
   death, of a nature widely different! How is it to the apostle's
   purpose, to fix on that period, the time of giving Moses's law, as if
   that had been the period wherein men began to be threatened with this
   punishment for their personal sins, when in truth it was no such thing?
   And therefore it was no more to this purpose to fix on that period,
   from Adam to Moses, than from Adam to David, or any other period
   whatsoever. Dr. T. holds, that even now, since the law of Moses has
   been given, the mortality of mankind, or the death we now die, does not
   come by that law; but that it always comes only by Adam. [316] And if
   it never comes by that law, we may be sure it never was threatened in
   that law.

   3. If we should allow the argument in Dr. T.s sense of it, to prove
   that death does not come by personal sin, yet it will be wholly without
   force to prove the main point, even that it must come by Adam's sin:
   for it might come by God's sovereign and gracious pleasure; as
   innumerable other divine benefits do. If it be ordered, agreeable to
   our author's supposition, not as a punishment, nor as a calamity, but
   only as a favour, what necessity of any settled constitution, or
   revealed sentence, in order to bestow such a favour, more than other
   favours; and particularly more than that great benefit, which he says
   entered into the world by the sin of the antediluvians, the shortening
   men's lives so much after the flood? Thus the apostle's arguing, by Dr.
   T.s explanation of it, is turned into mere trifling, a vain and
   impertinent use of words, without any real force or significance.

   VI. The apostle here speaks of that great benefit which we have by
   Christ, as the antitype of Adam, under the notion of the fruit of
   grace. I do not mean only that superabounding of grace wherein the
   benefit we have by Christ goes beyond the damage sustained by Adam; but
   that benefit, with regard to which Adam was the figure of him that was
   to come, and which is as it were the counterpart of the suffering by
   Adam, and which repairs the loss we have by him. This is here spoken of
   as the fruit of the free grace of God; (as appears by Rom. v. 15-18,
   20, 21.) which according to our author, is the restoring of mankind to
   that life which they lost in Adam: and he himself supposes this
   restoration of life by Christ to be what grace does for us, and calls
   it the free gift of God, and the grace and favour of the lawgiver.*
   [317] And speaking of this restoration, he breaks out in admiration of
   the unspeakable riches of this grace. [318]

   But it follows from his doctrine, that there is no grace at all in this
   benefit, and it is no more than a mere act of justice, being only a
   removing of what mankind suffer, being innocent. Death, as it commonly
   comes on mankind, and even on infants, (as has been observed,) is an
   extreme, positive calamity; to bring which on the perfectly innocent,
   unremedied, and without any thing to countervail it, we are
   sufficiently taught, is not consistent with the righteousness of the
   judge of all the earth. What grace therefore, worthy of being so
   celebrated, would there be in affording remedy and relief, after there
   had been brought on innocent mankind that which is (as Dr. T. himself
   represents [319] ) the dreadful and universal destruction of their
   nature; being a striking demonstration how infinitely hateful sin is to
   God! What grace in delivering from such shocking ruin, them who did not
   deserve the least calamity! Our author says, "We could not justly lose
   communion with God by Adam's sin." [320] If so, then we could not
   justly lose our lives, and be annihilated, after a course of extreme
   pains and agonies of body and mind, without any restoration; which
   would be an eternal loss of communion with God, and all other good,
   besides the positive suffering. The apostle, throughout this passage,
   represents the death which is the consequence of Adam's transgression,
   as coming in a way of judgment and condemnation for sin; but
   deliverance and life through Christ, as by grace, and the free gift of
   God. Whereas, on the contrary, by Dr. T.s scheme, the death that comes
   by Adam, comes by grace, great grace; it being a great benefit, ordered
   in fatherly love and kindness, and on the basis of a covenant of grace:
   but in the deliverance and restoration by Christ, there is no grace at
   all. So things are turned topsy-turvy, the apostle's scope and scheme
   entirely inverted and confounded.

   VII. Dr. T. explains the words, judgment, condemnation, justification,
   and righteousness, as used in this place in a very unreasonable manner.

   I will first consider the sense he puts upon the two former, judgment
   and condemnation. He often calls this condemnation a judicial act, and
   a sentence of condemnation. But, according to his scheme, it is a
   judicial sentence of condemnation passed upon them who are perfectly
   innocent--and viewed by the judge, even in passing the condemnatory
   sentence, as having no guilt of sin, or any fault at all chargeable
   upon them--and a judicial proceeding, passing sentence arbitrarily,
   without any law or rule of right before established. For there was no
   preceding law threatening death, that he or any one else ever pretended
   to have been established, but only this, "In the day that thou eatest
   thereof, thou shall surely die." And concerning this he insists, that
   there is not a word said in it of Adam's posterity. So that the
   condemnation spoken of, is a sentence of condemnation to death, for, or
   in consequence of, the sin of Adam, without any law by which that sin
   could be imputed to bring any such consequence; contrary to the
   apostle's plain scope. And not only so, but, over and above all this,
   it is a judicial sentence of condemnation to that which is no calamity,
   nor is considered as such in the sentence; but a condemnation to a
   great favour!

   The apostle uses the words judgment and condemnation in other places;
   they are no strange and unusual terms with him: but never are they used
   by him in this sense, or any like it; nor are they ever used thus any
   where else in the New Testament. This apostle, in this epistle to the
   Romans, often speaks of condemnation, using the same or similar terms
   and phrases as here, but never in the above said sense. [321] This will
   be plain to every one who casts his eye on those places. And if we look
   into the former part of this chapter, the apostle's discourse makes it
   evident, that he is speaking of a condemnation, which is no testimony
   of favor to the innocent; but of God's displeasure towards those to
   whom he is not reconciled, but looks on as offenders and enemies, and
   holds as the objects of his wrath, from which we are delivered by
   Christ. (See ver. 6-11. )

   And even viewing this discourse itself, in the very paragraph we are
   upon, if we may judge any thing by language, there is every thing to
   lead us to suppose, that the apostle uses words here, as he does
   elsewhere, properly, and as implying a supposition of sin, chargeable
   on the subject, and exposing to punishment. He speaks of condemnation
   as what comes by sin, a condemnation to death, which seems to be a most
   terrible evil, and capital punishment, even in what is temporal and
   visible: and this in the way of judgment and execution of justice, in
   opposition to grace or favour, and gift, or a benefit coming by favour.
   And sin, offence, transgression, and disobedience are, over and over
   again, spoken of as the ground of the condemnation, and of the capital
   suffering, for ten verses successively; that is, in every verse in the
   whole paragraph.

   The words, justification and righteousness, are explained by Dr. T. in
   a manner no less unreasonable. He understands justification, in ver.
   18. and righteousness, in ver. 19. in such a sense, as to suppose they
   belong to all, and are actually to be applied to all mankind, good and
   bad, believers and unbelievers; to the worst enemies of God, remaining
   such, as well as his peculiar favourites, and many that never had any
   sin imputed to them; meaning thereby no more than what is fulfilled in
   an universal resurrection from the dead, at the last day. [322] Now
   this is a most arbitrary, forced sense. Though these terms are used all
   over the New Testament, yet nothing like such an use of them is to be
   found in any one instance. The words justify, justification, and
   righteousness, as from God to men, are never used but to signify a
   privilege belonging only to some, and that which is peculiar to
   distinguished favourites. This apostle in particular, above all the
   other writers of the New Testament, abounds in the use of these terms;
   so that we have all imaginable opportunity to understand his language,
   and know the sense in which he uses these words: but he never elsewhere
   uses them in the sense supposed here, nor is there any pretence that he
   does. Above all, this apostle abounds in the use of these terms in this
   epistle. justification is the subject he had been upon through all the
   preceding part of the epistle. It was the grand subject of all the
   foregoing chapters, and the preceding part of this chapter, where these
   terms are continually repeated. And the word, justification, is
   constantly used to signify something peculiar to believers, who had
   been sinners; implying some reconciliation and forgiveness of sin, and
   special privilege in nearness to God, above the rest of the world. Yea,
   the word is constantly used thus, according to Dr. T's own
   explanations, in his paraphrase and notes on this epistle. And there is
   not the least reason to suppose but that he is still speaking of the
   same justification, which he had dwelt upon from the beginning to this
   place. He speaks of justification and righteousness here, just in the
   same manner as he had done in the preceding part of the epistle. He had
   all along spoken of justification as standing in relation to sin,
   disobedience to God, and offence against him, and so he does here. He
   had before been speaking of justification through free grace, and so he
   does here. He before had been speaking of justification through
   righteousness, as in Christ Jesus, and so he does here.

   And if we look into the former part of this very chapter, we shall find
   justification spoken of just in the same sense as in the rest of the
   epistle; which is also supposed by our author in his exposition. It is
   still justification by faith, justification of them who had been
   sinners, justification attended with reconciliation, justification
   peculiar to them who had the love of God shed abroad in their hearts.
   The apostle's foregoing discourse on justification by grace through
   faith--and what he had so greatly insisted on as the evidence of the
   truth of this doctrine, even the universal sinfulness of mankind in
   their original state--is plainly what introduces this discourse in the
   latter part of this 5th chapter; where he shows how all mankind came to
   be sinful and miserable, and so to need this grace of God, and
   righteousness of Christ. And therefore we cannot, without the most
   absurd violence, suppose any other than that he is still speaking of
   the same justification.

   And as to the universal expression used in the 18th verse, "by the
   righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification
   of life;" it is needless here to go into the controversy between the
   remonstrants and anti-remonstrants, concerning universal redemption,
   and their different interpretations of this place. If we take the words
   even as the Arminians do; yet, in their sense of them, the free gift
   comes on all men to justification only conditionally, i. e. provided
   they believe, repent, &c. But in our author's sense, it actually comes
   on all, whether they believe and repent, or not; which certainly cannot
   be inferred from the universal expression, as here used. Dr. T. himself
   supposes, the main design of the apostle in this universal phrase, all
   men, is to signify that the benefits of Christ shall come on Gentiles
   as well as Jews.* And he supposes that the Many and the All, here
   signify the same; but it is quite certain, that all the benefits here
   spoken of, which the apostle says are to the many, does not actually
   come upon all mankind; as particularly the abounding of grace, ver. 15.
   "The grace of God, and the gift by grace, hath abounded unto the many
   (NOT ENGLISH)."

   This abounding of grace our author explains thus; "a rich overplus of
   grace, in erecting a new dispensation, furnished with a glorious fund
   of light, means, and motives," (p. 44.) But will any pretend, that all
   mankind have actually been partakers of this new fund of light, &c. How
   were the many millions of Indians, on the American side of the globe,
   partakers of it, before the Europeans came hither? Yea, Dr. T. himself
   supposes, that it is only free for all that are willing to accept of
   it. [323] The agreement between Adam as the type or figure of him that
   was to come, and Christ as the anti-type, appears full and clear, if we
   suppose that all who are in christ (to use the common scripture phrase)
   have the benefit of his obedience, even as all who are in adam have the
   sorrowful fruit of his disobedience. The Scripture speaks of believers
   as the seed or posterity of Christ. (Gal. iii. 29.) They are in Christ
   by grace, as Adam's posterity are in him by nature. See also 1 Cor. xv.
   45-49. The spiritual seed are those which this apostle often represents
   as Christ's body: and the NOT ENGLISH . here spoken of as made
   righteous by Christ's obedience, are doubtless the same with the NOT
   ENGLISH which he speaks of in chap. chap. xii.5. We, being many, are
   one body; or, we, the many, NOT ENGLISH . And again, 1 Cor. x. 17. NOT
   ENGLISH. And the same which the apostle had spoken of in the preceding
   chapter. (Rom. iv. 18. compared with Gen. xv. 5.)

   Dr. T. insists much on 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22. "For since by man came death,
   by man came also the resurrection of the dead; for as in Adam all die,
   so in Christ shall all be made alive;" to confirm his suppositions,
   that the apostle in the 5th of Romans, speaking of the death and
   condemnation which come by Adam, has respect only to the death we all
   die, when this life ends: and that by the justification and life which
   come by Christ, he has respect only to the general resurrection at the
   last day. But it is observable, that his argument is wholly built on
   these two suppositions, viz. First, that the resurrection meant by the
   apostle, 1 Cor. xv. is the resurrection of all mankind, both just and
   unjust. Secondly, That the opposite consequences of Adam's sin, and
   Christ's obedience, in Rom. v. are the very same, neither more nor
   less, than are spoken of there. But there are no grounds for supposing
   either of these things to be true.

   1. There is no evidence, that the resurrection there spoken of, relates
   both to the just and unjust; but abundant evidence of the contrary. The
   resurrection of the wicked is seldom mentioned in the New Testament,
   and rarely included in the meaning of the word; it being esteemed not
   worthy to be called a rising to life, being only for a great increase
   of the misery and darkness of eternal death: and therefore by the
   resurrection is most commonly meant a rising to life and happiness.
   [324] The saints are called the children of the resurrection, as Dr. T.
   observes in his note on Rom. viii. 11. And it is exceeding evident,
   that it is the resurrection to life and happiness, which the apostle is
   speaking of in 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22. As appears by each of the three
   foregoing verses. Ver. 18. "Then they which are fallen asleep in Christ
   (i. e. the saints) are perished." Ver. 19. "If in this life only we
   (Christians or apostles) have hope in Christ, (and have no resurrection
   and eternal life to hope for,) we are of all men most miserable." Ver.
   20. "But now is Christ risen from the dead, and is become the
   first-fruits of them that slept." He is the forerunner and first-fruits
   only with respect to them that are his; who are to follow him, and
   partake with him in the glory and happiness of his resurrection: but he
   is not the first-fruits of them that shall come forth to the
   resurrection of damnation. It also appears by the verse immediately
   following, ver. 23. "But every man in his own order; Christ the
   first-fruits, and afterwards they that are Christ's, at his coming."
   The same is plain by what is said in verse 29-32. and by all that is
   said from the 35th verse to the end of the chapter, for twenty-three
   verses together: it there expressly appears, that the apostle is
   speaking only of a rising to glory, with a glorious body, as the little
   grain that is sown, being quickened, rises a beautiful flourishing
   plant. He there speaks of the different degrees of glory among them
   that shall rise, and compares it to the different degrees of glory
   among the celestial luminaries. The resurrection he treats of, is
   expressly, being raised in incorruption, in glory, in power, with a
   spiritual body, having the image of the second man, the spiritual and
   heavenly Adam: a resurrection wherein this corruptible shall put on
   incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality, and death be
   swallowed up in victory, and the saints gloriously triumph over that
   last enemy. Dr. T. himself says what is in effect owning that the
   resurrection here spoken of is only of the righteous; for it is
   expressly a resurrection NOT ENGLISH, and NOT ENGLISH, ( ver 53, and
   42. ) But Dr. T. says, These are never attributed to the wicked in
   Scripture.§ So that when the apostle says here, "As in Adam all die, so
   in Christ shall all be made alive;" [325] it is as much as if he had
   said, As in Adam we all die, and our bodies are sown in corruption, in
   dishonour, and in weakness: so in Christ we all (we Christians, whom I
   have been all along speaking of) shall be raised in power, glory, and
   incorruption, spiritual and heavenly, conformed to the second Adam. For
   as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image
   of the heavenly, ver. 49. Which clearly explains and determines his
   meaning in ver. 21, 22.

   2. There is no evidence, that the benefit by the second Adam, spoken of
   in Rom. v. is the very same (containing neither more nor less) as the
   resurrection spoken of in 1 Cor. xv. It is no evidence of it, that the
   benefit is opposed to the death that comes by the first Adam, in like
   manner in both places. The resurrection to eternal life, though it be
   not the whole of that salvation and happiness which comes by the second
   Adam, yet is it that wherein this salvation is principally obtained.
   The time of the saints' glorious resurrection is often spoken of as the
   proper time of their salvation, The day of their redemption, the time
   of their adoption, glory, and recompence. [326] All that happiness
   which is given before, is only a prelibation and earnest of their great
   reward. Well therefore may that consummate salvation bestowed on them,
   be set in opposition to the death and ruin which comes by the first
   Adam, in like manner as the whole of their salvation is opposed to the
   same in Rom. v. Dr. T. himself observes,Â¶ That the revival and
   resurrection of the body, is frequently put for our advancement to
   eternal life. It being the highest part, it is often put for the whole.

   This notion, as if the justification, righteousness, and life spoken of
   in Rom. v. implied the resurrection of damnation, is not only without
   ground from Scripture, but contrary to reason. For those are there
   spoken of as great benefits, by the grace and free gift of God: but
   this is the contrary, in the highest degree possible; the most
   consummate calamity. To obviate this, our author supposes the
   resurrection of all to be a great benefit in itself, though turned into
   a calamity by the sin and folly of obstinate sinners, who abuse God's
   goodness. But the far greater part of mankind, since Adam, have never
   had opportunity to abuse this goodness, it having never been made known
   to them. Men cannot abuse a kindness, which they never had either in
   possession, promise, offer, or some intimation: but a resurrection is
   made known only by divine revelation which few comparatively have
   enjoyed. So that as to such wicked men as die in lands of darkness, if
   their resurrection comes at all by Christ, it comes from him, and to
   them, only is a curse, and not a blessing; for it never comes to them
   at all by any conveyance, grant, promise, or offer, or any thing by
   which they can claim it, or know any thing of it, till it comes as an
   infinite calamity, past all remedy.

   VIII. In a peculiar manner is there an unreasonable violence used in
   our author's explanation of the words sinners and sinned, in the
   paragraph before us. He says, "These words, By one man's disobedience
   many were made sinners, mean neither more nor less, than that by one
   man's disobedience, the many were made subject to death, by the
   judicial act of God." [327] And he says in the same place, "By death,
   most certainly, is meant no other than the death and mortality common
   to all mankind." And those words, ver. 12. "For that all have sinned,"
   he thus explains, "All men became sinners, as all mankind are brought
   into a state of suffering. [328] Here I observe,

   1. The main thing, by which he justifies such interpretations, is, that
   sin, in various instances, is used for suffering, in the Old Testament.
   [329] To which I reply; though it be true, that the original word (NOT
   ENGLISH) signifies both sin, and a sin-offering--and though this, and
   some other Hebrew words which signify sin, iniquity, and wickedness,
   are sometimes put for the effect or punishment of iniquity, by a
   metonymy of the cause for the effect--yet it does not appear, that
   these words are ever used for suffering, where that suffering is not a
   punishment, or a fruit of God's anger for sin. And therefore none of
   the instances he mentions, come up to his purpose. When Lot is
   commanded to leave Sodom, that he might not be consumed in the iniquity
   of the city, meaning in that fire which was the effect and punishment
   of the iniquity of the city; this is quite another thing, than if that
   fire came on the city in general, as no punishment at all, nor as any
   fruit of a charge of iniquity, but as a token of God's favour to the
   inhabitants. For according to Dr. T. the death of mankind is introduced
   only as a benefit, from a covenant of grace. And especially is this
   quite another thing, than if, in the expression used, the iniquity had
   been ascribed to Lot; and God, instead of saying, Lest thou be consumed
   in the iniquity of the city, had said, Lest thou be consumed in thine
   iniquity, or, Lest thou sin, or be made a sinner. Whereas the
   expression is such, as expressly removes the iniquity spoken of from
   Lot, and fixes it on the city. The place cited by our author in Jer.
   li. is exactly parallel. And as to what Abimelech says to Abraham,
   "What have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me, and on my
   kingdom, a great sin?" [330] It is manifest, Abimelech was afraid that
   God was angry for what he had done to Sarah; or would have been angry
   with him, if he had done what he was about to do, as imputing sin to
   him for it. Which is a quite different thing from calling some
   calamity, sin, under no notion of its being any punishment of sin, nor
   in the least degree from God's displeasure. And so with regard to every
   place our author cites in the margin, it is plain, that what is meant
   in each of them, is the punishment of sin, and not some suffering which
   is no punishment at all. And as to the instances he mentions in his
   Supplement, (p. 8.) the two that look most favourable to his design are
   those in Gen. xxxi. 39. and 2 Kings vii. 9. With respect to the former,
   where Jacob says, that which was torn of beasts, (NOT ENGLISH) I bare
   the loss of it. Dr. T. is pleased to translate it, I was the sinner;
   but properly rendered, it is, I expiated it; the verb in Pihel properly
   signifying to expiate; and the plain meaning is, I bore the blame of
   it, and was obliged to pay for it, as being supposed to be lost through
   my fault or neglect: which is a quite different thing from suffering
   without any supposition of fault. And as to the latter place, where the
   lepers say, this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace:
   if we tarry till morning some mischief will befall us: in the Hebrew it
   is (NOT ENGLISH ) iniquity will find us, that is, some punishment of
   our fault will come upon us. Elsewhere such phrases are used, as your
   iniquity will find you out, and the like. But certainly this is a
   different thing from suffering without fault, or supposition of fault.
   And it does not appear, that the verb in Hiphil, (NOT ENGLISH) rendered
   to condemn, is ever put for condemn, in any other sense than for sin,
   or guilt, or supposed guilt belonging to the subject condemned. This
   word is used in the participle of Hiphil, to signify condemning, in
   Prov. xvii. 15. "He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth
   the just, even both are an abomination to the Lord." This Dr. T.
   observes, as if it were to his purpose, when he is endeavouring to
   show, that in this place (Rom. v.) the apostle speaks of God himself as
   condemning the just, or perfectly innocent, in a parallel signification
   of terms. Nor is any instance produced, wherein the verb sin, which is
   used by the apostle when he says, all have sinned, is any where used in
   our author's sense, for being brought into a state of suffering, and
   that not as a punishment for sin, or as any thing arising from God's
   displeasure; much less for being the subject of what comes only as the
   fruit of divine love, and as a benefit of the highest nature. [331] Nor
   can any thing like this sense of the verb be found in the whole Bible.

   2. If there had been any thing like such an use of the words sin and
   sinner, as our author supposes, in the Old Testament, it is evident
   that such an use of them is quite alien from the language of the New
   Testament. Where can an instance be produced of any thing like it, in
   any one place, besides what is pretended in this? and particularly in
   any of this apostle's writings? We have enough of his writings, by
   which to learn his way of speaking about sin, condemnation, punishment,
   death, and suffering. He wrote much more of the New Testament than any
   other person. He very often has occasion to speak of condemnation: but
   where does he express it by such a phrase as being made sinners?
   Especially how far is he elsewhere from using such a phrase, to signify
   being condemned without guilt, or any imputation or supposition of
   guilt? Vastly more still is it remote from his language, so to use the
   verb sin, and to say, man sinneth, or has sinned, though hereby meaning
   nothing more nor less, than that he, by a judicial act, is condemned,
   according to a dispensation of grace, to receive a great favour! He
   abundantly uses the words sin and sinner; his writings are full of such
   terms; but where else does he use them in such a sense? He has much
   occasion in his epistles to speak of death, temporal and eternal; to
   speak of suffering of all kinds, in this world, and the world to come:
   but where does he call these things sin? or denominate innocent men
   sinners, meaning, that they are brought into a state of suffering? If
   the apostle, because he was a Jew, was so addicted to the Hebrew idiom,
   as thus in one paragraph to repeat this particular Hebraism, which, at
   most, is comparatively rare even in the Old Testament; is it not
   strange, that never any thing like it should appear any where else in
   his writings? and especially, that he should never fall into such a way
   of speaking in his epistle to the Hebrews, written to Jews only, who
   were most used to the Hebrew idiom? And why does Christ never use such
   language in any of his speeches, though he was born and brought up
   among the Jews, and delivered almost all his speeches to Jews only? And
   why do none of the other New-Testament writers ever use it, who were
   all born and educated Jews, (excepting perhaps Luke,) and some of them
   wrote especially for the benefit of the Jews?

   It is worthy to be observed, what liberty is taken and boldness is used
   with this apostle. Such words as NOT ENGLISH. NOT ENGLISH , are
   abundantly used by him elsewhere in this and other epistles, when
   speaking, as here, of Christ's redemption and atonement, the general
   sinfulness of mankind, the condemnation of sinners, the justification
   by Christ, death as the consequence of sin, and restoration to life by
   Christ; yet no where are any of these words used, but in a sense very
   remote from what is supposed by Dr. T. however, in this place, it
   seems, these terms must have a distinguished singular sense annexed to
   them! A new language must be coined for the apostle, to which he is
   evidently quite unused, for the sake of evading this clear, precise,
   and abundant testimony of his, to the doctrine of original sin.

   3. To put such a sense on the word sin, in this place, is not only to
   make the apostle greatly disagree with himself in the language he uses
   every where else, but also in this very passage. He often here uses the
   word sin, and other words plainly of the same import, such as
   transgression, disobedience, offence. Nothing can be more evident, than
   that these are used as several names of the same thing; for they are
   used interchangeably, and put one for another. And these words are used
   no less than seventeen times in this one paragraph. Perhaps we shall
   find no place in the whole Bible, in which the word sin, and other
   words plainly synonymous, are used so often in so little compass: and
   in all these instances, in the proper sense, as signifying moral evil,
   and even so understood by Dr. T. himself, (as appears by his own
   exposition,) but only in these two places, ( ver. 12, 19. ) where, in
   the midst of all, to evade a clear evidence of the doctrine of original
   sin, another meaning must be found out, and it must be supposed that
   the apostle uses the word in a sense entirely different, signifying
   something that neither implies nor supposes any moral evil at all in
   the subject.

   Here it is very remarkable, how the gentleman who so greatly insisted
   upon it, that the word death must needs be understood in the same sense
   throughout this paragraph; yea, that it is evidently, clearly, and
   infallibly so, inasmuch as the apostle is still discoursing on the same
   subject; yet can, without the least difficulty, suppose the word sin,
   to be used so differently in the very same passage, wherein the apostle
   is discoursing on the same thing. Let us take that one instance in ver.
   12. "Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
   sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned." Here,
   by sin, implied in the word sinned, in the end of the sentence, our
   author understands something perfectly and altogether diverse from what
   is meant by the word sin, twice in the former part of the very same
   sentence, of which this latter part is the explication. And a sense
   entirely different from the use of the word twice in the next sentence,
   wherein the apostle is still most plainly discoursing on the same
   subject, as is not denied. And so our author himself understands ver.
   14. Afterwards ( ver. 19.) the apostle uses the word sinners, which our
   author supposes to be in a somewhat different sense still. So that here
   is the utmost violence of the kind that can be conceived of, to make
   out a scheme against the plainest evidence, in changing the meaning of
   a word backward and forward in one paragraph, all about one thing, and
   in different parts of the same sentence, occurring in quick
   repetitions, with a variety of other synonymous words to fix its
   signification. To which we may add, the continued use of the word in
   all the preceding and subsequent parts of this epistle; in none of
   which places is it pretended, but that the word is used in the proper
   sense, by our author in his paraphrase and notes on the whole epistle.
   [332]

   But indeed we need go no further than ver. 12. . What the apostle means
   by sin, in the latter part of the verse, is evident, by comparing it
   with the former part; the last clause being exegetical of the first.
   "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin;
   and so death passed upon all men, for that (or unto which) all have
   sinned." Here sin and death are so spoken of in the former and in the
   latter part that the same things are clearly meant by the terms in both
   parts. Besides, to interpret sinning, here, by falling under the
   suffering of death, is yet the more violent and unreasonable, because
   the apostle in this very place once and again distinguishes between sin
   and death; plainly speaking of one as the effect, and the other the
   cause. So in the 21st verse, "that as sin hath reigned unto death;" and
   in the 12th verse, "sin entered into the world, and death by sin.'' And
   this plain distinction holds through all the discourse, as between
   death and the offence, ver. 15. and ver. 17. . and between the offence
   and condemnation, ver. 18. .

   4. Though we should omit the consideration of the manner in which the
   apostle uses the words, sin, sinned, &c. in other places, and in other
   parts of this discourse, yet Dr. T.s interpretation of them would be
   very absurd.

   The case stands thus: according to his exposition, we are said to have
   sinned by an active verb, as though we had actively sinned; yet this is
   not spoken truly and properly, but it is put figuratively for our
   becoming sinners passively, our being made or constituted sinners. Yet
   again, not that we do truly become sinners passively, or are really
   made sinners, by any thing that God does; this also is only a
   figurative or tropical representation; and the meaning is only, we are
   condemned, and treated as if we were sinners. Not indeed that we are
   properly condemned, for God never truly condemns the innocent; but this
   also is only a figurative representation of the thing. It is but as it
   were condemning; because it is appointing to death, a terrible evil, as
   if it were a punishment. But then, in reality, here is no appointment
   to a terrible evil, or any evil at all; but truly to a benefit, a great
   benefit; and so in representing death as a punishment, another figure
   is used, and an exceeding bold one; for, as we are appointed to it, it
   is so far from being an evil or punishment, that it is really a favour,
   and that of the highest nature, appointed by mere grace and love,
   though it seems to be a calamity.

   Thus we have tropes and figures multiplied, one upon another; and all
   in that one word, sinned; according to the manner, as it is supposed,
   in which the apostle uses it. We have a figurative representation, not
   of a reality, but of a figurative representation. Neither is this a
   representation of a reality, but of another thing that still is but a
   figurative representation of something else: yea, even this something
   else is still but a figure, and one that is very harsh and far-fetched.
   So that here we have a figure to represent a figure, even a figure of a
   figure, representing some very remote figure, which most obscurely
   represents the thing intended; if the most terrible evil can indeed be
   said at all to represent the contrary good of the highest kind. And
   now, what cannot be made of any place of Scripture, in such a way as
   this? And is there any hope of ever deciding any controversy by the
   Scripture, in the way of using such a licence in order to force it to a
   compliance with our own schemes? If the apostle indeed uses language
   after so strange a manner in this place, it is perhaps such an
   instance, as not only there is not the like in all the Bible besides,
   but perhaps in no writing whatsoever. And this, not in any parabolical,
   visionary, or prophetic description, in which difficult and obscure
   representations are wont to be made; nor in a dramatic or poetical
   representation, in which a great licence is often taken, and bold
   figures are commonly to be expected. But it is in a familiar letter,
   wherein the apostle is delivering gospel-instruction, as a minister of
   the New Testament: and wherein, as he professes, he delivers divine
   truth without the vail of ancient figures and similitudes, and uses
   great plainness of speech. And in a discourse that is wholly didactic,
   narrative, and argumentative; evidently setting himself to explain the
   doctrine he is upon, in the reason and nature of it, with a great
   variety of expressions, turning it as it were on every side, to make
   his meaning plain, and to fix in his readers the exact notion of what
   he intends. Dr. T. himself observes, [333] "This apostle takes great
   care to guard and explain every part of his subject: and I may venture
   to say, he has left no part of it unexplained or unguarded. Never was
   an author more exact and cautious in this than he. Sometimes he writes
   notes on a sentence liable to exception, and wanting explanation." Now
   I think, this care and exactness of the apostle no where appears more
   than in the place we are upon. Nay, I scarcely know another instance
   equal to this, of the apostle's care to be well understood, by being
   very particular, explicit, and precise, setting the matter forth in
   every light, going over and over again with his doctrine, clearly to
   exhibit, and fully to settle and determine the thing at which he aims.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [304] Rom. v. 14.

   [305] There are many places parallel with these, as John xi. 25,26. " I
   am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he
   were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth, and believeth in
   me, shall never die." Here both the words, life and death, are used
   with this variation: "I am the resurrection and the life," meaning
   spiritual and eternal life, "He that believeth in me, though he were
   dead," having respect to temporal death, "yet shall he live," with
   respect to spiritual life, and the restoration of the life of the body.
   "And whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die," meaning a
   spiritual and eternal death. So in John vi. 49,50. "Your fathers did
   eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead," having respect chiefly to
   temporal death. "This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that
   a man may eat thereof, and not die," i.e. by the loss of spiritual
   life, and by eternal death. (See also ver. 58.) And in the next verse,
   "If any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever." have eternal
   life. So ver. 54. See another like instance, John v. 24-29.

   [306] Page 56.

   [307] Key,§ 374. where it is to be observed, that he himself puts the
   word ANY in capital letters. The same thing in substance is often
   asserted elsewhere. And this indeed is his main point in what he calls
   the true gospel-scheme.

   [308] Key, chap. viii. title, p. 44.

   [309] Key, § 145.

   [310] Page 40, 41, 43, 57. and often elsewhere.

   [311] See also Job iv. 7, 8, 9. Job xv. 17-35. Job xviii. 5-21. Job
   xix. 29. and Job xx. 4-8, 23-29. Job xxi 16-18, 20-26. Job xxii. 13-20
   and Job xxvii. 11-23 Job xxxi. 3,23 Job xxxiii. 18,22,23,24,28,30. Job
   xxxiv. 11, 21-26. Job xxxvii. 12, 18, 19, 20. and Job xxxviii. 13.

   [312] Page 117. S.

   [313] Page 77, 78.

   [314] Page 68.

   [315] | Page 120. S. He says to the like purpose in his note on Rom. v.
   17.

   [316] This is plain by what he says, p. 38, 40, 53, 117. S.

   [317] * Page 39, 70, 148, 27. S. See also contents of this paragraph in
   Rom v. in his notes on the epistle, and his notes on Rom. v. 15, 16,
   17.

   [318] Page 119. S.

   [319] Page 69.

   [320] Page 148.

   [321] See chap. ii. 1, 2, 3. six times in these verses; also ver. 12
   and 27. and chap. iii. 7. chap. viii. 1, and 3. chap. xiv. 3. 4. and
   ver. 10, 13, 22, and 23.

   [322] So page 47, 49, 60,61, 62, and other places.

   [323] Notes on the epistle, page 284.

   [324] As may be observed in Matt. xxii. 30. Luke xx. 35, 36. John vi.
   39, 40, 54. Philip. iii. 11. and other places.

   [325] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

   [326] As in Luke xiv. 14. and xxi. 28. Rom. viii. 23. Eph. iv. 30.
   Colos. iii. 4. 2 Thess. i.7. 2 Tim. iv. 8. 1 Pet. i. 13. and v. 4. 1
   John iii. 2. and other places.

   [327] Page 30.

   [328] Page 54, and elsewhere.

   [329] Page 34.

   [330] Gen. xx. 9.

   [331] Page 27. S.

   [332] Agreeably to his manner, our author, in explaining the 7th chap.
   of Romans, understands the pronoun I, or me, used by the apostle in
   that one continued discourse, in no less than six different senses. He
   takes it in the 1st ver. to signify the apostle Paul himself. In the 8,
   9, 10, and 11th verses, for the people of the Jews, through all ages,
   both before and after Moses, especially the carnal ungodly part of
   them. In the 13th ver. for an objecting Jew, entering into a dialogue
   with the apostle. In the 15, 16, 17, 20, and latter part of the 25th
   ver. it is understood in two different senses, for two I's in the same
   person; one, a man's reason; and the other, his passions and carnal
   appetites. And in the 7th and former part of the last verse, for us
   Christians in general; or, for all that enjoy the word of God, the law
   and the gospel: and these different senses, the most of them strangely
   inter mixed and interchanged backwards and forwards.

   [333] Pref. to Paraph. on Rom. p. 146. 48.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Some observations on the connexions, scope, and sense of this
   remarkable paragraph, Rom. v. 12, &c. With some reflections on the
   evidence which we here have of the doctrine of original sin.

   The connexion of this remarkable paragraph with the foregoing discourse
   in this epistle, is not obscure and difficult, nor to be sought for at
   a distance. It may be plainly seen, only by a general glance on what
   goes before, from the beginning of the epistle: and indeed what is said
   immediately before in the same chapter, leads directly to it. The
   apostle in the preceding part of this epistle had largely treated of
   the sinfulness and misery of all mankind, Jews as well as Gentiles. He
   had particularly spoken of the depravity and ruin of mankind in their
   natural state, in the foregoing part of this chapter; representing them
   as being sinners, ungodly, enemies, exposed to divine wrath, and
   without strength. This naturally leads him to observe, how this so
   great and deplorable an event came to pass; how this universal sin and
   ruin came into the world. And with regard to the Jews in particular,
   though they might allow the doctrine of original sin in profession,
   they were strongly prejudiced against what was implied in it, or
   evidently followed from it, with regard to themselves. In this respect
   they were prejudiced against the doctrine of universal sinfulness, and
   exposedness to wrath by nature, looking on themselves as by nature
   holy, and favourites of God, because they were the children of Abraham;
   and with them the apostle had laboured most in the foregoing part of
   the epistle, to convince them of their being by nature as sinful, and
   as much the children of wrath, as the Gentiles: it was therefore
   exceeding proper, and what the apostle's design most naturally led him
   to, that they should take off their eyes from their father Abraham,
   their father in distinction from other nations, and direct them to
   their father Adam, who was the common father of mankind, equally of
   Jews and Gentiles. And when he had entered on this doctrine of the
   derivation of sin and death, to all mankind from Adam, no wonder if he
   thought it needful to be somewhat particular in it, seeing he wrote to
   Jews and Gentiles; the former of which had been brought up under the
   prejudices of a proud opinion of themselves, as a holy people by
   nature, and the latter had been educated in total ignorance.

   Again, the apostle had, from the beginning of the epistle, been
   endeavouring to evince the absolute dependence of all mankind on the
   free grace of god for salvation, and the greatness of this grace; and
   particularly in the former part of this chapter. The greatness of this
   grace he shows especially by two things. (1.) The universal corruption
   and misery of mankind; as in all the foregoing chapters, and in several
   preceding verses of this chapter, ( ver. 6-10. ) (2.) The greatness of
   the benefits which believers receive, and the greatness of the glory
   for which they hope. So especially in ver. 1-5, and 11th of this
   chapter. And here, ver. 12, to the end, he still pursues the same
   design of magnifying the grace of God, in the favour, life, and
   happiness which believers in Christ receive; speaking here of the grace
   of God, the gift by grace, the abounding of grace, and the reign of
   grace. And he still sets forth the freedom and riches of grace by the
   same two arguments, viz. The universal sinfulness and ruin of mankind,
   all having sinned, all being naturally exposed to death, judgment, and
   condemnation; and the exceeding greatness of the benefit received,
   being far greater than the misery which comes by the first Adam, and
   abounding beyond it. And it is by no means consistent with the
   apostle's scope, to suppose, that the benefit which we have by Christ,
   as the antitype of Adam, here mainly insisted on, is without any grace
   at all, being only a restoration to life of such as never deserved
   death.

   Another thing observable in the apostle's grand scope from the
   beginning of the epistle, is, that he endeavours to show the greatness
   and absoluteness of dependence on the redemption and righteousness of
   christ, for justification and life, that he might magnify and exalt the
   Redeemer; in which design his whole heart was swallowed up, and may be
   looked upon as the main design of the whole epistle. And this is what
   he had been upon in the preceding part of this chapter, inferring it
   from the same argument, even the utter sinfulness and ruin of all men.
   And he is evidently still on the same thing from the 12th verse to the
   end; speaking of the same justification and righteousness, which he had
   dwelt on before, and not another totally diverse. No wonder, when the
   apostle is treating so fully and largely of our restoration,
   righteousness, and life by Christ, that he is led by it to consider our
   fall, sin, death, and ruin by Adam; and to observe wherein these two
   opposite heads of mankind agree, and wherein they differ, in the manner
   of conveyance of opposite influences and communications from each.

   Thus, if the place be understood, as it used to be understood by
   orthodox divines, the whole stands in a natural, easy, and clear
   connexion with the preceding part of the chapter, and all the former
   part of the epistle; and in a plain agreement with the express design
   of all that the apostle had been saying; and also in connexion with the
   words last before spoken, as introduced by the two immediately
   preceding verses, where he is speaking of our justification,
   reconciliation, and salvation by Christ; which leads the apostle
   directly to observe, how, on the contrary, we have sin and death by
   Adam. Taking this discourse of the apostle in its true and plain sense,
   there is no need of great extent of learning, or depth of criticism, to
   find out the connexion. But if it be understood in Dr. T.s sense, the
   plain scope and connexion are wholly lost, and there was truly need of
   skill in criticism, and the art of discerning, beyond or at least
   different from that of former divines, and a faculty of seeing what
   other men's sight could not reach, in order to find out the connexion.

   What has been already observed, may suffice to show the apostle's
   general scope in this place. But yet there seem to be some other things
   to which he alludes in several expressions. As particularly the Jews
   had a very superstitious and extravagant notion of their law, delivered
   by Moses; as if it were the prime, grand, and indeed only rule of God's
   proceeding with mankind as their judge, both in their justification and
   condemnation, or from whence all, both sin and righteousness, was
   imputed; and had no consideration of the law of nature, written in the
   hearts of the Gentiles, and of all mankind. Herein they ascribed
   infinitely too much to their particular law, beyond the true design of
   it. They made their boast of the law; as if their being distinguished
   from all other nations by that great privilege, the giving of the law,
   sufficiently made them a holy people, and God's children. This notion
   of theirs the apostle evidently refers to, chap. ii. 13, 17-19. and
   indeed through that whole chapter. They looked on the law of Moses as
   intended to be the only rule and means of justification; and as such,
   trusted in the works of the law, especially circumcision; which appears
   by the third chapter. But as for the Gentiles, they looked on them as
   by nature sinners, and children of wrath; because born of
   un-circumcised parents, and aliens from their law, and who themselves
   did not know, profess, and submit to the law of Moses, become
   proselytes, and receive circumcision. What they esteemed the sum of
   their wickedness, and condemnation, was, that they did not turn Jews,
   and act as Jews. [334] To this notion the apostle has a plain respect,
   and endeavours to convince them of its falseness, in chap. ii. 12-16.
   And he has a manifest regard again to the same thing here. ( Chap. v.
   12-14. ) Which may lead us the more clearly to see the true sense of
   those verses; about the sense of which is the main controversy, and the
   meaning of which being determined, it will settle the meaning of every
   other controverted expression through the whole discourse.

   Dr. T. misrepresents the apostle's argument in these verses; which, as
   has been demonstrated, is in his sense altogether vain and impertinent.
   He supposes, the thing which the apostle mainly intends to prove, is,
   that death or mortality does not come on mankind by personal sin; and
   that he would prove it by this medium, that death reigned when there
   was no law in being which threatened personal sin with death. It is
   acknowledged, that this is implied, even that death came into the world
   by Adam's sin: yet this is not the main thing the apostle designs to
   prove. But his main point evidently is, that sin and guilt, and just
   exposedness to death and ruin, came into the world by Adam's sin; as
   righteousness, justification, and a title to eternal life come by
   Christ. Which point he confirms by this consideration, that from the
   very time when Adam sinned, sin, guilt, and desert of ruin, became
   universal in the world, long before the law given by Moses to the
   Jewish nation had any being.

   The apostle's remark, that sin entered into the world by one man, who
   was the father of the whole human race, was an observation which
   afforded proper instruction for the Jews, who looked on themselves as
   an holy people, because they had the law of Moses, and were the
   children of Abraham, an holy father; while they looked on other nations
   as by nature unholy and sinners, because they were not Abraham's
   children. He leads them up to a higher ancestor than this patriarch,
   even to Adam, who being equally the father of Jews and Gentiles, both
   alike come from a sinful father; from whom guilt and pollution were
   derived alike to all mankind. And this the apostle proves by an
   argument, which of all that could possibly be invented, tended the most
   briefly and directly to convince the Jews; even by this reflection,
   that death had come equally on all mankind from Adam's time, and that
   the posterity of Abraham were equally subject to it with the rest of
   the world. This was apparent in fact, a thing they all knew. And the
   Jews had always been taught, that death (which began in the destruction
   of the body, and of this present life) was the proper punishment of
   sin. This they were taught in Moses's history of Adam, and God's first
   threatening of punishment for sin, and by the constant doctrine of the
   law and the prophets; as already observed.

   And the apostle's observation--that sin was in the world long before
   the law was given, and was as universal in the world from the times of
   Adam, as it had been among the heathen since the law of Moses--showed
   plainly, that the Jews were quite mistaken in their notion of their
   particular law; and that the law which is the original and universal
   rule of righteousness and judgment for all mankind, was another law, of
   far more ancient date, even the law of nature. This began as early as
   the human nature began, and was established with the first father of
   mankind, and in him with the whole race. The positive precept of
   abstaining from the forbidden fruit, was given for the trial of his
   compliance with this law of nature; of which the main rule is supreme
   regard to God and his will. And the apostle proves that it must be
   thus, because if the law of Moses had been the highest rule of
   judgment, and if there had not been a superior, prior, divine rule
   established, mankind in general would not have been judged and
   condemned as sinners, before that was given, (for "sin is not imputed,
   when there is no law,") as it is apparent in fact they were, because
   death reigned before that time, even from the time of Adam.

   It may be observed, that the apostle, both in this epistle, and in that
   to the Galatians, endeavours to convince the Jews of these two things,
   in opposition to the notions and prejudices they had entertained
   concerning their law. (1.) That it never was intended to be the
   covenant, or method by which they should actually be justified. (2.)
   That it was not the highest and universal rule or law, by which mankind
   in general, and particularly the heathen world, were condemned. And he
   proves both by similar arguments.--He proves, that the law of Moses was
   not the covenant, by which any of mankind were to obtain justification,
   because that covenant was of older date, being expressly established in
   the time of Abraham, and Abraham himself was justified by it. This
   argument the apostle particularly handles in the third chapter of
   Galatians, particularly in ver. 17-19. and especially in Rom. iv.
   13-15. He proves also, that the law of Moses was not the prime rule of
   judgment, by which mankind in general, and particularly the heathen
   world, were condemned. And this he proves also the same way, viz. by
   showing this to be of older date than that law, and that it was
   established with Adam. Now, these things tended to lead the Jews to
   right notions of their law, not as the intended method of
   justification, nor as the original and universal rule of condemnation,
   but something superadded to both; superadded to the latter, to
   illustrate and confirm it, that the offence might abound; and
   superadded to the former, to be as a schoolmaster, to prepare men for
   its benefits., and to magnify divine grace in it, that this might much
   more abound.

   The chief occasion of obscurity and difficulty, attending the scope and
   connexion of the various clauses of this discourse, particularly in the
   13th and 14th verses, is that there are two things (although closely
   connected) which the apostle has in view at once. He would illustrate
   the grand point he had been upon from the beginning, even justification
   through Christ's righteousness alone, by showing how we are originally
   in a sinful miserable state, how we derive this sin and misery from
   Adam, and how we are delivered and justified by Christ as a second
   Adam. At the same time he would confute those foolish and corrupt
   notions of the Jews, about their nation, and their law, which were very
   inconsistent with these doctrines. And he here endeavours to establish,
   at once, these two things in opposition to those Jewish notions.

   (1.) That it is our natural relation to Adam, and not to Abraham, which
   determines our native moral state; and that, therefore, being natural
   children of Abraham, will not make us by nature holy in the sight of
   God, since we are the natural seed of sinful Adam. Nor does the
   Gentiles being not descended from Abraham, denominate them sinners, any
   more than the Jews, seeing both alike are descended from Adam.

   (2.) That the law of Moses is not the prime and general law and rule of
   judgment for mankind, to condemn them, and denominate them sinners; but
   that the state they are in with regard to a higher, more ancient, and
   universal law, determines them in general to be sinners in the sight of
   God, and liable to be condemned as such. Which observation is, in many
   respects, to the apostle's purpose; particularly in this respect, that
   if the Jews were convinced, that the law, which was the prime rule of
   condemnation, was given to all, was common to all mankind, and that all
   fell under condemnation through the violation of that law by the common
   father of all, both Jews and Gentiles, then they would be led more
   easily and naturally to believe, that the method of justification,
   which God had established, also extended equally to all mankind: and
   that the Messiah, by whom we have this justification, is appointed, as
   Adam was, for a common head to all, both Jews and Gentiles.--The
   apostle aiming to confute the Jewish notion, is the principal occasion
   of those words in the 13th verse, "for until the law, sin was in the
   world; but sin is not imputed, when there is no law."

   As to the import of that expression, "even over them that had not
   sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression," not only is the
   thing signified, in Dr. T.s sense of it, not true; or if it had been
   true, would have been impertinent, as has been shown: but his
   interpretation is, otherwise, very much strained and unnatural.
   According to him, "by sinning after the similitude of Adam's
   transgression," is not meant any similitude of the act of sinning, nor
   of the command sinned against, nor properly any circumstance of the
   sin; but only the similitude of a circumstance of the command, viz. the
   threatening with which it is attended. A far-fetched thing, truly, to
   be called a similitude of sinning! Besides, this expression in such a
   meaning, is only a needless, impertinent, and awkward repetition of the
   same thing, which it is supposed the apostle had observed in the
   foregoing verse, even after he had proceeded another step in the series
   of his discourse. As thus, in the foregoing verse the apostle had
   plainly laid down his argument, (as our author understands it,) by
   which he would prove, that death did not come by personal sin, viz.
   because death reigned before any law, threatening death for personal
   sin, was in being: so that the sin then committed was against no law,
   threatening death for personal sin. Having laid this down, the apostle
   leaves this part of his argument, and proceeds another step,
   nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses: and then returns, in a
   strange unnatural manner, and repeats that argument or assertion again,
   but only more obscurely than before, in these words, even over them
   that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression; i. e.
   over them that had not sinned against a law threatening death for
   personal sin. Which is just the same thing as if the apostle had said,
   "they that sinned before the law, did not sin against a law threatening
   death for personal sin; for there was no such law for any to sin
   against at that time: nevertheless death reigned at that time, even
   over such as did not sin against a law threatening death for personal
   sin." Which latter clause adds nothing to the premises, and tends
   nothing to illustrate what was said before, but rather to obscure and
   darken it. The particle (NOT ENGLISH) even, when prefixed in this
   manner, is used to signify something additional, some advance in the
   sense or argument; implying, that the words following express something
   more, or express the same thing more fully, plainly, or forcibly. But
   to unite two clauses by such a particle, in such a manner, when there
   is nothing besides a flat repetition, with no superadded sense or
   force, but rather a greater uncertainty and obscurity, would be very
   unusual, and indeed very absurd.

   I can see no reason why we should be dissatisfied with that explanation
   of this clause, which has more commonly been given, viz. That by them
   who have not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, are
   meant infants; who, though they have indeed sinned in Adam, yet never
   sinned as Adam did, by actually transgressing in their own persons;
   unless it be, that this interpretation is too old, and too common. It
   was well understood by those to whom the apostle wrote, that vast
   numbers had died in infancy, within that period of which he speaks,
   particularly in the time of the deluge. And it would be strange, that
   the apostle should not have the case of such infants in his mind; even
   supposing his scope were what our author supposes, and he had only
   intended to prove that death did not come on mankind for their personal
   sin. How directly would it have served the purpose of proving this, to
   have mentioned so great a part of mankind who are subject to death, and
   who, all know, never committed any sin in their own persons! How much
   more plain and easy the proof of the point by that, than to go round
   about, as Dr. T. supposes, and bring in a thing so dark and uncertain
   as this, that God never would bring death on all mankind for personal
   sin (though they had personal sin) without an express revealed
   constitution; and then to observe, that there was no revealed
   constitution of this nature from Adam to Moses--which also seems to be
   an assertion without any plain evidence--and then to infer, that it
   must needs be so, that it could come only on occasion of Adam's sin,
   though not for his sin, or as any punishment of it; which inference
   also is very dark and unintelligible.

   If the apostle in this place meant those who never sinned by their
   personal act, it is not strange that he should express this by their
   not sinning after the similitude of Adam's transgression. We read of
   two ways of men being like Adam, or in which a similitude to him is
   ascribed to men: one is, being begotten or born in his image or
   likeness, Gen. v. 3. Another is, transgressing God's covenant or law,
   like him, Hos. vi. 7. They, like Adam, (so, in the Heb. and Vulg. Lat.)
   have transgressed the covenant. Infants have the former similitude, but
   not the latter. And it was very natural, when the apostle would infer
   that infants become sinners by that one act and offence of Adam, to
   observe, that they had not renewed the act of sin themselves, by any
   second instance of a like sort. And such might be the state of language
   among Jews and Christians at that day, that the apostle might have no
   phrase more aptly to express this meaning. The manner in which the
   epithets, personal and actual, are used and applied now in this case,
   is probably of later date, and more modern use.

   And the apostle having the case of infants in view, in this expression,
   makes it more to his purpose to mention death reigning before the law
   of Moses was given. For the Jews looked on all nations besides
   themselves, as sinners, by virtue of their law; being made so
   especially by the law of circumcision, given first to Abraham, and
   completed by Moses, making the want of circumcision a legal pollution,
   utterly disqualifying for the privileges of the sanctuary. This law,
   the Jews supposed, made the very infants of the Gentiles to be sinners,
   polluted and hateful to God; they being uncircumcised, and born of
   uncircumcised parents. But the apostle proves, against these notions of
   the Jews, that the nations of the world do not become sinners by
   nature, and sinners from infancy, by virtue of their law, in this
   manner, but by Adam's sin: inasmuch as infants were treated as sinners
   long before the law of circumcision was given, as well as before they
   had committed actual sin.

   What has been said, may, as I humbly conceive, lead us to that which is
   the true scope and sense of the apostle in these three verses; which I
   will endeavour more briefly to represent in the following paraphrase.

   "The things which I have largely insisted on, viz. the evil that is in
   the world, the general wickedness, guilt, and ruin of mankind, and the
   opposite good, even justification and life, as only by Christ, lead me
   to observe the likeness of the manner in which they are each of them
   introduced. For it was by one man that the general corruption and guilt
   which I have spoken of, came into the world, and condemnation and death
   by sin: and this dreadful punishment and ruin came on all mankind by
   the great law of works, originally established with mankind in their
   first father, and by his one offence, or breach of that law; all
   thereby becoming sinners in God's sight, and exposed to final
   destruction.

   Rom. v. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and
   death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
   sinned

   "It is manifest that it was in this way the world became sinful and
   guilty; and not in that way which the Jews suppose, viz. That their
   law, given by Moses, is the grand universal rule of righteousness and
   judgment for mankind, and that it is by being Gentiles, uncircumcised,
   and aliens from that law, that the nations of the world are constituted
   sinners, and unclean. For before the law of Moses was given, mankind
   were all looked upon by the great Judge as sinners, by corruption and
   guilt derived from Adam's violation of the original law of works; which
   shows, that the original universal rule of righteousness is not the law
   of Moses; for if so, there would have been no sin imputed before that
   was given; because sin is not imputed, when there is no law.

   Rom. v. 13. For until the law sin was in the world; but sin is not
   imputed, when there is no law.

   "But that at that time sin was imputed, and men were by their judge
   reckoned as sinners, through guilt and corruption derived from Adam,
   and condemned for sin to death, the proper punishment of sin, we have a
   plain proof; in that it appears in fact, all mankind, during that whole
   time which preceded the law of Moses, were subjected to that temporal
   death, which is the visible introduction and image of that utter
   destruction which sin deserves, not excepting even infants, who could
   be sinners no other way than by virtue of Adam's transgression, having
   never in their own persons actually sinned as Adam did; nor could at
   that time be made polluted by the law of Moses, as being uncircumcised,
   or born of uncircumcised parents."

   Rom. v. 14.Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
   them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression.

   Now, by way of reflection on the whole, I would observe, that though
   there are two or three expressions in this paragraph, Rom. v. 12, &c.
   the design of which is attended with some difficulty and obscurity, as
   particularly in the 13th and 14th verses, yet the scope and sense of
   the discourse in general is not obscure, but on the contrary very clear
   and manifest; and so is the particular doctrine mainly taught in it.
   The apostle sets himself with great care to make it plain, and
   precisely to fix and settle the point he is upon. And the discourse is
   so framed, that one part of it greatly clears and fixes the meaning of
   other parts; and the whole is determined by the clear connexion it
   stands in with other parts of the epistle, and by the manifest drift of
   all the preceding part of it.

   The doctrine of original sin is not only here taught, but most plainly,
   explicitly, and abundantly taught. This doctrine is asserted, expressly
   or implicitly, in almost every verse, and in some of the verses several
   times. It is fully implied in that first expression in the 12th ver.
   "By one man sin entered into the world." The passage implies, that sin
   became universal in the world; as the apostle had before largely shown
   it was; and not merely (which would be a trifling observation) that one
   man, who was made first, sinned first, before other men sinned; or,
   that it did not so happen that many men began to sin just together at
   the same moment. The latter part of the verse, "and death by sin, and
   so death passed upon all men, for that (or, if you will, unto which)
   all have sinned," [335] shows, that in the eye of the Judge of the
   world, in Adam's first sin, all sinned; not only in some sort, but all
   sinned so as to be exposed to that death, and final destruction, which
   is the proper wages of sin. The same doctrine is taught again twice
   over in the 14th verse. It is there observed, as a proof of this
   doctrine, that "death reigned over them which had not sinned after the
   similitude of Adam's transgression," i. e. by their personal act; and
   therefore could be exposed to death, only by deriving guilt and
   pollution from Adam, in consequence of his sin. And it is taught again
   in those words, who is the figure of him that was to come. The
   resemblance lies very much in this circumstance, viz. our deriving sin,
   guilt, and punishment by Adam's sin, as we do righteousness,
   justification, and the reward of life, by Christ's obedience; for so
   the apostle explains himself. The same doctrine is expressly taught
   again, ver. 15. Rom. v. 15. "Through the offence of one, many be dead."
   And again twice in the 16th verse, "it was by one that sinned:" i. e.
   It was by Adam, that guilt and punishment (before spoken of) came on
   mankind: and in these words, "judgment was by one to condemnation."
   [336] It is again plainly and fully laid down in the 17th verse, "By
   one man's offence, death reigned by one." So again in the 18th verse,
   Rom. v. 18. "By the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to
   condemnation." Again very plainly in the 19th verse, Rom. v. 19. "By
   one man's disobedience, many were made sinners."

   Here is every thing to determine and fix the meaning of all the
   important terms used; as, the abundant use of them in all parts of the
   New Testament; and especially in this apostle's writings, which make up
   a very great part of the New Testament; and his repeated use of them in
   this epistle in particular; and in the former part of this very
   chapter; and also the light that one sentence in this paragraph casts
   on another, which fully settles their meaning: as, with respect to the
   words justification, righteousness, and condemnation; and above all, in
   regard of the word sin, which is the most important of all, with
   relation to the doctrine and controversy we are upon. Besides the
   constant use of this term every where else through the New Testament,
   through the epistles of this apostle, this epistle in particular, and
   even the former part of this chapter, it is often repeated in this very
   paragraph, and evidently used in the very sense that is denied to
   belong to it in the end of ver. 12. and ver. 19. though owned every
   where else: and its meaning is fully determined by the apostle varying
   the term; using together with it, to signify the same thing, such a
   variety of other synonymous words, such as offence, transgression,
   disobedience. And further, to put the matter out of all controversy, it
   is particularly, expressly, and repeatedly distinguished from that
   which our opposers would explain it by, viz. condemnation and death.
   And what is meant by sin entering into the world, in ver. 12. is
   determined by a like phrase of sin being in the world, in the next
   verse.--And that by the offence of one, so often spoken of here, as
   bringing death and condemnation on all, the apostle means the sin of
   one, derived in its guilt and pollution to mankind in general, (over
   and above all that has been already observed,) is determined by those
   words in the conclusion of this discourse, ver. 20. "Moreover, the law
   entered, that the offence might abound: but where sin abounded, grace
   did much more abound." These words plainly show, that the offence
   spoken of so often, the offence of one man, became the sin of all. For
   when he says, "The law entered, that the offence might abound," his
   meaning cannot be, that the offence of Adam, merely as his personally,
   should abound; but, as it exists in its derived guilt, corrupt
   influence, and evil fruits, in the sin of mankind in general, even as a
   tree in its root and branches. [337]

   What further confirms the certainty of the proof of original sin, which
   this place affords, is this, that the utmost art cannot pervert it to
   another sense. What a variety of the most artful methods have been used
   by the enemies of this doctrine, to wrest and darken this paragraph of
   Holy Writ, which stands so much in their way, as it were to force the
   Bible to speak a language agreeable to their mind! How have expressions
   been strained, words and phrases racked! What strange figures of speech
   have been invented, and with violent hands thrust into the apostle's
   mouth; and then with a bold countenance and magisterial airs obtruded
   on the world, as from him!--But blessed be God, we have his words as he
   delivered them, and the rest of the same epistle, and his other
   writings to compare with them; by which his meaning stands in too
   strong and glaring a light to be hid by any of the artificial mists
   which they labour to throw upon it.

   It is really no less than abusing the Scripture and its readers, to
   represent this paragraph as the most obscure of all the places of
   Scripture, that speak of the consequences of Adam's sin; and to treat
   it as if there was need first to consider other places as more plain.
   Whereas, it is most manifestly a place in which these things are
   declared, the most plainly, particularly, precisely, and of set
   purpose, by that great apostle, who has most fully explained to us
   those doctrines in general, which relate to the redemption by Christ,
   and the sin and misery we are redeemed from. And it must be now left to
   the reader's judgment, whether the christian church has not proceeded
   reasonably, in looking on this as a place of Scripture most clearly and
   fully treating of these things, and in using its determinate sense as a
   help to settle the meaning of many other passages of Sacred Writ.

   As this place in general is very full and plain, so the doctrine of the
   corruption of nature, as derived from Adam, and also the imputation of
   his first sin, are both clearly taught in it. The imputation of Adam's
   one transgression, is indeed most directly and frequently asserted. We
   are here assured, that by one man's sin, death passed on all; all being
   adjudged to this punishment, as having sinned (so it is implied) in
   that one man's sin. And it is repeated, over and over, that all are
   condemned, many are dead, many made sinners, &c. by one man's offence,
   by the disobedience of one, and by one offence. And the doctrine of
   original depravity is also here taught, when the apostle says, "By one
   man sin entered into the world;" having a plain respect (as hath been
   shown) to that universal corruption and wickedness, as well as guilt,
   of which he had before largely treated.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [334] Here are worthy to be observed the things which Dr. T. himself
   says to the same purpose, Key. § 302, 303. and Pref. to Par. on Ep. to
   Rom. p. 144, 43.

   [335] Rom. v. 12.

   [336] Rom. v. 16.

   [337] The offence, according to Dr. T.s explanation, docs not abound by
   the law at all really and truly, in any sense; neither the sin, nor the
   punishment. For he says, "The meaning is not, that men should be made
   more wicked; but, that men should be liable to death for every
   transgression." But after all, they are liable to no more deaths, nor
   to any worse deaths, if they are not more sinful: for they were to have
   punishments according to their desert, before. Such as died, and went
   into another world, before the law of Moses was given, were punished
   according to their deserts; and the law, when it came, threatened no
   more.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III.

   The evidence given us, relative to the doctrine of original sin, in
   what the scriptures reveal. Concerning the redemption by Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. I.

   THE EVIDENCE OF ORIGINAL SIN, FROM THE NATURE OF REDEMPTION, IN THE
   PROCUREMENT OF IT.

   According to Dr. T.s scheme, a very great part of mankind are the
   subjects of Christ's redemption, who live and die perfectly innocent,
   who never have had, and never will have, any sin charged to their
   account, and never are exposed to any punishment whatsoever, viz. all
   that die in infancy. They are the subjects of Christ's redemption, as
   he redeems them from death, or as they by his righteousness have
   justification, and by his obedience are made righteous, in the
   resurrection of the body, in the sense of Rom. v. 18, 19. And all
   mankind are thus the subjects of Christ's redemption, while they are
   perfectly guiltless, and exposed to no punishment, as by Christ they
   are entitled to a resurrection. Though, with respect to such persons as
   have sinned, he allows it is in some sort by Christ and his death, that
   they are saved from sin, and the punishment of it.

   Now let us see whether such a scheme well consists with the
   scripture-account of the redemption by Jesus Christ.

   I. The representations of the redemption by Christ, every where in
   Scripture, lead us to suppose, that all whom he came to redeem are
   sinners; that his salvation, as to the term from which, (or the evil to
   be redeemed from,) in all, is sin, and the deserved punishment of sin.
   It is natural to suppose, that when he had his name Jesus, or Saviour,
   given him by God's special and immediate appointment, the salvation
   meant by that name should be his salvation in general; and not only a
   part of his salvation, and with regard only to some of them whom he
   came to save. But this name was given him to signify Matt. i. 21. "his
   saving his people from their sins," And the great doctrine of Christ's
   salvation is, that 1 Tim. i. 15. "he came into the world to save
   sinners," And that 1 Pet. iii. 18. "Christ hath once suffered, the just
   for the unjust," 1 John iv. 9, 10. "In this was manifested the love of
   God towards us, (towards such in general as have the benefit of God's
   love in giving Christ,) that God sent his only-begotten Son into the
   world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, that he sent his
   Son to be the propitiation for our sins." Many other texts might be
   mentioned, which seem evidently to suppose, that all who are redeemed
   by Christ are saved from SIN. We are led by what Christ himself said,
   to suppose, that if any are not sinners, they have no need of him as a
   Redeemer, any more than a man in health of a physician, Mark ii. 17.
   And that, in order to our being the proper subjects of the mercy of God
   through Christ, we must first be in a state of sin, is implied in Gal.
   iii. 22. "But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the
   promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe."
   To the same effect is Rom. xi. 32.

   These things are greatly confirmed by the scripture doctrine of
   sacrifices. It is abundantly plain, both from the Old and New
   Testament, that these were types of Christ's death, and were for sin,
   and supposed sin in those for whom they were offered. The apostle
   supposes, that in order to any having the benefit of the eternal
   inheritance by Christ, there must of necessity be the death of the
   testator; and gives that reason for it, Heb. ix. 15"That without
   shedding of blood there is no remission," &c. And Christ himself, in
   representing the benefit of his blood, in the institution of the Lord's
   supper, under the notion of the blood of a testament, calls it, Matt.
   xxvi. 28."The blood of the New Testament shed for the remission of
   sins," But according to the scheme of our author, many have the eternal
   inheritance by the death of the testator, who never had any need of
   remission.

   II. The Scripture represents the redemption by Christ, as a redemption
   from deserved destruction; and that, not merely as it respects some
   particulars, but as the fruit of God's love to mankind. John iii. 16.
   "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that
   whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
   life;" implying, that otherwise they must perish, or be destroyed. But
   what necessity of this, if they did not deserve to be destroyed? Now,
   that the destruction here spoken of, is deserved destruction, is
   manifest, because it is there compared to the perishing of such of the
   children of Israel as died by the bite of the fiery serpents, which God
   in his wrath, for their rebellion, sent amongst them. And the same
   thing clearly appears by the last verse of the same chapter, "He that
   believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not
   the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him," or,
   is left remaining on him: implying, that all in general are found under
   the wrath of God, and that they only of all mankind who are interested
   in Christ, have this wrath removed, and eternal life bestowed; the rest
   are left with the wrath of God still remaining on them. The same is
   clearly illustrated and confirmed by John v. 24. "He that believeth,
   hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
   passed from death to life." In being passed from death to life is
   implied, that before, they were all in a state of death; and they are
   spoken of as being so by a sentence of condemnation; and if it be a
   just condemnation, it is a deserved condemnation.

   III. It will follow on Dr. T.s scheme, that Christ's redemption, with
   regard to a great part of them who are the subjects of it, is not only
   a redemption from no sin, but from no calamity, and so from no evil of
   any kind. For as to death, which infants are redeemed from, they never
   were subjected to it as a calamity, but purely as a benefit. It came by
   no threatening or curse denounced upon or through Adam; the covenant
   with him being utterly abolished, as to all its force and power on
   mankind, (according to our author,) before the sentence of mortality.
   Therefore trouble and death could be appointed to innocent mankind no
   other way than on account of another covenant, the covenant of grace;
   and in this channel they come only as favours, not as evils. Therefore
   they could need no remedy, for they had no disease. Even death itself,
   which it is supposed Christ saves them from, is only a medicine; and
   one of the greatest of benefits. It is ridiculous to talk of persons'
   needing a medicine, or a physician, to save them from an excellent
   medicine; or of a remedy from a happy remedy! If it be said, though
   death be a benefit, yet it is so because Christ changes it, and turns
   it into a benefit, by procuring a resurrection: I would ask, what can
   be meant by turning or changing it into a benefit, when it never was
   otherwise, nor could ever justly be otherwise? Infants could not at all
   be brought under death as a calamity; for they never deserved it. And
   it would be only an abuse (be it far from us, to ascribe such a thing
   to God) in any being, to offer any poor sufferers a Redeemer from a
   calamity which he had brought upon them, without the least desert of it
   on their part.

   But it is plain, that mortality was not at first brought on mankind as
   a blessing, by the covenant of grace through Christ; and that Christ
   and grace do not bring mankind under death, but find them under it. 2
   Cor. v. 14. "We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
   dead." Luke xix. 10. "The Son of man is come to seek and save that
   which was lost." The grace which appears in providing a deliverer from
   any state, supposes the subject to be in that state prior to his
   deliverance. In our author's scheme, there never could be any sentence
   of death or condemnation, that requires a Savior from it; because the
   very sentence itself, according to the true meaning of it, implies and
   makes sure all that good, which is requisite to abolish and make void
   the seeming evil to the innocent subject. So that the sentence itself
   is in effect the deliverer; and there is no need of another to deliver
   from that sentence. Dr. T. insists upon it, that "nothing comes upon us
   in consequence of Adam's sin, in any sense, kind, or degree,
   inconsistent with the original blessing pronounced on Adam at his
   creation; and nothing but what is perfectly consistent with God's
   blessing, love, and goodness, declared to Adam as soon as he came out
   of his Maker's hands." [338] If the case be so, it is certain there is
   no evil or calamity at all for Christ to redeem us from; unless things
   agreeable to the divine goodness, love, and blessing, are things from
   which we need redemption. [339]

   IV. It will follow, on our author's principles, not only with respect
   to infants, but even adult persons, that redemption is needless, and
   Christ is dead in vain. Not only is there no need of Christ's
   redemption in order to deliverance from any consequences of Adam's sin,
   but also in order to perfect freedom from personal sin, and all its
   evil consequences. For God has made other sufficient provision for
   that, viz. a sufficient power and ability, in all mankind, to do all
   their duty, and wholly to avoid sin. Yea, he insists upon it, that
   "when men have not sufficient power to do their duty, they have no duty
   to do. We may safely and assuredly conclude, (says he,) that mankind in
   all parts of the world have sufficient power to do the duty which God
   requires of them; and that he requires of them no more than they have
   sufficient powers to do." [340] And in another place, [341] "God has
   given powers equal to the duty which he expects." And he expresses a
   great dislike at R. R.s supposing, that our propensities to evil, and
   temptations, are too strong to be effectually and constantly resisted;
   or that we are unavoidably sinful in a degree; that our appetites and
   passions will be breaking out, notwithstanding our everlasting
   watchfulness." [342] These things fully imply, that men have in their
   own natural ability sufficient means to avoid sin, and to be perfectly
   free from it; and so, from all the bad consequences of it. And if the
   means are sufficient, then there is no need of more; and therefore
   there is no need of Christ dying, in order to it. What Dr. T. says, (p.
   72. S.) fully implies, that it would be unjust in God to give mankind
   being in such circumstances, as that they would be more likely to sin,
   so as to be exposed to final misery, than otherwise. Hence then,
   without Christ and his redemption, and without any grace at all, mere
   justice makes sufficient provision for our being free from sin and
   misery, by our own power. [343]

   If all mankind, in all parts of the world, have such sufficient power
   to do their whole duty, without being sinful in any degree, then they
   have sufficient power to obtain righteousness by the law: and then,
   according to the apostle Paul, Christ is dead in vain. Gal. ii. 21. "If
   righteousness come by law, Christ is dead in vain;"--NOT ENGLISH,
   without the article, by law, or the rule of right action, as our author
   explains the phrase. [344] And according to the sense in which he
   explains this very place, "it would have frustrated, or rendered
   useless, the grace of God, if Christ died to accomplish what was or
   might have been effected by law itself, without his death." [345] So
   that it most clearly follows from his own doctrine, that Christ is dead
   in vain, and the grace of God is useless. The same apostle says, if
   there had been a law which could have given life, verily righteousness
   should have been by the law, Gal. iii. 21. i. e. (still according to
   Dr. T.s own sense,) if there was a law, that man, in his present state,
   had sufficient power perfectly to fulfil. For Dr. T. supposes the
   reason why the law could not give life, to be "not because it was weak
   in itself, but through the weakness of our flesh, and the infirmity of
   the human nature in the present state." [346] But he says, "We are
   under a mild dispensation of GRACE, making allowance for our
   infirmities." [347] By our infirmities, we may upon good grounds
   suppose he means that infirmity of human nature, which he gives as the
   reason why the law cannot give life. But what grace is there in making
   that allowance for our infirmities, which justice itself (according to
   his doctrine) most absolutely requires, as he supposes divine justice
   exactly proportions our duty to our ability?

   Again, if it be said, that although Christ's redemption was not
   necessary to preserve men from beginning to sin, and getting into a
   course of sin, because they have sufficient power in themselves to
   avoid it; yet it may be necessary to deliver men, after they have by
   their own folly brought themselves under the dominion of evil appetites
   and passions. [348] I answer, if it be so, that men need deliverance
   from those habits and passions, which are become too strong for them,
   yet that deliverance, on our author's principles, would be no salvation
   from sin. For the exercise of passions which are too strong for us, and
   which we cannot overcome, is necessary: and he strongly urges, that a
   necessary evil can be no moral evil. It is true, it is the effect of
   evil, as it is the effect of a bad practice, while the man had power to
   have avoided it. But then according to Dr. T. that evil cause alone is
   sin; for he says expressly, "The cause of every effect is alone
   chargeable with the effect it produceth, or which proceedeth from it."
   [349] And as to that sin which was the cause, the man needed no Saviour
   from that, having had sufficient power in himself to have avoided it.
   So that it follows by our author's scheme, that none of mankind,
   neither infants nor adult persons, neither the more nor less vicious,
   neither Jews nor Gentiles, neither heathens nor Christians, ever did or
   ever could stand in any need of a Saviour; and that, with respect to
   all, the truth is, Christ is dead in vain.

   If any should say, although all mankind in all ages have sufficient
   ability to do their whole duty, and so may by their own power enjoy
   perfect freedom from sin, yet God foresaw that they would sin, and that
   after they had sinned, they would need Christ's death. I answer, it is
   plain, by what the apostle says in those places which were just now
   mentioned, (Gal. ii. 21. and Gal. iii. 21.) that God would have
   esteemed it needless to give his Son to die for men, unless there had
   been a prior impossibility of their having righteousness by any law;
   and that, if there had been a law which could have given life, this
   other way by the death of Christ would not have been provided. And this
   appears to be agreeable to our author's own sense of things, by his
   words which have been cited, wherein he says, " It would have
   frustrated or rendered useless the grace of God, if Christ died to
   accomplish what was or might have been effected by law itself, without
   his death."

   V. It will follow on Dr. T.s scheme, not only that Christ's redemption
   is needless for saving from sin, or its consequences, but also that it
   does no good that way, has no tendency to any diminution of sin in the
   world. For as to any infusion of virtue or holiness into the heart, by
   divine power through Christ or his redemption, it is altogether
   inconsistent with this author's notions. With him, inwrought virtue, if
   there were any such thing, would be no virtue; not being the effect of
   our own will, choice, and design, but only of a sovereign act of God's
   power. [350] And therefore, all that Christ does to increase virtue, is
   only increasing our talents, our light, advantages, means, and motives;
   as he often explains the matter. [351] But sin is not at all
   diminished, for he says, our duty must be measured by our talents; as,
   a child that has less talents, has less duty; and therefore must be no
   more exposed to commit sin, than he that has greater talents; because
   he that has greater talents, has more duty required, in exact
   proportion. [352] If so, he that has but one talent, has as much
   advantage to perform that one degree of duty which is required of mm,
   as he that has five talents, to perform his five degrees of duty, and
   is no more exposed to fail of it. And that man's guilt, who sins
   against greater advantages means, and motives, is greater in proportion
   to his talents. [353] And therefore it will follow, on Dr. T.s
   principles, that men stand no better chance, have no more eligible or
   valuable probability of freedom from sin and punishment, or of
   contracting but little guilt, or of performing required duty, with the
   great advantages and talents implied in Christ's redemption, than
   without them; when all things are computed, and put into the balances
   together, the numbers, degrees, and aggravations of sin exposed to,
   degrees of duty required, &c. So that men have no redemption from sin,
   and no new means of performing duty, that are valuable or worth any
   thing at all. And thus the great redemption by Christ in every respect
   comes to nothing, with regard both to infants and adult persons.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [338] Page 88. 89. S.

   [339] In this inferential short reply, our author it not quite so
   guarded as usual. It seems applicable only to infant; since adults have
   actual or personal sin and guilt from which to be redeemed. But what
   immediately follows anticipates the objection.--W.

   [340] Page 111. 68, 64. S.

   [341] Page 67. S.

   [342] Page 68. S.

   [343] Here, also, our author will be thought not quite accurate, in the
   inference lie draws against Dr. T. for the "sufficient power," for
   which Dr. T. pleads, relates only to the prevention of sin, but not to
   its remission, or the removal of its effects. But this also will be
   soon answered.--W.

   [344] Pref. to Par. on Rom. p. 143. 38.

   [345] Note on Rom. v. 20. p. 297.

   [346] Ibid.

   [347] Page 92. S.

   [348] See p. 228. and also what he says of the helpless state of the
   heathen, in paraph. and notes on Rom. vii. and beginning of chap. viii.

   [349] Page 128.

   [350] See p. 180, 245, 250

   [351] In p. 44, 50. and innumerable other places.

   [352] See page 234, 61, 64-72. S.

   [353] See Paraph, on Rom. ii. 9. also on ver. 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAP. II.

   THE EVIDENCE OF THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN FROM WHAT THE SCRIPTURE
   TEACHES OF THE APPLICATION OF REDEMPTION.

   The truth of the doctrine of original sin is very clearly manifest from
   what the Scripture says of that change of state, which it represents as
   necessary to an actual interest in the spiritual and eternal blessings
   of the Redeemer's kingdom.

   In order to this, it speaks of it as absolutely necessary for every
   one, that he be regenerated, or born again. John iii. 3. "Verily,
   verily, I say unto thee, except a man (NOT ENGLISH) be begotten again,
   or born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." Dr. T. though he will
   not allow that this signifies any change from a state of natural
   propensity to sin, yet supposes that the new birth here spoken of,
   means a man's being brought to a divine life, in a right use and
   application of the natural powers, in a life of true holiness: [354]
   and that it is the attainment of those habits of virtue and religion,
   which gives us the real character of true Christians, and the children
   of God;? and that it is putting on the new nature of right action.
   [355]

   But in order to proceed in the most sure and safe manner, in
   understanding what is meant in Scripture by being born again, and so in
   the inferences we draw from what is said of the necessity of it, let us
   compare scripture with scripture, and consider what other terms or
   phrases are used, where respect is evidently had to the same change.
   And here I would observe the following things.

   I. If we compare one scripture with another, it will be sufficiently
   manifest, that by regeneration, or being begotten, or born again, the
   same change in the state of the mind is signified with that which the
   scripture speaks of as affected in true repentance and conversion. I
   put repentance and conversion together, because the scripture puts them
   together, Acts iii. 19. and because they plainly signify much the same
   thing. The word (NOT ENGLISH ) repentance, signifies a change of the
   mind; as the word conversion, means a change or turning from sin to
   God. And that this is the same change with that which is called
   regeneration (excepting that this latter term especially signifies the
   change, as the mind is passive in it) the following things may show.

   In the change which the mind undergoes in repentance and conversion, is
   attained that character of true Christians which is necessary to the
   eternal privileges of such. Acts iii. 19. "Repent ye therefore, and be
   converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
   refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." And thus it is in
   regeneration; as is evident from what Christ says to Nicodemus, and as
   is allowed by Dr. T.

   The change of the mind in repentance is that in which saving faith is
   attained. Mark i. 15. "The kingdom of God is at hand, repent ye, and
   believe the gospel." And so it is in being born again, or born of God;
   as appears by John i. 12, 13. "But as many as received him, to them he
   gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
   name, which were born not of blood, &c. but of God." Just as Christ
   says concerning conversion, Matt. xviii. 3. "Verily, verily, I say unto
   you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
   not enter the kingdom of heaven:" so does he say concerning being born
   again, in what he spake to Nicodemus.

   By the change men undergo in conversion, they become as little
   children; which appears in the place last cited: and so they do by
   regeneration. (1 Pet. i. 23. and ii. 2. ) "Being born again.--Wherefore
   as new-born babes, desire," &c. It is no objection, that the disciples,
   to whom Christ spake in Matt. xviii. 3. were converted already: this
   makes it not less proper for Christ to declare the necessity of
   conversion to them, leaving it with them to try themselves, and to make
   sure their conversion: in like manner as he declared to them the
   necessity of repentance, in Luke xiii. 3, 5. "Except ye repent, ye
   shall all likewise perish."

   The change effected by repentance, is expressed and exhibited by
   baptism. Hence it is called the baptism of repentance. (Matt. iii. 11.
   Luke iii. 3. Acts xiii. 24. and xix. 4) And so is regeneration, or
   being born again, expressed by baptism; as is evident by such
   representations of regeneration as those: John iii. 5. "Except a man be
   born of water, and of the Spirit."--Tit. iii. 5. "He saved us by the
   washing of regeneration."--Many other things might be observed, to show
   that the change men pass under in their repentance and conversion, is
   the same with that of which they are the subjects in regeneration.--But
   these observations may be sufficient.

   II. The change which a man undergoes when born again, and in his
   repentance and conversion, is the same that the scripture calls the
   circumcision of the heart.--This may easily appear by considering, that
   as regeneration is that in which are attained the habits of true virtue
   and holiness, as has been shown, and as is confessed; so is
   circumcision of heart. Deut. xxx. 6. "And the Lord thy God will
   circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy
   God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul."

   Regeneration is that whereby men come to have the character of true
   Christians; as is evident, and as is confessed; and so is circumcision
   of heart: for by this men become Jews inwardly, or Jews in the
   spiritual and christian sense, (and that is the same as being true
   Christians,) as of old, proselytes were made Jews by circumcision of
   the flesh. Rom. ii. 28, 29. "For he is not a Jew which is one
   outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:
   but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the
   heart, in the spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men,
   but of God."

   That circumcision of the heart, is the same with conversion, or turning
   from sin to God, is evident by Jer. iv. 1-4. "If thou wilt return, O
   Israel, return unto me. Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and put away
   the foreskins of your heart" And Deut. x. 16. "Circumcise therefore the
   foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiff-necked." Circumcision of
   the heart is the same change of the heart that men experience in
   repentance; as is evident by Lev. xxvi. 41. "If their uncircumcised
   hearts be humbled, and they accept the punishment of their iniquity."

   The change effected in regeneration, repentance, and conversion, is
   signified by baptism, as has been shown; and so is circumcision of the
   heart signified by the same thing. None will deny, that it was this
   internal circumcision, which of old was signified by external
   circumcision; nor will any deny, now under the New Testament, that
   inward and spiritual baptism, or the cleansing of the heart, is
   signified by external washing or baptism. But spiritual circumcision
   and spiritual baptism are the same thing; both being putting off the
   body of the sins of the flesh; as is very plain by Colos. ii. 11-13.
   "In whom also ye are circumcised, with the circumcision made without
   hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
   circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are
   risen with him," &c.

   III. This inward change, called regeneration, and circumcision of the
   heart, which is wrought in repentance and conversion, is the same with
   that spiritual resurrection so often spoken of, and represented as a
   dying unto sin, and a living unto righteousness.--This appears with
   great plainness in that last cited place, Col. ii.) "In whom also ye
   are circumcised, with the circumcision made without hands,--buried with
   him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, through the faith
   of the operation of God, &c. And you, being dead in your sins, and the
   uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him;
   having forgiven you all trespasses."

   The same appears by Rom. vi. 3-5. "Know ye not, that so many of us as
   were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
   Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as
   Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so
   we also should walk in newness of life," &c. ver. 11. "Likewise reckon
   ye also yourselves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through
   Jesus Christ our Lord." In which place also it is evident, and by the
   whole context, that this spiritual resurrection is that change, in
   which persons are brought to habits of holiness and to the divine life,
   by which Dr. T. describes the thing obtained in being born again.

   That a spiritual resurrection to a new, divine life, should be called a
   being born again, is agreeable to the language of Scripture. So those
   words in the 2nd Psalm "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
   thee," are applied to Christ's resurrection, Acts xiii. 33. So in
   Colos. i. 18. Christ is called the first born from the dead; and in
   Rev. i. 5. The first begotten of the dead. The saints, in their
   conversion or spiritual resurrection, are risen with Christ, and are
   begotten and born with him. 1 Pet. i. 3. "Who hath begotten us again to
   a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
   inheritance incorruptible." This inheritance is the same thing with
   that kingdom of heaven, which men obtain by being born again, according
   to Christ's words to Nicodemus; and that same inheritance of them that
   are sanctified, spoken of as what is obtained in true conversion. Acts
   xxvi. 18. "To turn them (or convert them) from darkness to light, and
   from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
   sin, and inheritance among them that are sanctified, through faith that
   is in me." Dr. T's own words, in his note on Rom. i. 4. speaking of
   that place in the 2d Psalm , are very worthy to be here recited. He
   observes how this is applied to Christ's resurrection and exaltation,
   in the New Testament, and then has this remark, "note, begetting is
   conferring a new and happy state: a son is a person put into it.
   Agreeably to this, good men are said to be the sons of God, as they are
   the sons of the resurrection to eternal life, which is represented as a
   NOT ENGLISH, a being begotten, or born again, regenerated." So that I
   think it is abundantly plain, that the spiritual resurrection spoken of
   in Scripture, by which the saints are brought to a new divine life, is
   the same with that being born again, which Christ says is necessary for
   every one, in order to his seeing the kingdom of God.

   IV. This change, of which men are the subjects, when they are born
   again, and circumcised in heart, when they repent, and are converted,
   and spiritually raised from the dead, is the same change which is meant
   when the Scripture speaks of making the heart and spirit new, or giving
   a new heart and spirit.

   It is almost needless to observe, how evidently this is spoken of as
   necessary to salvation, and as the change in which are attained the
   habits of true virtue and holiness, and the character of a true saint;
   as has been observed of regeneration, conversion, &c. and how apparent
   it is, that the change is the same. Thus repentance, (NOT ENGLISH ) the
   change of the mind, is the same as being changed to a new mind, or a
   new heart and spirit. Conversion is the turning of the heart; which is
   the same thing as changing it so, that there shall be another heart, or
   a new heart, or a new spirit. To be born again, is to be born anew;
   which implies a becoming new, and is represented as becoming new-born
   babes. But none supposes it is the body, that is immediately and
   properly new, but the mind, heart, or spirit. And so a spiritual
   resurrection is the resurrection of the spirit, or rising to begin a
   new existence and life, as to the mind, heart, or spirit. So that all
   these phrases imply, having a new heart, and being renewed in the
   spirit, according to their plain signification.

   When Nicodemus expressed his wonder at Christ declaring it necessary,
   that a man should be born again in order to see the kingdom of God, or
   enjoy the privileges of the kingdom of the Messiah, Christ says to him,
   Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things? i. e. "Art
   thou one who is set to teach others the things written in the law and
   the prophets, and knowest not a doctrine so plainly taught in your
   Scriptures, that such a change is necessary to a partaking of the
   blessings of the Messiah's kingdom?" But what can Christ refer to,
   unless such prophecies as that in Ezek. xxxvi. 25-27.? Where God, by
   the prophet, speaking of the days of the Messiah's kingdom, says, "Then
   will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean.--A new
   heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you--and
   I will put my Spirit within you." [356] Here God speaks of having a new
   heart and spirit, by being washed with water, and receiving the Spirit
   of God, as the qualification of God's people, that shall enjoy the
   privileges of the Messiah's kingdom. How much is this like the doctrine
   of Christ to Nicodemus, of being born again of water, and of the
   Spirit! We have another like prophecy in Ezek. xi. 19.--Add to this,
   that regeneration, or a being born again, and the renewing (or making
   new) by the Holy Ghost, are spoken of as the same thing, Tit. iii. 5.
   "By the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost."

   V. It is abundantly manifest, that being born again, spiritually rising
   from the dead to newness of life, receiving a new heart, and being
   renewed in the spirit of the mind, are the same thing with that which
   is called putting off the old man, and putting on the new man.

   The expressions are equivalent; and the representations are plainly of
   the same thing. When Christ speaks of being born again, two births are
   supposed: a first and a second, an old birth and anew one: and the
   thing born is called man. So what is born in the first birth is the old
   man; and what is brought forth in the second birth, is the new man.
   That which is born in the first birth (says Christ) is flesh: it is the
   carnal man, wherein we have borne the image of the earthly Adam, whom
   the apostle calls the first man. That which is born in the new birth,
   is spirit, or the spiritual and heavenly man: wherein we proceed from
   Christ the second man, the new man, who is made a quickening Spirit,
   and is the Lord from heaven, and the Head of the new creation.--In the
   new birth, men are represented as becoming new-born babes, which is the
   same thing as becoming new men.

   And how apparently is what the Scripture says of the spiritual
   resurrection of the Christian convert, equivalent and of the very same
   import with putting off the old man, and putting on the new man. So in
   Rom. vi. the convert is represented as dying, and being buried with
   Christ; which is explained in the 6th verse, by this, that the old man
   is crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed, And in the 4th
   verse, converts in this change are spoken of as rising to newness of
   life. Are not these things plain enough? The apostle in effect tells
   us, that when he speaks of spiritual death and resurrection, he means
   the same thing as crucifying and burying the old man, and rising as a
   new man.

   And it is most apparent, that spiritual circumcision, and spiritual
   baptism, and the spiritual resurrection, are all the same with putting
   off the old man, and putting on the new man. This appears by Colos. ii.
   11, 12. "In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
   without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
   circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism; wherein also ye are
   risen with him." Here it is manifest, that the spiritual circumcision,
   baptism, and resurrection, all signify that change wherein men put off
   the body of the sins of the flesh: but that is the same thing, in this
   apostle's language, as putting off the old man; as appears by Rom. vi.
   6. "Our old man is crucified, that the body of sin may be destroyed."
   And that putting off the old man is the same with putting off the body
   of sin, appears further by Ephes. iv. 22-24. and Colos. iii. 8-10. As
   Dr. T. confesses, "that to be born again, is that wherein are obtained
   the habits of virtue, religion, and true holiness;" so how evidently is
   the same thing predicated of that change, which is called putting off
   the old man, and putting on the new man! Eph. iv. 22-24. "That ye put
   off the old man, which is corrupt, &c. and put on the new man, which
   after God is created in righteousness and true holiness."

   And it is most plain, that this putting off the old man, &c. is the
   very same thing with making the heart and spirit new. It is apparent in
   itself; the spirit is called the man, in the language of the apostle;
   it is called the inward man, and the hidden man. (Rom. vii. 22. 2 Cor.
   iv. 16. 1 Pet. iii. 4.) And therefore, putting off the old man, is the
   same thing with the removal of the old heart; and the putting on of the
   new man, is the receiving of a new heart, and a new spirit. Yea,
   putting on the new man is expressly spoken of as the same thing with
   receiving a new spirit, or being renewed in spirit, Eph. iv. 22-24.
   "That ye put off the old man--and be renewed in the spirit of your
   mind, and that ye put on the new man."

   From these things it appears, how unreasonable, and contrary to the
   utmost degree of scriptural evidence, is Dr. T.s way of explaining the
   old man, and the new man, [357] as though thereby was meant nothing
   personal; but that by the old man was meant the heathen state, and by
   the new man the christian dispensation, or state of professing
   Christians, or the whole collective body of professors of Christianity,
   made up of Jews and Gentiles; when all the colour he has for it is,
   that the apostle once calls the christian church a new man. (Eph. ii.
   15.) It is very true, in the Scriptures often, both in the Old
   Testament and the New, collective bodies, nations, peoples, and cities,
   are figuratively represented by persons: particularly the church of
   Christ is represented as one holy person, and has the same appellatives
   as a particular saint or believer; and so is called a child, a son of
   God, (Exod. iv. 22. Gal. iv. 1, 2. ) a servant of God, (Isa. xli. 8, 9.
   and xliv. 1) The daughter of God, and spouse of Christ, (Psal. xlv. 10,
   13, 14. Rev. xix. 7.) Nevertheless, would it be reasonable to argue,
   that such appellations, as a servant of God, child of God, &c. are
   always or commonly to be taken as signifying only the church of God in
   general, or great collective bodies; and not to be understood in a
   personal sense? But certainly this would not be more unreasonable than
   to urge, that by the old and the new man, as the phrases are mostly
   used in Scripture, is to be understood nothing but the great collective
   bodies of pagans and of Christians, or the heathen and the christian
   world, as to their outward profession, and the dispensation they are
   under. It might have been proper, in this case, to have considered the
   unreasonableness of that practice which our author charges on others,
   and finds so much fault with in them, [358] "That they content
   themselves with a few scraps of Scripture, which though wrong
   understood, they make the test of truth, and the ground of their
   principles, in contradiction to the whole tenor of revelation.

   VI. I observe once more, it is very apparent, that being born again,
   and spiritually raised from death to a state of new existence and life,
   having a new heart created in us, being renewed in the spirit of our
   mind, and being the subjects of that change by which we put off the old
   man, and put on the new man, is the same thing with that which in
   Scripture is called being created anew, or made new creatures.

   Here, to pass over many other evidences which might be mentioned, I
   would only observe, that the representations are exactly equivalent.
   These several phrases naturally and most plainly signify the same
   effect. In the first birth, or generation, we are created, or brought
   into existence; it is then the whole man first receives being; the soul
   is then formed, and then our bodies are fearfully and wonderfully made,
   being curiously wrought by our Creator. So that a new-born child is a
   new creature. So, when a man is born again, he is created again; in
   that new birth, there is a new creation; and therein he becomes as a
   new-born babe, or a new creature. So, in a resurrection, there is a new
   creation. When a man is dead, that which was made in the first creation
   is destroyed: when that which was dead is raised to life, the mighty
   power of the author of life is exerted the second time, and the subject
   restored to a new existence, and a new life, as by a new creation. So
   giving a new heart is called creating a clean heart, Psal. li. 10.
   where the word, translated create, is the same that is used in the
   first verse, in Genesis. And when we read in Scripture of the new
   creature, the creature that is called new is man; and therefore the
   phrase, new man, is evidently equipollent with new creature; and
   putting off the old man, and putting on the new man, is spoken of
   expressly as brought to pass by a work of creation. Col. iii. 9, 10.
   "Ye have put off the old man--and have put on the new man, which is
   renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him." So Eph.
   iv. 22-24. "That ye put off the old man, which is corrupt, &c. and be
   renewed in the spirit of your mind, and that ye put on the new man,
   which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness." These
   things absolutely fix the meaning of 2 Cor. v. 17. "If any man be in
   Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all
   things are become new."

   On the whole, the following reflections may be made:

   1. That it is a truth of the utmost certainty, with respect to every
   man born of the race of Adam, by ordinary generation, that unless he be
   born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This is true, not only of
   the heathen, but of them that are born of the professing people of God,
   as Nicodemus, and the Jews, and every man born of the flesh. This is
   most manifest by Christ's discourse in John iii. 3-11. So it is plain
   by 2 Cor. v. 17. That every man who is in Christ, is a new creature.

   2. It appears from this, together with what has been proved above, that
   it is most certain with respect to every one of the human race, that he
   can never have any interest in Christ, or see the kingdom of God,
   unless he be the subject of that change in the temper and disposition
   of his heart, which is made in repentance and conversion, circumcision
   of heart, spiritual baptism, dying to sin, and rising to a new and holy
   life; and unless he has the old heart taken away, and a new heart and
   spirit given, and puts off the old man, and puts on the new man, and
   old things are passed away, and all things made new.

   3. From what is plainly implied in these things, and from what the
   Scripture most clearly teaches of the nature of them, it is certain,
   that every man is born into the world in a state of moral pollution.
   For spiritual baptism is a cleansing from moral filthiness. (Ezek.
   xxxvi. 25. compared with Acts ii. 16. and John iii. 5.) So the washing
   of regeneration, or the NEW BIRTH, is a change from a state of
   wickedness. (Tit. iii. 3-5.) Men are spoken of as purified in their
   regeneration. (1 Pet. i. 22, 23. See also 1 John ii. 29. and iii. 1,3.)
   And it appears, that every man in his first or natural state is a
   sinner; for otherwise he would then need no repentance, no conversion,
   no turning from sin to God. And it appears, that every man in his
   original state has a heart of stone; for thus the Scripture calls that
   old heart, which is taken away, when a new heart and new spirit is
   given. (Ezek. xi.19. and xxxvi. 26.) And it appears, that man's nature,
   as in his native state, is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,
   and of its own motion exerts itself in nothing but wicked deeds. For
   thus the Scripture characterizes the old man, which is put off, when
   men are renewed in the spirit of their minds, and put on the new man.
   (Eph. iv. 22-24. Col. iii. 8-10.) In a word, it appears, that man's
   nature, as in its native state, is a body of sin, which must be
   destroyed, must die, be buried, and never rise more. For thus the old
   man is represented, which is crucified, when men are the subjects of a
   spiritual resurrection. Rom. vi. 4-6. Such a nature, such a body of sin
   as this, is put off in the spiritual renovation, wherein we put on the
   NEW MAN, and are the subjects of the spiritual circumcision. Eph. iv.
   21-23.

   It must now be left with the reader to judge for himself, whether what
   the Scripture teaches of the application of Christ's redemption, and
   the change of state and nature necessary to true and final happiness,
   does not afford clear and abundant evidence to the truth of the
   doctrine of original sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [354] Page 144.

   [355] Page 251.

   [356] Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.

   [357] Page 149-153. S.

   [358] Page 224.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART IV.

   containing answers to objections.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. I.

   CONCERNING THE OBJECTION, THAT TO SUPPOSE MEN BORN IN SIN, WITHOUT
   THEIR CHOICE, OR ANY PREVIOUS ACT OF THEIR OWN, IS TO SUPPOSE WHAT IS
   INCONSISTENT WITH THE NATURE OF SIN.

   Some of the objections made against the doctrine of original sin, which
   have reference to particular arguments used in defence of it, have been
   already considered in the handling of those arguments. What I shall
   therefore now consider, are such objections as I have not yet had
   occasion to notice.

   There is no argument Dr. T. insists more upon, than that which is taken
   from the Arminian and Pelagian notion of freedom of will, consisting in
   the will's self-determination, as necessary to the being of moral good
   or evil. He often urges, that if we come into the world infected with
   sinful and depraved dispositions, then sin must be natural to us; and
   if natural, then necessary; and if necessary, then no sin, nor any
   thing we are blamable for, or that can in any respect be our fault,
   being what we cannot help: and he urges, that sin must proceed from our
   own choice, &c. [359]

   Here I would observe in general, that the forementioned notion of
   freedom of will, as essential to moral agency, and necessary to the
   very existence of virtue and sin, seems to be a grand favourite point
   with Pelagians and Arminians, and all divines of such characters, in
   their controversies with the orthodox. There is no one thing more
   fundamental in their schemes of religion: on the determination of this
   one leading point depends the issue of almost all controversies we have
   with such divines. Nevertheless, it seems a needless task for me
   particularly to consider that matter in this place; having already
   largely discussed it, with all the main grounds of this notion, and the
   arguments used to defend it, in a late book on this subject, to which I
   ask leave to refer the reader. It is very necessary, that the modern
   prevailing doctrine concerning this point, should be well understood,
   and therefore thoroughly considered and examined: for without it there
   is no hope of putting an end to the controversy about original sin, and
   innumerable other controversies that subsist, about many of the main
   points of religion. I stand ready to confess to the forementioned
   modern divines, if they can maintain their pecular notion of freedom,
   consisting in the self-determining power of the will, as necessary to
   moral agency, and can thoroughly establish it in opposition to the
   arguments lying against it, then they have an impregnable castle, to
   which they may repair, and remain invincible, in all the controversies
   they have with the reformed divines, concerning original sin, the
   sovereignty of grace, election, redemption, conversion, the efficacious
   operation of the Holy Spirit, the nature of saving faith, perseverance
   of the saints, and other principles of the like kind. However, at the
   same time, I think this will be as strong a fortress for the Deists, in
   common with them; as the great doctrines, subverted by their notion of
   freedom, are so plainly and abundantly taught in the Scripture. But I
   am under no apprehensions of any danger, which the cause of
   Christianity, or the religion of the reformed, is in, from any
   possibility of that notion being ever established, or of its being ever
   evinced that there is not proper, perfect, and manifold demonstration
   lying against it. But as I said, it would be needless for me to enter
   into a particular disquisition of this point here; from which I shall
   easily be excused by any reader who is willing to give himself the
   trouble of consulting what I have already written. And as to others,
   probably they will scarce be at the pains of reading the present
   discourse; or at least would not, if it should be enlarged by a full
   consideration of that controversy.

   I shall at this time therefore only take notice of some gross
   inconsistencies that Dr. T. has been guilty of, in his handling this
   objection against the doctrine of original sin. In places which have
   been cited, he says, that sin must proceed from our own choice: and
   that if it does not, it being necessary to us, it cannot be sin, it
   cannot be our fault, or what we are to blame for: and therefore all our
   sin must be chargeable on our choice, which is the cause of sin: for he
   says, the cause of every effect is alone chargeable with the effect it
   produceth, and which proceedeth from it. [360] Now here are implied
   several gross contradictions. He greatly insists., that nothing can be
   sinful, or have the nature of sin, but what proceeds from our choice.
   Nevertheless he says, "Not the effect, but the cause alone is
   chargeable with blame." Therefore the choice, which is the cause, is
   alone blamable, or has the nature of sin; and not the effect of that
   choice. Thus nothing can be sinful, but the effect of choice; and yet
   the effect of choice never can be sinful, but only the cause, which
   alone is chargeable with all the blame.

   Again, the choice, from which sin proceeds, is itself sinful. Not only
   is this implied in his saying, "The cause alone is chargeable with all
   the blame;" but he expressly speaks of the choice as faulty, [361] and
   calls that choice wicked, from which depravity and corruption proceeds.
   [362] Now if the choice itself be sin, and there be no sin but what
   proceeds from a sinful choice, then the sinful choice must proceed from
   another antecedent choice; it must he chosen by a foregoing act of
   will, determining itself to that sinful choice, that so it may have
   that which he speaks of as absolutely essential to the nature of sin,
   namely, that it proceeds from our choice, and does not happen to us
   necessarily. But if the sinful choice itself proceeds from a foregoing
   choice, then also that foregoing choice must be sinful; it being the
   cause of sin, and so alone chargeable with the blame. Yet if that
   foregoing choice be sinful, then neither must that happen to us
   necessarily, but must like-wise proceed from choice, another act of
   choice preceding that: for we must remember, that "Nothing is sinful
   but what proceeds from our choice." And then, for the same reason, even
   this prior choice, last mentioned, must also be sinful, being
   chargeable with all the blame of that consequent evil choice, which was
   its effect. And so we must go back till we come to the very first
   volition, the prime or original act of choice in the whole chain. And
   this to be sure must be a sinful choice, because this is the origin or
   primitive cause of all the train of evils which follow; and according
   to our author, must therefore be "alone chargeable with all the blame."
   And yet so it is, according to him, this "cannot be sinful," because it
   does not "proceed from our own choice," or any foregoing act of our
   will; it being, by the supposition, the very first act of will in the
   case. And therefore it must be necessary, as to us, having no choice of
   ours to be the cause of it.

   In p. 232. he says, "Adam's sin was from his own disobedient will; and
   so must every man's sin, and all the sin in the world be, as well as
   his." By this, it seems, he must have a "disobedient will" before he
   sins; for the cause must be before the effect: and yet that disobedient
   will itself is sinful; otherwise it could not be called disobedient.
   But the question is, How do men come by the disobedient will, this
   cause of all the sin in the world? It must not come necessarily,
   without men's choice; for if so, it is not sin, nor is there any
   disobedience in it. Therefore that disobedient will must also come from
   a disobedient will; and so on, in infinitum. Otherwise it must be
   supposed, that there is some sin in the world, which does not come from
   a disobedient will: contrary to our author's dogmatical assertions.

   In p. 166. S. he says, "Adam could not sin without a sinful
   inclination." Here he calls that inclination itself sinful, which is
   the principle from whence sinful acts proceed; as elsewhere he speaks
   of the disobedient will from whence all sin comes: and he allows, [363]
   that "the law reaches to all the latent principles of sin;" meaning
   plainly, that it forbids, and threatens punishment for, those latent
   principles. Now these latent principles of sin, these sinful
   inclinations, without which, according to our author, there can be no
   sinful act, cannot all proceed from a sinful choice; because that would
   imply great contradiction. For, by the supposition, they are the
   principles from whence a sinful choice comes, and whence all sinful
   acts of will proceed; and there can be no sinful act without them. So
   that the first latent principles and inclinations, from whence all
   sinful acts proceed, are sinful; and yet they are not sinful, because
   they do not proceed from a wicked choice, without which, according to
   him, "nothing can be sinful."

   Dr. T. speaking of that proposition of the Assembly of Divines, wherein
   they assert, that man is by nature utterly corrupt, &c. [364] thinks
   himself well warranted, by the supposed great evidence of these his
   contradictory notions, to say, "Therefore sin is not natural to us; and
   therefore I shall not scruple to say, this proposition in the Assembly
   of Divines is false." But it may be worthy of consideration, whether it
   would not have greatly become him, before he had clothed himself with
   so much assurance, and proceeded, on the foundation of these his
   notions, so magisterially to charge the Assembly's proposition with
   falsehood, to have taken care that his own propositions, which he has
   set in opposition to them, should be a little more consistent; that he
   might not have contradicted himself, while contradicting them; lest
   some impartial judges, observing his inconsistence, should think they
   had warrant to declare with equal assurance, that "they should not
   scruple to say, Dr. T.s doctrine is false."
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. II.

   CONCERNING THE OBJECTION, AGAINST THE DOCTRINE OF NATIVE CORRUPTION,
   THAT TO SUPPOSE MEN RECEIVE THEIR FIRST EXISTENCE IN SIN, IS TO MAKE
   HIM WHO IS THE AUTHOR OF THEIR BEING, THE AUTHOR OF THEIR DEPRAVITY.

   One argument against a supposed native, sinful depravity, which Dr. T.
   greatly insists upon, is, "that this does in effect charge him, who is
   the author of our nature, who formed us in the womb, with being the
   author of a sinful corruption of nature; and that it is highly
   injurious to the God of our nature, whose hands have formed and
   fashioned us, to believe our nature to be originally corrupted, and
   that in the worst sense of corruption. [365]

   With respect to this, I would observe, in the first place, that this
   writer, in handling this grand objection, supposes something to belong
   to the doctrine objected against, as maintained by the divines whom he
   is opposing, which does not belong to it, nor follow from it. As
   particularly, he supposes the doctrine of original sin to imply, that
   nature must be corrupted by some positive influence; "something, by
   some means or other, infused into the human nature; some quality or
   other, not from the choice of our minds, but like a taint, tincture, or
   infection, altering the natural constitution, faculties, and
   dispositions of our souls. [366] That sin and evil dispositions are
   implanted in the foetus in the womb." [367] Whereas truly our doctrine
   neither implies nor infers any such thing. In order to account for a
   sinful corruption of nature, yea, a total native depravity of the heart
   of man, there is not the least need of supposing any evil quality,
   infused, implanted, or wrought into the nature of man, by any positive
   cause, or influence whatsoever, either from God, or the creature; or of
   supposing, that man is conceived and born with a fountain of evil in
   his heart, such as is any thing properly positive. I think, a little
   attention to the nature of things will be sufficient to satisfy any
   impartial considerate inquirer, that the absence of positive good
   principles, and so the withholding of a special divine influence to
   impart and maintain those good principles--leaving the common natural
   principles of self-love, natural appetite, &c. to themselves, without
   the government of superior divine principles--will certainly be
   followed with the corruption; yea, the total corruption of the heart,
   without occasion for any positive influence at all: and that it was
   thus in fact that corruption of nature came on Adam, immediately on his
   fall, and comes on all his posterity, as sinning in him, and falling
   with him. [368]

   The case with man was plainly this: When God made man at first, he
   implanted in him two kinds of principles. There was an inferior kind,
   which may be called natural, being the principles of mere human nature;
   such as self-love, with those natural appetites and passions, which
   belong to the nature of man, in which his love to his own liberty,
   honour, and pleasure, were exercised: these, when alone, and left to
   themselves, are what the Scriptures sometimes call flesh. Besides
   these, there were superior principles, that were spiritual, holy, and
   divine, summarily comprehended in divine love; wherein consisted the
   spiritual image of God, and man's righteousness and true holiness;
   which are called in Scripture the divine nature. These principles may,
   in some sense, be called supernatural, [369] being (however concreated
   or connate, yet) such as are above those principles that are
   essentially implied in, or necessarily resulting from, and inseparably
   connected with, mere human nature; and being such as immediately depend
   on man's union and communion with God, or divine communications and
   influences of God's Spirit: which though withdrawn, and man's nature
   forsaken of these principles, human nature would be human nature still;
   man's nature, as such, being entire without these divine principles,
   which the Scripture sometimes calls spirit, in contradistinction to
   flesh. These superior principles were given to possess the throne, and
   maintain an absolute dominion in the heart; the other to be wholly
   subordinate and subservient. And while things continued thus, all was
   in excellent order, peace, and beautiful harmony, and in a proper and
   perfect state. These divine principles thus reigning, were the dignity,
   life, happiness, and glory of man's nature. When man sinned and broke
   God's covenant, and fell under his curse, these superior principles
   left his heart: for indeed God then left him; that communion with God
   on which these principles depended, entirely ceased; the Holy Spirit,
   that divine inhabitant, forsook the house. Because it would have been
   utterly improper in itself, and inconsistent with the constitution God
   had established, that he should still maintain communion with man, and
   continue by his friendly, gracious, vital influences, to dwell with him
   and in him, after he was become a rebel, and had incurred God's wrath
   and curse. Therefore immediately the superior divine principles wholly
   ceased; so light ceases in a room when the candle is withdrawn; and
   thus man was left in a state of darkness, woful corruption, and ruin;
   nothing but flesh without spirit. The inferior principles of self-love,
   and natural appetite, which were given only to serve, being alone, and
   left to themselves, of course became reigning principles; having no
   superior principles to regulate or control them, they became absolute
   masters of the heart. The immediate consequence of which was a fatal
   catastrophe, a turning of all things upside down, and the succession of
   a state of the most odious and dreadful confusion. Man immediately set
   up himself, and the objects of his private affections and appetites, as
   supreme; and so they took the place of god. These inferior principles
   are like fire in a house; which, we say, is a good servant, but a bad
   master; very useful while kept in its place, but if left to take
   possession of the whole house, soon brings all to destruction. Man's
   love to his own honour, separate interest, and private pleasure, which
   before was wholly subordinate unto love to God, and regard to his
   authority and glory, now disposes and impels him to pursue those
   objects, without regard to God's honour, or law; because there is no
   true regard to these divine things left in him. In consequence of
   which, he seeks those objects as much when against God's honour and
   law, as when agreeable to them. God still continuing strictly to
   require supreme regard to himself, and forbidding all undue
   gratifications of these inferior passions--but only in perfect
   subordination to the ends, and agreeableness to the rules and limits,
   which his holiness, honour, and law prescribe--hence immediately arises
   enmity in the heart, now wholly under the power of self-love; and
   nothing but war ensues, in a constant course, against God. As, when a
   subject has once renounced his lawful sovereign, and set up a pretender
   in his stead, a state of enmity and war against his rightful king
   necessarily ensues. It were easy to show, how every lust, and depraved
   disposition of man's heart, would naturally arise from this private
   original, if here were room for it. Thus it is easy to give an account,
   how total corruption of heart should follow on man's eating the
   forbidden fruit, though that was but one act of sin, without God
   putting any evil into his heart, or implanting any bad principle, or
   infusing any corrupt taint, and so becoming the author of depravity.
   Only God's withdrawing, as it was highly proper and necessary that he
   should, from rebel-man, and his natural principles being left to
   themselves, is sufficient to account for his becoming entirely corrupt,
   and bent on sinning against God.

   And as Adam's nature became corrupt, without God's implanting or
   infusing of any evil thing into it; so does the nature of his
   posterity. God dealing with Adam as the head of his posterity, (as has
   been shown,) and treating them as one, he deals with his posterity as
   having all sinned in him. And therefore, as God withdrew spiritual
   communion, and his vital gracious influence, from the common head, so
   he withholds the same from all the members, as they come into
   existence; whereby they come into the world mere flesh, and entirely
   under the government of natural and inferior principles; and so become
   wholly corrupt, as Adam did.

   Now, for God so far to have the disposal of this affair, as to withhold
   those influences, without which, nature will be corrupt, is not to be
   the author of sin. But, concerning this, I must refer the reader to
   what I have said of it in my discourse on the Freedom of the Will.
   [370] Though, besides what I have there said, I may here observe, that
   if for God so far to order and dispose the being of sin, as to permit
   it, by withholding the gracious influences necessary to prevent it, is
   for him to be the author of sin, then some things which Dr. T. himself
   lays down, will equally be attended with this very consequence. For,
   from time to time he speaks of God giving men up to the vilest lusts
   and affections, by permitting, or leaving them. [371] Now, if the
   continuance of sin, and its increase and prevalence, may be in
   consequence of God's disposal, in withholding needful grace, without
   God being the author of that continuance and prevalence of sin; then,
   by parity of reason, may the being of sin, in the race of Adam, be in
   consequence of Gods disposal, by his withholding that grace which is
   needful to prevent it, without his being the author of sin.

   If here it should be said, that God is not the author of sin, in giving
   up to sin those who have already made themselves sinful, because when
   men have once made themselves sinful, their continuing so, and sin
   prevailing in them, and becoming more and more habitual, will follow in
   a course of nature: I answer, let that be remembered which this writer
   so greatly urges, in opposition to them who suppose original corruption
   comes in a course of nature, viz. That the course of nature is nothing
   without God. He utterly rejects the notion of the "course of nature's
   being a proper active cause, which will work, and go on by itself,
   without God, if he lets or permits it." [372] But affirms, "That the
   course of nature, separate from the agency of God, is no cause or
   nothing; and that the course of nature should continue itself, or go on
   to operate by itself, any more than at first produce itself, is
   absolutely impossible." These strong expressions are his. Therefore, to
   explain the continuance of the habits of sin in the same person, when
   once introduced, yea, to explain the very being of any such habits, in
   consequence of repeated acts, our author must have recourse to those
   same principles, which he rejects as absurd to the utmost degree, when
   alleged to explain the corruption of nature in the posterity of Adam.
   For, that habits, either good or bad, should continue, after being once
   established, or that habits should be settled and have existence in
   consequence of repeated acts, can be owing only to a course of nature,
   and those laws of nature which God has established.

   That the posterity of Adam should be born without holiness, and so with
   a depraved nature, comes to pass as much by the established course of
   nature, as the continuance of a corrupt disposition in a particular
   person, after he once has it; or as much as Adam's continuing unholy
   and corrupt, after he had once lost his holiness. For Adam's posterity
   are from him, and as it were in him, and belonging to Him, according to
   an established course of nature, as much as the branches of a tree are,
   according to a course of nature, from the tree, in the tree, and
   belonging to the tree; or, (to make use of the comparison which Dr. T.
   himself chooses from time to time, as proper to illustrate the matter,
   [373] ) just as the acorn is derived from the oak. And I think, the
   acorn is as much derived from the oak, according to the course of
   nature, as the buds and branches. It is true, that God, by his own
   almighty power, creates the soul of the infant; and it is also true, as
   Dr. T. often insists, that God, by his immediate power, forms and
   fashions the body of the infant in the womb; yet he does both according
   to that course of nature, which he has been pleased to establish. The
   course of nature is demonstrated, by late improvements in philosophy,
   to be indeed what our author himself says it is, viz. Nothing but the
   established order of the agency and operation of the author of nature.
   And though there be the immediate agency of God in bringing the soul
   into existence in generation, yet it is done according to the method
   and order established by the author of nature, as much as his producing
   the bud, or the acorn of the oak; and as much as his continuing a
   particular person in being, after he once has existence. God's
   immediate agency in bringing the soul of a child into being, is as much
   according to an established order, as his immediate agency in any of
   the works of nature whatsoever. It is agreeable to the established
   order of nature, that the good qualities wanting in the tree, should
   also be wanting in the branches and fruit. It is agreeable to the order
   of nature, that when a particular person is without good moral
   qualities in his heart, he should continue without them, till some new
   cause or efficiency produces them. And it is as much agreeable to an
   established course and order of nature, that since Adam, the head of
   mankind, the root of that great tree with many branches springing from
   it, was deprived of original righteousness, the branches should come
   forth without it. Or, if any dislike the word nature, as used in this
   last case, and instead of it choose to call it a constitution, or
   established order of successive events, the alteration of the name will
   not in the least alter the state of the present argument. Where the
   name, nature, is allowed without dispute, no more is meant than an
   established method and order of events, settled and limited by divine
   wisdom.

   If any should object to this, that if the want of original
   righteousness be thus according to an established course of nature,
   then why are not principles of holiness, when restored by divine grace,
   also communicated to posterity; I answer, The divine law and
   establishments of the author of nature, are precisely settled by him as
   he pleaseth, and limited by his wisdom. Grace is introduced among the
   race of man by a new establishment; not on the ground of God's original
   establishment, as the head of the natural world, and author of the
   first creation; but by a constitution of a vastly higher kind; wherein
   Christ is made the root of the tree, whose branches are his spiritual
   seed, and he is the head of the new creation; of which I need not stand
   now to speak particularly.

   But here I desire it may be noted, that I do not suppose the natural
   depravity of the posterity of Adam is owing to the course of nature
   only; it is also owing to the just judgment of God. But yet I think, it
   is as truly and in the same manner owing to the course of nature, that
   Adam's posterity come into the world without original righteousness, as
   that Adam himself continued without it, after he had once lost it. That
   Adam continued destitute of holiness, when he had lost it, and would
   always have so continued, had it not been restored by a Redeemer, was
   not only a natural consequence, according to the course of things
   established by God, as the author of nature; but it was also a penal
   consequence, or a punishment of his sin. God, in righteous judgment,
   continued to absent himself from Adam after he became a rebel; and
   withheld from him now those influences of the Holy Spirit, which he
   before had. And just thus I suppose it to be with every natural branch
   of mankind: all are looked upon as sinning in and with their common
   root; and God righteously withholds special influences and spiritual
   communications from all, for this sin. But of the manner and order of
   these things, more may be said in the next chapter.

   On the whole, this grand objection against the doctrine of men being
   born corrupt, that it makes him who gave us our being, to be the cause
   of the being of corruption, can have no more force in it, than a like
   argument has to prove, that if men by a course of nature continue
   wicked, or remain without goodness, after they have by vicious acts
   contracted vicious habits, and so made themselves wicked, it makes him,
   who is the cause of their continuance in being, and the cause of the
   continuance of the course of nature, to be the cause of their continued
   wickedness. Dr. T. says, [374] "God would not make any thing that is
   hateful to him; because, by the very terms, he would hate to make such
   a thing." But if this be good arguing in the case to which it is
   applied, may I not as well say, God would not continue a thing in being
   that is hateful to him; because, by the very terms, he would hate to
   continue such a thing in being? I think, the very terms do as much (and
   no more) infer one of these propositions, as the other. In like manner,
   the rest that he says on that head may be shown to be unreasonable, by
   only substituting the word continue, in the place of make and
   propagate. I may fairly imitate his way of reasoning thus: to say, God
   continues us according to his own original decree, or law of
   continuation, which obliges him to continue us in a manner he abhors,
   is really to make bad worse: for it is supposing him to be defective in
   wisdom, or by his own decree or law to lay such a constraint upon his
   own actions, that he cannot do what he would, but is continually doing
   what he would not, what he hates to do, and what he condemns in us;
   viz. continuing us sinful when he condemns us for continuing ourselves
   sinful." If the reasoning be weak in the one case, it is no less so in
   the other.

   If any shall still insist, that there is a difference between God so
   disposing things, as that depravity of heart shall be continued,
   according to the settled course of nature, in the same person, who has
   by his own fault introduced it; and his so disposing as that men,
   according to a course of nature, should be born with depravity, in
   consequence of Adam's introducing of sin, by his act which we had no
   concern in, and cannot be justly charged with: on this I would observe,
   that it is quite going off the objection, which we have been upon, from
   God's agency, and flying to another. It is then no longer insisted on,
   that simply for him, from whose agency the course of nature and our
   existence derive, so to dispose things as that we should have existence
   in a corrupt state, is for him to be the author of sin: but the plea
   now advanced is, that it is not proper and just for such an agent so to
   dispose, in this case, and only in consequence of Adam's sin; it not
   being just to charge Adam's sin to his posterity. And this matter shall
   be particularly considered, in answer to the next objection; to which I
   now proceed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [365] P. 137, 187-189, 256, 258, 260, 143. S. and other places.

   [366] Page 187.

   [367] Page 146, 148, 149. S. and the like in many other places.

   [368] The sentiment contained in this paragraph, and illustrated in the
   following part of this chapter, is of the utmost importance, in order
   not only to remove Pelagian prejudices, and the cavils of modern
   philosophers, but also to give a just and consistent view of the nature
   and cause of sin; the cause of all sin in general, and original sin in
   particular. Our author's explanation, which immediately follows, both
   in the text and in the note, is ingenious, and in some respects quite
   satisfactory. But a brief representation of the same result in another
   way, may demand some attention. 1. It is probably more philosophical,
   as well as more intelligible, in describing the two kinds of
   principles, as the author calls them, possessed by Adam, to say, that
   the inferior ones were, those faculties in man which constituted him a
   moral agent; rather than calling them "the principles of mere human
   nature." The superior ones are very accurately described; but instead
   of calling them "supernatural principles;" they may more properly be
   termed, divine, benevolent, sovereign influence, superadded to those
   faculties which constituted adam a moral agent. This representation
   leads to the essential relations that subsist between God and his
   creature man. "Mere human nature," and "supernatural principles" convey
   no distinctive character of relation. "Faculties which constitute a
   moral agent," express the ground of relation between equity in God and
   accountableness in man; and "benevolent influences," express the ground
   of relation between sovereignty in God and passiveness in man. 2. That
   Adam had such qualifications, or faculties, as rendered him a moral
   agent, independently of his spiritual knowledge, righteousness,
   holiness, dominion, honour, and glory--in other words, his divine
   light, holy life, and supreme love to God--is self-evident. For, after
   he had lost those excellencies, he was confessedly no less a moral
   agent, and accountable to his divine Governor and Judge for his temper,
   thoughts, desires, words, and works, than he was before he lost them.
   3. The philosophical cause, or the true origin, of Adam's defection,
   was his liberty in union with his passive power. For an explanation of
   these terms, and the proof of the proposition just laid down, we must
   refer the reader to our notes on the first volume of this work, where
   the subject is professedly discussed. 4. The true and ultimate cause of
   the first sin of Adam, of all his subsequent sins, and those of his
   posterity, whether infants or adults, is not essentially different. If
   the principles, as our author calls them, or the faculties and
   qualifications, which constitute moral agency and accountability, be
   left to themselves--whereby they become influenced by passive power,
   not counteracted by sovereign, benevolent, or holy divine
   influence--the effect will be the same, though attended with different
   circumstances. 5. When the cause of Adam's integrity, perfection,
   spirituality, and happiness, or his paradisiacal life, was no longer
   operative for his preservation, defection ensued; which consisted in
   the loss of the chief good, together with that disorder, confusion, and
   a conscious exposedness to a continuance in that state, whereby
   happiness was necessarily exchanged for a restless uneasiness, called
   misery. 6. This was the case of Adam in his own person. But our author,
   in the next chapter, excellently shows, that Adam and all his posterity
   were strictly one. This union we may call a systematic whole. For
   mankind, or the whole race of man, has a constituted connexion, no less
   than a seed with its plant; for instance, the acorn with the oak-plant,
   and that with its future branches. We justly called it the same tree
   from the time it was planted to its utmost longevity, though some of
   its branches came into existence a hundred years or more after the
   first shoot. This union of Adam with his posterity, is no less a
   constituted union, than that which connects the solar system; or any
   other inferior systematic whole, as an animal body, which is regarded
   as one from its birth till its death. For instance, nothing but a
   constitution founded in the sovereign pleasure of God, caused the body
   of Methuselah to be the same, or regarded as the same, when in infancy,
   and above nine hundred years after. The parts of his body, at least
   most of them, were as different in old age, compared with his infancy,
   as any of his posterity are different from Adam. In each case alike,
   the appointment of God in forming a course of nature, or his operations
   according to a constituted plan, could make the body of Methuselah to
   be the same body from the first to the last; and the posterity of Adam
   the same with himself. 7. In every vital system there is a vital part,
   and in every other system, as such, one part is more essential than
   another. Adam was the vital part of the system of mankind.--The root of
   the tree, the foundation of the building, the main spring of the
   machine, the sun of the system. We his posterity are but so many
   members of a body, and are all dependent on him as on our head or
   heart; but not so on one another. There may be the amputation of a
   limb, while the other limbs are not injured; but if the head or heart
   be deprived of life, all the members are deprived at the same time. A
   branch of a tree may be lopped off without injury to the other part;
   but if the root, the vital part, be affected, all the branches are also
   affected as the necessary consequence. A dead root and a living tree
   are incompatible; though a dead branch and a living branch of the same
   tree are not. A watch is a system formed on principles of mechanism,
   the index may be mutilated, or the cog of a wheel may be broken and
   detached, without affecting the more essential parts; but if the main
   spring be broken, the whole system, as to its designed use, is
   destroyed. A building is a system; a slate or a chimney may be blown
   down, without affecting the foundation, but if the whole foundation be
   undermined, the whole fabric must fall to ruin. The solar system might
   subsist, for ought that appears to the contrary, though a comet, a
   satellite, or a planet, were annihilated; but if the sun were
   annihilated, ruin and confusion must ensue. 8. Whatever Adam lost by
   transgression, he could have no claim either in equity or by promise,
   that is, he could have no claim at all, for a restoration of it. And
   what he could have no claim for himself, could not be claimable by or
   for his posterity; any more than a branch or a member could obtain
   life, when the root of that branch or the head of that member had
   ceased to live; or any more than the subordinate parts of any system
   when the radical, vital, fundamental, and essential parts had failed.
   9. What Adam lost was the divine life, and the happiness implied in it,
   as a favour granted on a condition. Observing the condition, he was to
   have it continued; but on breaking the condition, it was to be
   forfeited. Adam may be compared to a lord in waiting, who should have
   free access to every room in the king's palace one excepted. By
   abstaining from this intrusion, he should have his honour and dignity
   preserved, and confirmed to his heirs for ever; but by offending as to
   the condition prescribed, he must sink to the rank of a common subject,
   stripped of all his former dignity. How absurd would it be for the
   heirs of such a lord to step forward and claim what he had forfeited!
   Equally absurd is it to say, that Adam's posterity are no suffers by
   his transgression. 10. If we would form accurate notions of Adam's
   transgression, original sin, and the imputation of guilt, it will be of
   the utmost importance to consider the divine law, by which is the
   knowledge of sin, under a twofold consideration. As a rule requiring
   conformity and obedience in every period of our existence, or the
   measure of moral obligation; and as a covenant, the condition of which
   was perfect conformity and obedience, under forfeiture of a special
   favour. The law as a rule may be transgressed times and methods
   innumerable; but as a covenant it could be transgressed only once. For
   the very first offence was a breach of the condition, and a forfeiture
   of that favour which depended on the performance of that condition. It
   is possible for the transgressor of the law as a rule to become,
   through grace, a perfect character, and therefore perfectly conformable
   to that law. But to be perfectly conformable to the required condition,
   once broken, is impossible; as impossible as to recall time once past,
   or to make transgression to be no transgression. 11. Our author very
   justly remarks that "there is not the least, need of supposing any evil
   quality infused, implanted, or wrought into the nature of man, by any
   positive cause or influence whatsoever, either from God, or the
   creature; or of supposing, that man is conceived and born with a
   foundation of evil in his heart, such as in any thing properly
   positive." But however just this remark, there is reason to fear that
   many beside Dr. Taylor have imbibed a notion of original sin
   considerably different from what is here asserted. It is not improbable
   that the terms by which the evil has been commonly expressed without a
   due examination of the idea intended, have had no small influence to
   effect this. The frequent use of such analogical and allusive terms as
   pollution, defilement, corruption, contamination, and the like, seems
   to imitate something positive; as these expressions in their original
   meaning convey an idea of something superadded to the subject. Whereas
   other terms, though equally analogical and allusive, imply no such
   thing; such as, disorder, discord, confusion, and the like. We do not
   mean to condemn the use of the former, or to recommend the latter to
   their exclusion; but only design to caution against a wrong inference
   from a frequent use of them. 12. On the subject of the imputation of
   Adam's offence to his posterity, our author, in the next chapter, has
   treated very ably and fully. But we may here observe, that it is of the
   greatest importance to have just views of what is called original
   guilt. It is to be feared that many form very confused notions of the
   subject, when it is said. "we are all guilty when born," or "we are all
   guilty of Adam's transgression," or "the guilt of Adam's offence is
   ours." Though we conceive these, and similar propositions, to be
   expressive of an important truth; yet we are no less liable to be led
   astray from the true idea referred to by these expressions, than by
   others employed to represent moral depravity. 13. It may contribute to
   a clearness of conception on the subject, if we keep in mind, that Adam
   was guilty by his first offence, under a twofold consideration. He was
   guilty of a breach of law considered as a rule of rectitude, and of the
   same law as a covenant enjoining the observance of a special duty,
   which was the avowed and express condition of it. The performance of
   the condition was to secure not merely moral purity and innocence, but
   also the favour, or gracious benefit, which he possessed on the footing
   of a sovereign grant. This was his federal privilege. How by the
   transgression of the law, considered as a covenant, this favour was
   forfeited; and for God to treat him as one deprived of this favour, is
   the same thing as to treat him as guilty. For how could he be treated
   otherwise, when the very condition on which he retained the favour was
   broken? 14. Whatever Adam possessed, beyond those considerations which
   constituted him a moral agent, was the fruit of sovereign benevolence.
   Hence arises the propriety of regarding the possession of his
   privilege, on the observance of a specified condition, under the term
   covenant. For, if Adam possessed some spiritual principles, or
   benevolent influences, as a person possesses immunities and privileges
   by charter for himself and his heirs; and if these chartered benefits
   be retained on condition of not offending in a specified manner; it
   follows, that a privation of such benefits belongs as much to the heirs
   as to the individual offending. But if they are treated for breach of
   such covenant, or charter held on condition, as persons included in the
   forfeiture, it is manifest they are regarded so far guilty or worthy to
   suffer such loss. 15. From these considerations it follows that Adam's
   breach of law as a rule which brought guilt upon him as an individual,
   is not the guilt imputable to his posterity. During his long life, no
   doubt, he was guilty of innumerable offences after the first
   transgression, but not one of these is imputed to us; the reason is,
   that after he broke the condition of the charter, he stood upon the
   bare ground of personal moral obligation. But personal guilt, on such
   ground, cannot in equity be transferred from one to another. The sins
   of the father, whether the first father or any other, considered merely
   as a personal deviation from rectitude, or a breach of moral
   obligation, cannot be imputed to the children. 16. What Adam,
   therefore, suffered for breach of covenant, was a privation of
   chartered benefits. The unavoidable effect of this was, DEATH; a
   privation of spiritual life--which continued is death eternal--and a
   privation of that protection and care which would have preserved from
   temporal death. There seems little room to doubt that even the
   corporeal, or elementary part of Adam underwent a great change by the
   fall. However, having forfeited his charter of preservation by
   transgression, he and all his posterity became exposed to the natural
   operations of this world and its elements. Matter and motion, in
   animals and vegetables, in the natural state of things, insure a
   dissolution. 17. Much has been said by some divines, about the
   probability of Adam, had he kept the condition, being promoted to some
   situation still more exalted. But there is reason to suspect, that such
   a sentiment proceeds on the supposition of Adam possessing a less
   exalted situation than he really did possess. The idea seems to be
   founded on a probable promotion for continued obedience. But what could
   be a greater reward than a continuance of chartered privileges? And
   what greater loss than their forfeiture? 18. It would not be difficult
   to demonstrate, were not this note too far extended to admit of it,
   that Adam, dealt with on the ground of strict equity, would have been
   not less liable to defection than his posterity are, when they begin to
   exercise moral agency. Therefore, the objection against the
   constitution of Adam and his posterity being regarded as one, is
   deprived of all force. For, whatever creature, in whatever world, were
   dealt with in strict equity, without benevolent influence to counteract
   passive power, he would have no advantages against a liability to
   defection above the race of man after the fall. The only difference is,
   that Adam once actually possessed an exalted privilege, and fell from
   it. And if his posterity, rendered so far guilty as to be deprived of
   chartered benefits with him, cannot be raised to happiness from their
   fallen state without the exercise of benevolent sovereign influence in
   the plan of salvation: it should be recollected, that Adam himself
   could not have maintained his standing but by the same benevolent
   sovereign influence, though exercised in a different way. COROLLARY.
   19. Hence the propriety and the true ground of the well known
   distinction of a believer in the second Adam not being under the law
   (i.e. the condemnation of the law) as a covenant, though under the law
   as a rule. It is found, as to its true reason, in the state of Adam, as
   above explained.--W

   [369] To prevent all cavils, the reader is desired particularly to
   observe, in what sense I here use the words natural and
   supernatural:--Not as epithets of distinction between that which is
   concreated or connate, and that which is extraordinarily introduced
   afterwards, besides the first state of things, or the order established
   originally, beginning when man's nature began; but as distinguishing
   between what belongs to, or flows from, that nature which man has,
   merely as man, and those things which are above this, by which one is
   denominated, not only a man, but a truly virtuous, holy, and spiritual
   man; which, though they began in Adam as soon as humanity began, and
   are necessary to the perfection and well-being of the human nature, yet
   are not essential to the constitution of it, or necessary to its being:
   inasmuch as one may have every thing to his being man, exclusively of
   them. If in thus using the words, natural and supernatural, I use them
   in an uncommon sense, it is not from any affectation of singularity,
   but for want of other terms more aptly to express my meaning.

   [370] Part iv. § 9.

   [371] Key, § 388, note: and Par. on Rom. i. 24, 36.

   [372] Page 134. S. See also with what vehemence this is urged in p.
   137. S.

   [373] Page 146, 187.

   [374] Page 136. S.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. III.

   THAT GREAT OBJECTION AGAINST THE IMPUTATION OF ADAM'S SIN TO HIS
   POSTERITY, CONSIDERED, THAT SUCH IMPUTATION IS UNJUST AND UNREASONABLE,
   INASMUCH AS ADAM AND HIS POSTERITY ARE NOT ONE AND THE SAME. WITH A
   BRIEF REFLECTION SUBJOINED OF WHAT SOME HAVE SUPPOSED, OF GOD IMPUTING
   THE GUILT OF ADAM'S SIN TO HIS POSTERITY, BUT IN AN INFINITELY LESS
   DEGREE THAN TO ADAM HIMSELF.

   That we may proceed with the greater clearness in considering the main
   objections against supposing the guilt of Adam's sin to be imputed to
   his posterity; I would premise some observations with a view to the
   right stating of the doctrine; and then show its reasonableness, in
   opposition to the great clamour raised against it on this head.

   I think, it would go far towards directing us to the more clear
   conception and right statement of this affair, were we steadily to bear
   this in mind: that God, in every step of his proceeding with Adam, in
   relation to the covenant or constitution established with him, looked
   on his posterity as being one with him. And though he dealt more
   immediately with Adam, it yet was as the head of the whole body, and
   the root of the whole tree; and in his proceedings with him, he dealt
   with all the branches, as if they had been then existing in their root.

   From which it will follow, that both guilt, or exposedness to
   punishment, and also depravity of heart, came upon Adam's posterity
   just as they came upon him, as much as if he and they had all
   co-existed, like a tree with many branches; allowing only for the
   difference necessarily resulting from the place Adam stood in, as head
   or root of the whole. Otherwise, it is as if, in every step of
   proceeding, every alteration in the root had been attended, at the same
   instant, with the same alterations throughout the whole tree, in each
   individual branch. I think, this will naturally follow on the
   supposition of there being a constituted oneness or identity of Adam
   and his posterity in this affair.

   Therefore I am humbly of opinion, that if any have supposed the
   children of Adam to come into the world with a double guilt, one the
   guilt of Adam's sin, another the guilt arising from their having a
   corrupt heart, they have not so well conceived of the matter. The guilt
   a man has upon his soul at first existence, is one and simple, viz. the
   guilt of the original apostacy, the guilt of the sin by which the
   species first rebelled against God. This, and the guilt arising from
   the depraved disposition of the heart, are not to be looked upon as two
   things, distinctly imputed and charged upon men in the sight of God.
   Indeed the guilt that arises from the corruption of the heart, as it
   remains a confirmed principle, and appears in its consequent
   operations, is a distinct and additional guilt: but the guilt arising
   from the first existing of a depraved disposition in Adam's posterity,
   I apprehend, is not distinct from their guilt of Adam's first sin. For
   so it was not in Adam himself. The first evil disposition or
   inclination of Adam to sin, was not properly distinct from his first
   act of sin, but was included in it. The external act he committed was
   no otherwise his, than as his heart was in it, or as that action
   proceeded from the wicked inclination of his heart. Nor was the guilt
   he had double, as for two distinct sins: one, the wickedness of his
   will in that affair; another, the wickedness of the external act,
   caused by it. His guilt was all truly from the act of his inward man;
   exclusive of which the motions of his body were no more than the
   motions of any lifeless instrument. His sin consisted in wickedness of
   heart, fully sufficient for, and entirely amounting to, all that
   appeared in the act he committed.

   The depraved disposition of Adam's heart is to be considered two ways.
   (1.) As the first rising of an evil inclination in his heart, exerted
   in his first act of sin, and the ground of the complete transgression.
   (2.) An evil disposition of heart continuing afterwards, as a confirmed
   principle that came by God's forsaking of him; which was a punishment
   of his first transgression. This confirmed corruption, by its remaining
   and continued operation, brought additional guilt on his soul.

   In like manner, depravity of heart is to be considered two ways in
   Adam's posterity. The first listing of a corrupt disposition, is not to
   be looked upon as sin distinct from their participation of Adam's first
   sin. It is as it were the extended pollution of that sin, through the
   whole tree, by virtue of the constituted union of the branches with the
   root; or the inherence of the sin of that head of the species in the
   members, in their consent and concurrence with the head in that first
   act. But the depravity of nature remaining as an established principle
   in a child of Adam, and as exhibited in after-operations, is a
   consequence and punishment of the first apostacy thus participated, and
   brings new guilt. The first being of an evil disposition in a child of
   Adam, whereby he is disposed to approve the sin of his first father, so
   far as to imply a full and perfect consent of heart to it, I think, is
   not to be looked upon as a consequence of the imputation of that first
   sin, any more than the full consent of Adam's own heart in the act of
   sinning; which was not consequent on the imputation, but rather prior
   to it in the order of nature. Indeed the derivation or the evil
   disposition to Adam's posterity, or rather, the co-existence of the
   evil disposition, implied in Adam's first rebellion, in the root and
   branches, is a consequence of the union that the wise Author of the
   world has established between Adam and his posterity; but not properly
   a consequence of the imputation of his sin; nay, is rather antecedent
   to it, as it was in Adam himself. The first depravity of heart, and the
   imputation of that sin, are both the consequences of that established
   union; but yet in such order, that the evil disposition is first, and
   the charge of guilt consequent, as it was in the case of Adam himself.
   [375]

   The first existence of an evil disposition, amounting to a full consent
   to Adam's sin, no more infers God being the author of that evil
   disposition in the child, than in the father. The first arising or
   existing of that evil disposition in the heart of Adam, was by God's
   permission; who could have prevented it, if he had pleased, by giving
   such influences of his Spirit, as would have been absolutely effectual
   to hinder it; which, it is plain in fact, he did withhold: and whatever
   mystery may be supposed in the affair, yet no Christian will presume to
   say, it was not in perfect consistence with God's holiness and
   righteousness, notwithstanding Adam had been guilty of no offence
   before. So root and branches being one, according to God's wise
   constitution, the case in fact is, that by virtue of this oneness
   answerable changes or effects through all the branches co-exist with
   the changes in the root: consequently an evil disposition exists in the
   hearts of Adam's posterity, equivalent to that which was exerted in his
   own heart, when he eat the forbidden fruit. Which God has no hand in,
   any otherwise, than in not exerting such an influence, as might be
   effectual to prevent it; as appears by what was observed in the former
   chapter. [376]

   But now the grand objection is against the reasonableness of such a
   constitution, by which Adam and his posterity should be looked upon as
   one, and dealt with accordingly, in an affair of such infinite
   consequence; so that if Adam sinned, they must necessarily be made
   sinners by his disobedience, and come into existence with the same
   depravity of disposition, and be looked upon and treated as though they
   were partakers with him in his act of sin. I have not room here to
   rehearse all Dr. T.s vehement exclamations against the reasonableness
   and justice of this. The reader may at his leisure consult his book,
   and see them in the places referred to below. [377] Whatever black
   colours and frightful representations are employed on this occasion,
   all may be summed up in this, That Adam and his posterity are not one,
   but entirely distinct agents. But with respect to this mighty outcry
   made against the reasonableness of any such constitution, by which God
   is supposed to treat Adam and his posterity as one, I would make the
   following observations.

   I. It signifies nothing to exclaim against plain fact. Such is the
   fact, the most evident and acknowledged fact, with respect to the state
   of all mankind, without exception of one individual among all the
   natural descendants of Adam, as makes it apparent, that God actually
   deals with Adam and his posterity as one, in reference to his apostacy,
   and its infinitely terrible consequences. It has been demonstrated, and
   shewn to be in effect plainly acknowledged, that every individual of
   mankind comes into the world in such circumstances, as that there is no
   hope or possibility of any other than their violating God's holy law,
   (if they ever live to act at all as moral agents,) and being thereby
   justly exposed to eternal ruin. [378] And God either thus deals with
   mankind, because he looks upon them as one with their first father, and
   so treats them as sinful and guilty by his apostacy; or (which will not
   mend the matter) he, without viewing them as at all concerned in that
   affair, but as in every respect perfectly innocent, subjects them
   nevertheless to this infinitely dreadful calamity. Adam by his sin was
   exposed to the calamities and sorrows of this life, to temporal death
   and eternal ruin; as is confessed. And it is also in effect confessed,
   that all his posterity come into the world in such a state, as that the
   certain consequence is their being exposed, and justly so, to the
   sorrows of this life, to temporal death and eternal ruin, unless saved
   by grace. So that we see, God in fact deals with them together, or as
   one. If God orders the consequences of Adam's sin, with regard to his
   posterity's welfare--even in those things which are most important, and
   which in the highest degree concern their eternal interest-- to be the
   same with the consequences to Adam himself, then he treats Adam and his
   posterity as one in that affair. Hence, however the matter be attended
   with difficulty, fact obliges us to get over it, either by finding out
   some solution, or by shutting our mouths, and acknowledging the
   weakness and scantiness of our understandings; as we must in other
   innumerable cases, where apparent and undeniable fact, in God's works
   of creation and providence, is attended with events and circumstances,
   the manner and reason of which are difficult to our
   understandings.--But to proceed.

   II. We will consider the difficulties themselves, insisted on in the
   objections of our opposers. They may be reduced to these two: First,
   That such a constitution is injurious to Adam's posterity. Secondly,
   That it is altogether improper, as it implies falsehood, viewing and
   treating those as one, which indeed are not one, but entirely distinct.

   First difficulty, That appointing Adam to stand, in this great affair,
   as the moral head of his posterity, and so treating them as one with
   him, as standing or falling with him, is injurious to them. To which I
   answer, it is demonstrably otherwise; that such a constitution was so
   far from being injurious to Adam's posterity, any more than if every
   one had been appointed to stand for himself personally, that it was, in
   itself considered, attended with a more eligible probability of a happy
   issue than the latter would have been: and so a constitution that truly
   expresses the goodness of its Author. For,

   1. It is reasonable to suppose, that Adam was as likely, on account of
   his capacity and natural talents, to persevere in obedience, as his
   posterity, (taking one with another,) if they had all been put on the
   trial singly for themselves. And supposing that there was a constituted
   union or oneness of him and his posterity, and that he stood as a
   public person, or common head, all by this constitution would have been
   as sure to partake of the benefit of his obedience, as of the ill
   consequence of his disobedience, in case of his fall.

   2. There was a greater tendency to a happy issue, in such an
   appointment, than if every one had been appointed to stand for himself;
   especially on two accounts. (1.) That Adam had stronger motives to
   watchfulness than his posterity would have had; in that not only his
   own eternal welfare lay at stake, but also that of all his posterity:
   (2.) Adam was in a state of complete manhood, when his trial began. It
   was a constitution very agreeable to the goodness of God, considering
   the state of mankind, which was to be propagated in the way of
   generation, that their first father should be appointed to stand for
   all. For by reason of the manner of their coming into existence in a
   state of infancy, and their coming so gradually to mature state, and so
   remaining for a great while in a state of childhood and comparative
   imperfection, after they were become moral agents, they would be less
   fit to stand for themselves, than their first lather to stand for them.

   If any man, notwithstanding these things, shall say, that for his own
   part, if the affair had been proposed to him, he should have chosen to
   have had his eternal interest trusted in his own hands: it is
   sufficient to answer, that no man's vain opinion of himself, as more
   fit to be trusted than others, alters the true nature and tendency of
   things, as they demonstrably are in themselves. Nor is it a just
   objection, that this constitution has in event proved for the hurt of
   mankind. For it does not follow, that no advantage was given for a
   happy event, in such an establishment, because it was not such as to
   make it utterly impossible there should be any other event.

   3. The goodness of God in such a constitution with Adam appears in
   this: that if there had been no sovereign gracious establishment at
   all, but God had proceeded only on the basis of mere justice, and had
   gone no further than this required, he might have demanded of Adam and
   all his posterity, that they should perform perfect perpetual
   obedience, without ever failing in the least instance, on pain of
   eternal death; and might have made this demand without the promise of
   any positive reward for their obedience. For perfect obedience is a
   debt, that every one owes to his Creator; and therefore is what his
   Creator was not obliged to pay him for. None is obliged to pay his
   debtor for discharging his just debt.--But such was evidently the
   constitution with Adam, that an eternal happy life was to be the
   consequence of his persevering fidelity, to all such as were included
   within that constitution, (of which the tree of life was a sign,) as
   well as eternal death to be the consequence of his disobedience.--I
   come now to consider the

   Second difficulty.--It being thus manifest, that this constitution, by
   which Adam and his posterity are dealt with as one, is not unreasonable
   on account of its being injurious and hurtful to the interest of
   mankind, the only thing remaining in the objection, against such a
   constitution, is the impropriety of it, as implying falsehood, and
   contradiction to the true nature of things; as hereby they are viewed
   and treated as one, who are not one, but wholly distinct; and no
   arbitrary constitution can ever make that to be true, which in itself
   considered is not true.

   This objection, however specious, is really founded on a false
   hypothesis, and wrong notion of what we call sameness or oneness, among
   created things; and the seeming force of the objection arises from
   ignorance or inconsideration of the degree, in which created identity
   or oneness with past existence, in general, depends on the sovereign
   constitution and law of the supreme Author and Disposer of the
   universe.

   Some things are entirely distinct, and very diverse, which yet are so
   united by the established law of the Creator, that by virtue of that
   establishment, they are in a sense one. Thus a tree, grown great, and a
   hundred years old, is one plant with the little sprout, that first came
   out of the ground from whence it grew, and has been continued in
   constant succession; though it is now so exceeding diverse, many
   thousand times bigger, and of a very different form, and perhaps not
   one atom the very same: yet God, according to an established law of
   nature, has in a constant succession communicated to it many of the
   same qualities, and most important properties, as if it were one. It
   has been his pleasure, to constitute an union in these respects, and
   for these purposes, naturally leading us to look upon all as one.--So
   the body of man at forty years of age, is one with the infant body
   which first came into the world, from whence it grew; though now
   constituted of different substance, and the greater part of the
   substance probably changed scores (if not hundreds) of times: and
   though it be now in so many respects exceeding diverse, yet God,
   according to the course of nature, which he has been pleased to
   establish, has caused, that in a certain method it should communicate
   with that infantile body, in the same life, the same senses, the same
   features, and many the same qualities, and in union with the same soul;
   and so, with regard to these purposes, it is dealt with by him as one
   body. Again, the body and soul of a man are one, in a very different
   manner, and for different purposes. Considered in themselves, they are
   exceeding different beings, of a nature as diverse as can be conceived;
   and yet, by a very peculiar divine constitution, or law of nature,
   which God has been pleased to establish, they are strongly united, and
   become one, in most important respects; a wonderful mutual
   communication is established; so that both become different parts of
   the same man. But the union and mutual communication they have, has
   existence, and is entirely regulated and limited, according to the
   sovereign pleasure of God, and the constitution he has been pleased to
   establish.

   And if we come even to the personal identity of created intelligent
   beings, though this be not allowed to consist wholly in what Mr. Locke
   supposes, i. e. Same consciousness; yet I think it cannot be denied,
   that this is one thing essential to it. But it is evident, that the
   communication or continuance of the same consciousness and memory to
   any subject, through successive parts of duration, depends wholly on a
   divine establishment. There would be no necessity, that the remembrance
   and ideas of what is past should continue to exist, but by an arbitrary
   constitution of the Creator.--If any should here insist, that there is
   no need of having recourse to any such constitution, in order to
   account for the continuance of the same consciousness; and should say,
   that the very nature of the soul is such as will sufficiently account
   for it, its ideas and consciousness being retained, according to the
   course of nature: then let it be remembered, who it is that gives the
   soul this nature; and let that be remembered, which Dr. T. says of the
   course of nature, before observed; denying, that the course of nature
   is a proper active cause, which will work and go on by itself without
   God, if he lets and permits it; saying, that the course of nature,
   separate from the agency of God, is no cause, or nothing; and
   affirming, that it is absolutely impossible, the course of nature
   should continue itself, or go on to operate by itself, any more than
   produce itself; [379] and that God, the original of all being, is the
   only cause of all natural effects. [380] Here it is worthy also to be
   observed, what Dr. Turnbull says of the laws of nature, as cited from
   Sir Isaac Newton. [381] "It is the will of the mind that is the first
   cause, that gives subsistence and efficacy to all those laws, who is
   the efficient cause that produces the phenomena, which appear in
   analogy, harmony, and agreement. according to these laws." And, "the
   same principles must take place in things pertaining to moral as well
   as natural philosophy." [382]

   From these things it will clearly follow, that identity of
   consciousness depends wholly on a law of nature; and so, on the
   sovereign will and agency of GOD. And therefore, that personal
   identity, and so the derivation of the pollution and guilt of past sins
   in the same person, depends on an arbitrary divine constitution; and
   this, even though we should allow the same consciousness not to be the
   only thing which constitutes oneness of person, but should, besides
   that, suppose sameness of substance requisite. For, if same
   consciousness be one thing necessary to personal identity, and this
   depends on God's sovereign constitution, it will still follow that
   personal identity depends on God's sovereign constitution.

   And with respect to the identity of created substance itself, in the
   different moments of its duration, I think we shall greatly mistake, if
   we imagine it to be like that absolute, independent identity of the
   first being, whereby he is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
   Nay, on the contrary, it may be demonstrated, that even this oneness of
   created substance, existing at different times, is a merely dependent
   identity; dependent on the pleasure and sovereign constitution of him
   who worketh all in all. This will follow from what is generally
   allowed, and is certainly true, that God not only created all things,
   and gave them being at first, but continually preserves them, and
   upholds them in being. This being a matter of considerable importance,
   it may be worthy here to be considered with a little attention. Let us
   inquire therefore, in the first place, whether it be not evident, that
   God does continually, by his immediate power, uphold every created
   substance in being; and then let us see the consequence.

   That God does, by his immediate power, uphold every created substance
   in being, will be manifest, if we consider that their present existence
   is a dependent existence, and therefore is an effect and must have some
   cause; and the cause must be one of these two; either the antecedent
   existence of the same substance, or else the power of the Creator. But
   it cannot be the antecedent existence of the same substance. For
   instance, the existence of the body of the moon, at this present
   moment, cannot be the effect of its existence at the last foregoing
   moment. For not only was what existed the last moment, no active cause,
   but wholly a passive thing; but this also is to be considered, that no
   cause can produce effects in a time and place in which itself is not.
   It is plain, nothing can exert itself, or operate, when and where it is
   not existing. But the moon's past existence was neither where nor when
   its present existence is. In point of time, what is past entirely
   ceases, when present existence begins; otherwise it would not be past.
   The past moment has ceased, and is gone, when the present moment takes
   place; and no more coexists with it, than any other moment that had
   ceased, twenty years ago. Nor could the past existence of the particles
   of this moving body produce effects in any other place, than where it
   then was. But its existence at the present moment, in every point of
   it, is in a different place, from where its existence was at the last
   preceding moment. From these things, I suppose, it will certainly
   follow, that the present existence, either of this, or any other
   created substance, cannot be an effect of its past existence. The
   existences (so to speak) of an effect, or thing dependent, in different
   parts of space or duration, though ever so near one to another, do not
   at all co-exist one with the other; and therefore are as truly
   different effects, as if those parts of space and duration were ever so
   far asunder. And the prior existence can no more be the proper cause of
   the new existence, in the next moment, or next part of space, than if
   it had been in an age before, or at a thousand miles' distance, without
   any existence to fill up the intermediate time or space. Therefore the
   existence of created substances, in each successive moment, must be the
   effect of the immediate agency, will, and power of god.

   If any shall insist upon it, that their present existence is the effect
   or consequence of past existence, according to the nature of things;
   that the established course of nature is sufficient to continue
   existence once given; I allow it. But then it should be remembered,
   what nature is in created things; and what the established course of
   nature is; that, as has been observed already, it is nothing, separate
   from the agency of God; and that, as Dr. T. says, god, the original of
   all being, is the only cause of all natural effects. A father,
   according to the course of nature, begets a child; an oak, according to
   the course of nature, produces an acorn, or a bud; so according to the
   course of nature, the former existence of the trunk of the tree is
   followed by its new or present existence. In one case, and the other,
   the new effect is consequent on the former, only by the established
   laws and settled course of nature; which is allowed to be nothing but
   the continued immediate efficiency of god, according to a constitution
   that he has been pleased to establish. Therefore, according to what our
   author urges, as the child and the acorn which come into existence
   according to the course of nature, in consequence of the prior
   existence and state of the parent and the oak, are truly immediately
   created by God; so must the existence of each created person and thing,
   at each moment, be from the immediate continued creation of God. It
   will certainly follow from these things, that God's preserving of
   created things in being, is perfectly equivalent to a continued
   creation, or to his creating those things out of nothing at each moment
   of their existence. If the continued existence of created things be
   wholly dependent on God's preservation, then those things would drop
   into nothing upon the ceasing of the present moment, without a new
   exertion of the divine power to cause them to exist in the following
   moment. [383] If there be any who own, that God preserves things in
   being, and yet hold that they would continue in being without any
   further help from him, after they once have existence; I think, it is
   hard to know what they mean. To what purpose can it be, to talk of God
   preserving things in being, when there is no need of his preserving
   them? Or to talk of their being dependent on God for continued
   existence, when they would of themselves continue to exist, without his
   help; nay, though he should wholly withdraw his sustaining power and
   influence?

   It will follow from what has been observed, that God's upholding of
   created substance, or causing of its existence in each successive
   moment, is altogether equivalent to an immediate production out of
   nothing, at each moment. Because its existence at this moment is not
   merely in part from God, but wholly from him; and not in any part, or
   degree, from its antecedent existence. For, to suppose that its
   antecedent existence concurs with God in efficiency, to produce some
   part of the effect, is attended with all the very same absurdities,
   which have been shown to attend the supposition of its producing it
   wholly. Therefore the antecedent existence is nothing, as to any proper
   influence or assistance in the affair: and consequently God produces
   the effect as much from nothing, as if there had been nothing before.
   So that this effect differs not at all from the first creation, but
   only circumstantially; as, in the first creation there had been no such
   act and effect of God's power before: whereas, his giving existence
   afterwards, follows preceding acts and effects of the same kind, in an
   established order.

   Now, in the next place, let us see how the consequence of these things
   is to my present purpose. If the existence of created substance, in
   each successive moment, be wholly the effect of God's immediate power,
   in that moment, without any dependence on prior existence, as much as
   the first creation out of nothing, then what exists at this moment, by
   this power, is a new effect; and simply and absolutely considered, not
   the same with any past existence, though it be like it, and follows it
   according to a certain established method. [384] And there is no
   identity or oneness in the case, but what depends on the arbitrary
   constitution of the Creator; who by his wise sovereign establishment so
   unites these successive new effects, that he treats them as one, by
   communicating to them like properties, relations, and circumstances;
   and so, leads us to regard and treat them as one. When I call this an
   arbitrary constitution, I mean, that it is a constitution which depends
   on nothing but the divine will; which divine will depends on nothing
   but the divine wisdom. In this sense, the whole course of nature, with
   all that belongs to it, all its laws and methods, constancy and
   regularity, continuance and proceeding, is an arbitrary constitution.
   In this sense, the continuance of the very being of the world and all
   its parts, as well as the manner of continued being, depends entirely
   on an arbitrary constitution. For it does not at all necessarily
   follow, that because there was sound, or light, or colour, or
   resistance, or gravity, or thought, or consciousness, or any other
   dependent thing the last moment, that therefore there shall be the like
   at the next. All dependent existence whatsoever is in a constant flux,
   ever passing and returning; renewed every moment, as the colours of
   bodies are every moment renewed by the light that shines upon them; and
   all is constantly proceeding from god, as light from the sun. In him we
   live, and move, and have our being.

   Thus it appears, if we consider matters strictly, there is no such
   thing as any identity or oneness in created objects, existing at
   different times, but what depends on God's sovereign constitution. And
   so it appears, that the objection we are upon, made against a supposed
   divine constitution, whereby Adam and his posterity are viewed and
   treated as one, in the manner and for the purposes supposed--as if it
   were not consistent with truth, because no constitution can make those
   to be one, which are not one--is built on a false hypothesis: for it
   appears, that a divine constitution is what makes truth, in affairs of
   this nature. The objection supposes, there is a oneness in created
   beings, whence qualities and relations are derived down from past
   existence, distinct from, and prior to, any oneness that can be
   supposed to be founded on divine constitution. Which is demonstrably
   false; and sufficiently appears so from things conceded by the
   adversaries themselves: and therefore the objection wholly falls to the
   ground.

   There are various kinds of identity and oneness, found among created
   things, by which they become one in different manners, respects, and
   degrees, and to various purposes; several of which differences have
   been observed; and every kind is ordered, regulated, and limited, in
   every respect, by divine constitution. Some things, existing in
   different times and places, are treated by their Creator as one in one
   respect, and others in another; some are united for this communication,
   and others for that; but all according to the sovereign pleasure of the
   fountain of all being and operation.

   It appears, particularly, from what has been said, that all oneness, by
   virtue whereof pollution and guilt from past wickedness are derived,
   depends entirely on a divine establishment. It is this, and this only,
   that must account for guilt and an evil taint on any individual soul,
   in consequence of a crime committed twenty or forty years ago,
   remaining still, and even to the end of the world, and for ever. It is
   this that must account for the continuance of any such thing, and
   where, as consciousness of acts that are past; and for the continuance
   of all habits, either good or bad: and on this depends every thing that
   can belong to personal identity. And all communications, derivations,
   or continuation of qualities, properties, or relations, natural or
   moral, from what is past, as if the subject were one, depends on no
   other foundation.

   And I am persuaded, that no solid reason can be given, why God--who
   constitutes all other created union or oneness according to his
   pleasure, and for what purposes, communications, and effects he
   pleases--may not establish a constitution whereby the natural posterity
   of Adam, proceeding from him, much as the buds and branches from the
   stock or root of a tree, should be treated as one with him, for the
   derivation, either of righteousness, and communion in rewards, or of
   the loss of righteousness, and consequent corruption and guilt. [385]

   As I said before, all oneness in created things, whence qualities and
   relations are derived, depends on a divine constitution that is
   arbitrary, in every other respect, excepting that it is regulated by
   divine wisdom. The wisdom which is exercised in these constitutions,
   appears in these two things. First, in a beautiful analogy and harmony
   with other laws or constitutions, especially, relating to the same
   subject; and secondly, in the good ends obtained, or useful
   consequences of such a constitution. If therefore there be any
   objection still lying against this constitution with Adam and his
   posterity, it must be, that it is not sufficiently wise in these
   respects. But what extreme arrogance would it be in us, to take upon us
   to act as judges of the beauty and wisdom of the laws and established
   constitutions of the supreme Lord and Creator of the universe! And not
   only so, but if this constitution, in particular, be well considered,
   its wisdom, in the two forementioned respects, may easily be made
   evident. There is an apparent manifold analogy to other constitutions
   and laws, established and maintained through the whole system of vital
   nature in this lower world; all parts of which, in all successions, are
   derived from the first of the kind, as from their root, or fountain;
   each deriving from thence all properties and qualities, that are proper
   to the nature and capacity of the species: no derivative having any one
   perfection, unless it be what is merely circumstantial, but what was in
   its primitive. And that Adam's posterity should be without that
   original righteousness, which Adam had lost, is also analogous to other
   laws and establishments, relating to the nature of mankind; according
   to which, Adam's posterity have no one perfection of nature, in any
   kind, superior to what was in him, when the human race began to be
   propagated from him.

   And as such a constitution was fit and wise in other respects, so it
   was in this that follows. Seeing the divine constitution concerning the
   manner of mankind coming into existence, was such as did so naturally
   unite them, and make them in so many respects one, naturally leading
   them to a close union in society, and manifold intercourse, and mutual
   dependence--things were wisely so established, that all should
   naturally be in one and the same moral state; and not in such exceeding
   different states, as that some should be perfectly innocent and holy,
   but others corrupt and wicked; some needing a Saviour, but others
   needing none; some in a confirmed state of perfect happiness, but
   others in a state of public condemnation to perfect and eternal misery;
   some justly exposed to great calamities in this world, but others by
   their innocence raised above all suffering. Such a vast diversity of
   state would by no means have agreed with the natural and necessary
   constitution and unavoidable situation and circumstances of the world
   of mankind; all made of one blood, to dwell on all the face of the
   earth, to be united and blended in society, and to partake together in
   the natural and common goods and evils of this lower world.

   Dr. T. urges, [386] that sorrow and shame are only for personal sin;
   and it has often been urged, that repentance can be for no other sin.
   To which I would say, that the use of words is very arbitrary: but that
   men's hearts should be deeply affected with grief and humiliation
   before God, for the pollution and guilt which they bring into the world
   with them, I think, is not in the least unreasonable. Nor is it a thing
   strange and unheard of, that men should be ashamed of things done by
   others, in whom they are nearly concerned. I am sure, it is not
   unscriptural; especially when they are justly looked upon in the sight
   of God, who sees the disposition of their hearts, as fully consenting
   and concurring.

   From what has been observed it may appear, there is no sure ground to
   conclude, that it must be an absurd and impossible thing, for the race
   of mankind truly to partake of the sin of the first apostacy, so as
   that this, in reality and propriety, shall become their sin; by virtue
   of a real union between the root and branches of mankind, (truly and
   properly availing to such a consequence,) established by the author of
   the whole system of the universe; to whose establishments are owing all
   propriety and reality of union, in any part of that system; and by
   virtue of the full consent of the hearts of Adam's posterity to that
   first apostacy. And therefore the sin of the apostacy is not theirs,
   merely because God imputes it to them; but it is truly and properly
   theirs, and on that ground God imputes it to them.

   By reason of the established union between Adam and his posterity, the
   case is far otherwise between him and them, than it is between distinct
   parts or individuals of Adam's race; betwixt whom is no such
   constituted union: as, between children and other ancestors. Concerning
   whom is apparently to be understood that place, Ezek. xviii. 1-20.
   [387] Where God reproves the Jews for the use they made of that
   proverb, "The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth
   are set on edge;" and tells them, that hereafter they shall no more
   have occasion to use this proverb; and that if a son sees the
   wickedness of his father, and sincerely disapproves it and avoids it,
   and he himself is righteous, he shall not die for the iniquity of his
   father; that all souls, both the soul of the father and the sin are
   his, and that therefore the son shall not bear the iniquity of his
   father, nor the father bear the iniquity of the son; but the soul that
   sinneth, it shall die; that the righteousness of the righteous shall be
   upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. The thing
   denied, is communion in the guilt and punishment of the sins of others,
   that are distinct parts of Adam's race; and expressly, in that case,
   where there is no consent and concurrence, but a sincere disapprobation
   of the wickedness of ancestors. It is declared, that children who are
   adult and come to act for themselves, who are righteous, and do not
   approve of, but sincerely condemn, the wickedness of their fathers,
   shall not be punished for their disapproved and avoided iniquities. The
   occasion of what is here said, as well as the design and plain sense,
   shows, that nothing is intended in the least degree inconsistent with
   what has been supposed concerning Adam's posterity sinning and falling
   in his apostacy. The occasion is, the people's murmuring at God's
   methods under the Mosaic dispensation; agreeable to that in Levit.
   xxvi. 39. "And they that are left of you, shall pine away in their
   iniquity in their enemies' land, and also in the iniquities of their
   fathers shall they pine away with them:" and other parallel places,
   respecting external judgments, which were the punishments most plainly
   threatened, and chiefly insisted on, under that dispensation, (which
   was, as it were, an external and carnal covenant,) and particularly the
   people suffering such terrible judgments in Ezekiel's time, for the
   sins of Manasseh; according to what God says by Jeremiah, (Jer. xv. 4.)
   and agreeable to what is said in that confession, Lam. v. 7. "Our
   fathers have sinned and are not, and we have borne their iniquities."

   In what is said here, there is a special respect to the
   gospel-dispensation; as is greatly confirmed by comparing this place
   with Jer. xxxi. 29-31. Under which dispensation, the righteousness of
   God's dealings with mankind would be more fully manifested, in the
   clear revelation then to be made of the method of God's judgment, by
   which the final state of wicked men is determined; which is not
   according to the behaviour of their particular ancestors; but every one
   is dealt with according to the sin of his own wicked heart, or sinful
   nature and practice. The affair of derivation of the natural corruption
   of mankind in general, and of their consent to, and participation of,
   the primitive and common apostacy, is not in the least intermeddled
   with, by any thing meant in the true scope and design of this place in
   Ezekiel.

   On the whole, if any do not like the philosophy or the metaphysics (as
   some perhaps may choose to call it) made use of in the foregoing
   reasonings; yet I cannot doubt, but that a proper consideration of what
   is apparent and undeniable in fact, with respect to the dependence of
   the state and course of things in the universe on the sovereign
   constitutions of the supreme Author and Lord of all--who gives account
   to none of any of his matters, and whose ways are past finding
   out--will be sufficient, with persons of common modesty and sobriety,
   to stop their mouths from making peremptory decisions against the
   justice of God, respecting what is so plainly and fully taught in his
   holy word, concerning; the derivation of depravity and guilt from Adam
   to his posterity.

   This is enough, one would think, for ever to silence such bold
   expressions as these--"If this be just,--if the Scriptures teach such
   doctrine, &c. then the Scriptures are of no use--understanding is no
   understanding,--and, what a god must he be, that can thus curse
   innocent creatures!-- Is this thy god, o Christian!"--&c. &c.

   It may not be improper here to add something (by way of supplement to
   this chapter, in which we have had occasion to say so much about the
   imputation of Adam's sin) concerning the opinions of two divines, of no
   inconsiderable note among the dissenters in England, relating to a
   partial imputation of Adam's first sin.

   One of them supposes, that this sin, though truly imputed to infants,
   so that thereby they are exposed to a proper punishment, yet is not
   imputed to them in such a degree, as that upon this account they should
   be liable to eternal punishment, as Adam himself was, but only to
   temporal death, or annihilation; Adam himself, the immediate actor,
   being made infinitely more guilty by it, than his posterity. On which I
   would observe; that to suppose, God imputes not all the guilt of Adam's
   sin, but only some little part of it, relieves nothing but one's
   imagination. To think of poor little infants bearing such torments for
   Adam's sin, as they sometimes do in this world, and these torments
   ending in death and annihilation, may sit easier on the imagination,
   than to conceive of their suffering eternal misery for it. But it does
   not at all relieve one's reason. There is no rule of reason, that can
   be supposed to lie against imputing a sin in the whole of it, which was
   committed by one, to another who did not personally commit it, but what
   will also lie against its being so imputed and punished in part. For
   all the reasons (if there be any) lie against the imputation; not the
   quantity or degree of what is imputed. If there be any rule of reason,
   that is strong and good, lying against a proper derivation or
   communication of guilt, from one that acted, to another that did not
   act; then it lies against all that is of this nature. The force of the
   reasons brought against imputing Adam's sin to his posterity (if there
   be any force in them) lies in this, That Adam and his posterity are not
   one. But this lies as properly against charging a part of the guilt, as
   the whole. For Adam's posterity, by not being the same with him, had no
   more hand in a little of what was done, than the whole. They were as
   absolutely free from being concerned in that act partly, as they were
   wholly. And there is no reason to be brought, why one man's sin cannot
   be justly reckoned to another's account, who was not then in being, in
   the whole of it; but what will as properly lie against its being
   reckoned to him in any part, so as that he should be subject to any
   condemnation or punishment on that account. If those reasons are good,
   all the difference is this; that to bring a great punishment on infants
   for Adam's sin, is a great act of injustice, and to bring a
   comparatively smaller punishment, is a smaller act of injustice; but
   not, that this is not as truly and demonstrably an act of injustice, as
   the other.

   To illustrate this by an instance something parallel. It is used as an
   argument why I may not exact from one of my neighbours, what was due to
   me from another, that he and my debtor are not the same; and that their
   concerns, interests, and properties are entirely distinct. Now if this
   argument be good, it lies as truly against my demanding from him a part
   of the debt, as the whole, indeed it is a greater act of injustice for
   me to take from him the whole of it, than a part; but not more truly
   and certainly an act of injustice.

   The other divine thinks, there is truly an imputation of Adam's sin, so
   that infants cannot be looked upon as innocent creatures; yet seems to
   think it not agreeable to the perfections of God, to make the state of
   infants in another world worse than a state of non-existence. But this
   to me appears plainly a giving up of that grand point of imputation,
   both in whole and in part. For it supposes it to be not right, for God
   to bring any evil on a child of Adam, which is innocent as to personal
   sin, without paying for it, or balancing it with good; so that still
   the state of the child shall be as good as could be demanded in
   justice, in case of mere innocence. Which plainly supposes, that the
   child is not exposed to any proper punishment at all, or is not at all
   in debt to divine justice, on account of Adam's sin. For if the child
   were truly in debt, then surely justice might take something from him,
   without paying for it, or without giving that which makes its state as
   good, as mere innocence could in justice require. If he owes the
   suffering of some punishment, then there is no need that justice should
   requite the infant for suffering that punishment; or make up for it, by
   conferring some good, that shall countervail it, and in effect remove
   and disannul it; so that, on the whole, good and evil shall be at even
   balance, yea, so that the scale of good shall preponderate. If it is
   unjust in a judge, to order any quantity of money to be taken from
   another, without paying him again, and fully making it up to him, it
   must be because he had justly forfeited none at all.

   It seems to me pretty manifest, that none can, in good consistence with
   themselves, own a real imputation of the guilt of Adam's first sin to
   his posterity, without owning that they are justly treated as sinners,
   truly guilty, and children of wrath, on that account; nor unless they
   allow a just imputation of the whole of the evil of that transgression;
   at least, all that pertains to the essence of that act, as a full and
   complete violation of the covenant, which God had established; even as
   much as if each one of mankind had the like covenant established with
   him singly, and had by the like direct and full act of rebellion,
   violated it for himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [375] My meaning, in the whole of what has been said, may be
   illustrated thus: Let us suppose that Adam and all his posterity had
   co-existed, and that his posterity had been, through a law of nature
   established by the Creator, united to him, something as the branches of
   a tree are united to the root, or the members of the body to the head,
   so as to constitute as it were one complex person, or one moral whole:
   so that by the law of union there should have been a communion and
   co-existence in acts and affections; all jointly participating, and all
   concurring, as one whole, in the disposition and action of the head: as
   we see in the body natural, the whole body is affected as the head is
   affected; and the whole body concurs when the head acts. Now, in this
   case, all the branches of mankind, by the constitution of nature and
   law of union, would have been affected just as Adam, their common root,
   was affected. When the heart of a root, by a full disposition,
   committed the first sin, the hearts of all the branches would have
   concurred; and when the root, in consequence of this, became guilty, so
   would all the branches; and when the root, as a punishment of the sin
   committed, was forsaken of God, in like manner would it have fared with
   all the branches; and when the root, in consequence of this, was
   confirmed in permanent depravity, the case would have been the same
   with all the branches; and as new guilt on the soul of Adam would have
   been consequent on this, so also would it have been with his moral
   branches. And thus all things, with relation to evil disposition,
   guilt, pollution, and depravity, would exist, in the same order and
   dependence, in each branch, as in the root. Now, difference of the time
   of existence does not at all hinder things succeeding in the same
   order, any more than difference of place in a co-existence of time.
   Here may be observed, as in several respects to the present purpose,
   some things are said by STAPFERUS, an eminent divine of Zurich, in
   Switzerland, in his Theologia Polemica, published about fourteen years
   ago:--in English as follows. "Seeing all Adam's posterity are derived
   from their first parent, as their root, the whole of human kind, with
   its root, may be considered as constituting but one whole, or one mass;
   so as not to be properly distinct from its root; the posterity not
   differing from it, any otherwise than the branches of from the tree.
   From which it easily appears, how that when the root sinned, all which
   is derived from it, and with it constitutes but one whole, may be
   looked upon as also sinning; seeing it is not distinct from the root,
   but one with it."--Tom. i. cap. 3. § 856. 57. "It is objected, against
   the imputation of Adam's sin, that we never committed the same sin with
   Adam, neither in number or in kind. I answer, we should distinguish
   here between the physical act itself, which Adam committed, and the
   morality of the action, and consent to it. If we have respect only to
   the external act, to be sure it must be confessed, that Adam's
   posterity did not put forth their hands to the forbidden fruit: in
   which sense, that act of transgression, and that fall of Adam, cannot
   be physically one with the sin of his posterity. But if we consider the
   morality of the action, and what consent there is to it, it is
   altogether to be maintained, that his posterity committed the same sin,
   both in number and in kind, inasmuch as they are to be looked upon as
   consenting to it. For where there is consent to a sin, there the same
   sin is committed. Seeing therefore that Adam with all his posterity
   constitute but one moral person, and are united in the same covenant,
   and are transgressors of the same law, they are also to be looked upon
   as having, in a moral estimation, committed the same transgression of
   the law, both in number and in kind. Therefore this reasoning avails
   nothing against the righteous imputation of the sin of Adam to all
   mankind or to the whole moral person that is consenting to it. And for
   the reason mentioned, we may rather argue thus: the sin of the
   posterity, on account of their consent, and the moral view in which
   they are to be taken, is the same with the sin of Adam, not only in
   kind, but in number; therefore the sin of Adam is rightfully imputed to
   his posterity."--Id. Tom. iv. cap. 16. § 60, 61. The imputation of
   Adam's first sin consists in nothing else than this, that his posterity
   are viewed as in the same place with their father, and are like him.
   But seeing, agreeable to what we have already proved, God might,
   according to his own righteous judgment, which was founded on his most
   righteous law, give Adam a posterity that were like himself; and indeed
   it could not be otherwise, according to the very laws of nature:
   therefore he might also in righteous judgment impute Adam's sin to
   them, inasmuch as to give Adam a posterity like himself, and to impute
   his sin to them, is one and the same thing. And therefore if the former
   be not contrary to the divine perfections, so neither is the latter.
   Our adversaries contend with us chiefly on this account, that according
   to our doctrine of original sin, such an imputation of the first sin is
   maintained, whereby God, without any regard to universal native
   corruption, esteems all Adam's posterity as guilty, and holds them as
   liable to condemnation, purely on account of that sinful act of their
   first parent: so that they without any respect had to their own sin,
   and so, as innocent in themselves, are destined to eternal
   punishment.--I have therefore ever been careful to show, that they do
   injurously suppose those things to be separated in our doctrine which
   are by no means separated. The whole of the controversy they have with
   us about this matter, evidently arises from this, that they suppose the
   mediate and the immediate imputation are distinguished one from the
   other, not only in the matter of conception, but in reality. And so
   indeed they consider imputation only as immediate and abstractly from
   the mediate; when yet our divines suppose, that neither ought to be
   considered separately from the other. Therefore I chose not to use any
   such distinction, or to suppose any such thing, in what I have said on
   the subject: but only have endeavoured to explain the thing itself, and
   to reconcile it with divine attributes. And therefore I have everywhere
   conjoined both these conceptions concerning the imputation of the first
   sin, as inseparable; and judged, that one ought never to be considered
   without the other.--While I have been writing this note, I consulted
   all the systems of divinity, which I have by me, that I might see what
   was the true and genuine opinion of our chief divines in this affair:
   and I found that they were of the same mind with me: namely, that these
   two kinds of imputation are by no means to be separated, or to be
   considered abstractly one from the other, but that one does involve the
   other." He there particularly cites these two famous reformed divines,
   Vitringa and Lampins. Tom. iv. cap 17. § 78.

   [376] See also p. 39, note, § 8, &c. 48 § 12, &c. 80 § 9, &c. 82§ 17,
   &c. 121 § 7, &c.

   [377] Page 13. 150, 151, 156, 261. 108, 109, 111. S.

   [378] Part I. Chap. I, the three first sections.

   [379] Page 134. S.

   [380] Page 140. S.

   [381] Mor. Phil. p. 7.

   [382] Ibid. p. 9.

   [383] The christian observer, (vol. v. p. 177.) in reviewing a sermon,
   entitled, "Predestination to Life," remarks: "It may be allowed,
   (though even this is not to us in the sense formerly explained, a
   self-evident proposition,) that all created nature, as such, tends to
   nihility. Since it sprung out of nothing, only through the intervention
   of Almighty Power, it must certainly relapse into nothing when the
   intervening power is removed. Since it became something only during the
   pleasure of another, it will cease to be something when left to itself.
   But it is not apparent, why that which never subsisted but in a state
   of virtue and purity, should of itself have a tendency to subsist in
   any other state; or why, when left to itself, if it continue at all, it
   should not continue in that state in which it was left." But, in p.
   186. he retracts what he first said, in the following very singular
   note: "The preceding sheet was printed off before we perceived that we
   had expressed ourselves at p. 177. col. 2. in language which may be
   construed into an admission of the truth of the doctrine maintained by
   Dr. Williams, as it respects the necessary tendency of all created
   nature to nihility. In a popular sense, indeed, it may perhaps be said,
   (though the proposition will be found "to fill the ear rather than the
   mind,") that what sprung out of nothing at the pleasure of another,
   must again become nothing when left to itself; and, for the sake of
   shortening the discussion, we were willing to concede thus much. We
   must at the same time confess that we do not quite understand the
   position, that created beings tend to nihility: and we leave it to our
   readers to judge whether there be much more meaning in saying that what
   is tends not to be,' than in saying that what is not tends to be;' or,
   in other words, whether a tendency to annihilation in that which
   exists, be at all more conceivable, than a tendency to become existent
   in that which exists not." How far the writer had any good reason for
   retracting what he first asserted, and thereby opposing the sentiments,
   not only of the author he reviews, but of nearly all the divines that
   ever have written upon providence, let the reader judge by a careful
   perusal of this chapter. We are ignorant of what Bishop Burnet says on
   this head, (Art. I p. 30. 3d Ed.) but are well satisfied his notion is
   as incapable of being supported by sound reason, as it was novel; and
   as little calculated to support the cause of piety as any one opinion
   he advances, in his undecisive and latitudinarian exposition of the
   Thirty-nine Articles. ( See particularly Art. ix. on Original Sin.) For
   what can be a more heterodox opinion, or more full of horrid impiety,
   if traced to its just consequences, that the sentiment advanced by that
   Bishop and by the christian observer! though we are far from supposing
   that either the one or the other foresaw these consequences. The best
   excuse we can form for this writer is, that "he does not quite
   understand the position" against which he writes. This record, we
   believe, is true; and is equally applicable to several other positions
   in that article. But then, the public expects from a Reviewer a
   comprehensive acquaintance with the subject which he criticises,
   instead of "a wood of words" and inconclusive declamations. However, he
   seems to be notoriously deficient in comprehending the true state of
   the question. A great part of that long article consists in proving
   what was not denied, and in disproving what was never asserted; with a
   goodly portion of contradictory propositions. We might have expected,
   that an author who studiously shuns the intricacies of a subject which
   will, in his apprehension, "descend to posterity with all the
   difficulties on its head"-- a subject, the depth of which "the sounding
   line of metaphysics will never fathom"--would have kept himself more
   free from embarrassments and self-contradictions. And it was also to be
   expected from one who professes to advocate the cause of piety and
   practical religion, that he should keep aloof from the horrible
   sentiment suggested by Burnet, in opposition to the almost unanimous
   verdict of all the pious and learned divines that ever lived. We almost
   shudder to draw the inference demonstrably implied in the
   sentiment.--That the world would continue in being, were there no God
   to uphold it! When we say, that this is the just inference drawn from
   the sentiment held by the christian observer, we mean, by the
   individual Reviewer in question, whose critique disgraces that
   excellent work. Aware, perhaps, that the author whose works we now
   publish was of the same way of thinking; or at least, that his works
   have the same tendency with what he opposes, he observes: "We are apt
   to think that the metaphysical cast which the celebrated Mr. Edwards
   gave to his writings in divinity, has to a certain degree produced an
   unfavourable effect on the minds of his followers." It would have been
   extremely difficult for this writer to point out any preacher who comes
   closer in men's consciences, or any writer who more effectually
   promotes the interest of genuine, humble, holy, practical religion,
   than President Edwards; and the editors of his works are fully
   conscious, that what they publish tends, in the most direct manner,
   when duly considered and understood, to essential truth--to God: of
   whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things: to whom be glory
   for ever. Amen.--W.

   [384] When I suppose, that an effect which is produced every moment by
   a new action or exertion of power, must be a new effect in each moment,
   and not absolutely and numerically the same with that which existed in
   preceding moments, what I intend, may be illustrated by this example.
   The lucid colour or brightness of the moon, as we look steadfastly upon
   it, seems to be a permanent thing, as though it were perfectly the same
   brightness continued. But indeed it is an effect produced every moment.
   It ceases, and is renewed, in each successive point of time; and so
   becomes altogether a new effect at each instant; and no one thing that
   belongs to it, is numerically the same that existed in the preceding
   moment. The rays of the sun, impressed on that body, and reflected from
   it, which cause the effect, are none of them the same: the impression,
   made in each moment on our sensory, is by the stroke of new rays: and
   the sensation excited by the stroke, is a new effect, an effect of a
   new impulse. Therefore the brightness or lucid whiteness of this body
   is no more numerically the same thing with that which existed in the
   preceding moment, than the sound of the wind that blows now, is
   individually the same with the sound of the wind that blew just before;
   which, though it be like it, is not the same, any more than the
   agitated air, that makes the sound, is the same; or than the water,
   flowing in a river, that now passes by, is individually the same with
   that which passed a little before. And if it be thus with the
   brightness or colour of the moon, so it must be with its solidity, and
   every thing else belonging to its substance, if all be, each moment, as
   much the immediate effect of a new exertion or application of power.
   The matter may perhaps be in some respects still more clearly
   illustrated thus.--The images of things in a glass, as we keep our eye
   upon them, seem to remain precisely the same, with a continuing perfect
   identity. But it is known to be otherwise. Philosophers well know, that
   these images are constantly renewed, by the impression and reflection
   of new rays of light: so that the image impressed by the former rays is
   constantly vanishing, and a new image impressed by new rays every
   moment, both on the glass and on the eye. The image constantly renewed,
   by new successive rays, is no more numerically the same, than if it
   were by some artist put on anew with a pencil, and the colours
   constantly vanishing as fast as put on. And the new images being put on
   immediately or instantly, do not make them the same, any more than if
   it were done with the intermission of an hour or a day. The image that
   exists this moment, is not at all derived from the image which existed
   the last preceding moment: for, if the succession of new rays be
   intercepted, by something interposed between the object and the glass,
   the image immediately ceases: the past existence of the image has no
   influence to uphold it, so much as for one moment. Which shows, that
   the image is altogether new-made every moment; and strictly speaking,
   is in no part numerically the same with that which existed the moment
   preceding. And truly so the matter must be with the bodies themselves,
   as well as the images: they also cannot be the same, with an absolute
   identity, but must be wholly renewed every moment, if the case be as
   has been proved, that their present existence is not, strictly
   speaking, at all the effect of their past existence; but is wholly,
   every instant, the effect of a new agency, or exertion of the powerful
   cause of their existence. If so, the existence caused is every instant
   a new effect, whether the cause be light or immediate divine power, or
   whatever it be.

   [385] I appeal to such as are not wont to content themselves with
   judging by a superficial appearance and view of things, but are
   habituated to examine things strictly and closely, that they may judge
   righteous judgment, whether on supposition that all mankind had
   co-existed, in the manner mentioned before, any good reason can be
   given, why their Creator might not, if he had pleased, have established
   such an union between Adam and the rest of mankind, as was in that case
   supposed. Particularly, if it had been the case, that Adam's posterity
   had actually, according to the law of nature, some how grown out of
   him, and yet remained continuous and literally united to him, as the
   branches to a tree, or the members of the body to the head; and had
   all, before the fall, existed together at the same time, though in
   different places, as the head and members are in different places: in
   this case who can determine, that the Author of nature might not, if it
   had pleased him, have established such an union between the root and
   branches of this complex being, as that all should constitute one moral
   whole; so that by the law of union, there should be a communion in each
   moral alteration, and that the heart of every branch should at the same
   moment participate with the heart of the root, be confirmed to it and
   concurring with it in all its affections and acts, and so jointly
   partaking in its state, as part of the same thing? Why might not God,
   if he had pleased, have fixed such a kind of union as this, an union of
   the various parts of such a moral whole, as well as many other unions,
   which he has actually fixed, according to his sovereign pleasure? And
   if he might, by his sovereign constitution, have established such an
   union of the various branches of mankind, when existing in different
   places, I do not see why he might not also do the same, through they
   exist in different times. I know not why succession, or diversity of
   time, should make any such constituted union more unreasonable, than
   diversity of place. The only reason, why diversity of time can seem to
   make it unreasonable, is that difference of time shows, there is no
   absolute identity of the things existing in those different times: but
   it shows this, I think, not at all more than the difference of the
   place of existence.

   [386] Page 14.

   [387] Which Dr. T. alleges, p. 10, 11 S.
     __________________________________________________________________

      CHAP. IV.

   WHEREIN SEVERAL OTHER OBJECTIONS ARE CONSIDERED.

   Dr. T. objects against Adam's posterity being supposed to come into the
   world under a forfeiture of God's blessing, and subject to his curse
   through his sin,--That at the restoration of the world after the flood,
   God pronounced equivalent or greater blessings on Noah and his sons,
   than he did on Adam at his creation, when he said, be fruitful, and
   multiply, and replenish the earth, and have dominion over the fish of
   the sea, &c.*--To this I answer, in the following remarks.

   1. As has been already shown, that in the threatening denounced for
   Adam's sin, there was nothing which appears inconsistent with the
   continuance of this present life for a season, or with propagating his
   kind; so for the like reason, there appears nothing in that
   threatening, upon the supposition that it reached Adam's posterity,
   inconsistent with enjoying the temporal blessings of the present life,
   as long as this is continued; even those temporal blessings which God
   pronounced on Adam at his first creation. For it must be observed, that
   the blessings which God pronounced on Adam when he created him, and
   before the trial of his obedience, were not the same with the blessings
   which were suspended on his obedience. The blessings thus suspended,
   were the blessings of eternal life; which, if he had maintained his
   integrity through his trial, would have been pronounced upon him
   afterwards; when God, as his judge, should have given him his reward.
   God might indeed, if he had pleased, immediately have deprived him of
   life, and of all temporal blessings, given him before. But those
   blessings pronounced on him before-hand, were not the things for the
   obtaining of which his trial was appointed. These were reserved till
   the issue of his trial should be seen, and then to be pronounced in the
   blessed sentence, which would have been passed upon him by his judge,
   when God came to decree to him his reward for his approved fidelity.
   The pronouncing of these latter blessings on a degenerate race, that
   had fallen under the threatening denounced, would indeed (without a
   redemption) have been inconsistent with the constitution which had been
   established. But giving them the former kind of blessings, which were
   not the things suspended on the trial, or dependent on his fidelity,
   (and these to be continued for a season,) was not at all inconsistent
   therewith.

   2. It is no more an evidence of Adam's posterity being not included in
   the threatening denounced for his eating the forbidden fruit, That they
   still have the temporal blessings of fruitfulness, and a dominion over
   the creatures, continued to them; than it is an evidence of Adam being
   not included in that threatening himself, That he had these blessings
   continued to him, was fruitful, and had dominion over the creatures,
   after his fall, equally with his posterity.

   3. There is good evidence, that the benedictions God pronounced on Noah
   and his posterity, were granted on a new foundation; a dispensation
   diverse from any grant, promise, or revelation, which God gave to Adam,
   antecedently to his fall; even on the foundation of the covenant of
   grace, established in Christ Jesus; a dispensation, the design of which
   is to deliver men from the curse that came upon them by Adam's sin, and
   to bring them to greater blessings than ever he had. These blessings
   were pronounced on Noah and his seed, on the same foundation whereon
   afterwards the blessing was pronounced on Abraham and his seed, which
   included both spiritual and temporal benefits.--Noah had his name
   prophetically given him by his father Lamech, because by him and his
   seed deliverance should be obtained from the curse, which came by
   Adam's fall. Gen. v. 29. "And he called his name Noah, (i. e. rest,)
   saying, This name shall comfort us concerning our work, and toil of our
   hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed." Pursuant to
   the scope and intent of this prophecy (which indeed seems to respect
   the same thing with the prophecy in Gen. iii. 15. ) are the blessings
   pronounced on Noah after the flood. There is this evidence of these
   blessings being conveyed through the channel of the covenant of grace,
   and by the redemption through Jesus Christ, that they were obtained by
   sacrifice; or were bestowed as the effect of God's favour to mankind,
   which was in consequence of smelling a sweet savour in the sacrifice
   which Noah offered. And it is very evident by the epistle to the
   Hebrews, that the ancient sacrifices never obtained the favour of God,
   but only by virtue of the relation they had to the sacrifice of
   Christ.-- Now that Noah and his family had been so wonderfully saved
   from the wrath of God, which had destroyed the rest of the world, and
   the world was as it were restored from a ruined state, there was a
   proper occasion to point to the great salvation to come by Christ: as
   it was a common thing for God, on occasion of some great temporal
   salvation of his people, or restoration from a low and miserable state,
   to renew the intimations of the great spiritual restoration of the
   world by Christ's redemption. [388] God deals with the generality of
   mankind, in their present state, far differently, on occasion of the
   redemption by Jesus Christ, from what he otherwise would do; for, being
   capable subjects of saving mercy, they have a day of patience and
   grace, and innumerable temporal blessings bestowed on them; which, as
   the apostle signifies, ( Acts xiv. 17.) are testimonies of God's
   reconcilableness to sinful men, to put them upon seeking after God.

   But beside the sense in which the posterity of Noah in general partake
   of these blessings of dominion over the creatures, &c. Noah himself,
   and all such of his posterity as have obtained like precious faith with
   that exercised by him in offering his sacrifice, which made it a sweet
   savour, and by which it procured these blessings, have dominion over
   the creatures, through Christ, in a more excellent sense than Adam in
   innocency; as they are made kings and priests unto God, and reign with
   Christ, and all things are theirs, by a covenant of grace. They partake
   with Christ in that dominion over the beasts of the earth, the fowls of
   the air, and fishes of the sea, spoken of in the 8th Psalm; which is by
   the apostle interpreted of Christ's dominion over the world, (1 Cor.
   xv. 27. and Heb. ii. 7. ) And the time is coming, when the greater part
   of the posterity of Noah, and each of his sons, shall partake of this
   more honourable and excellent dominion over the creatures, through him
   in whom all the families of the earth shall be blessed. Neither is
   there any need of supposing that these blessings have their most
   complete accomplishment, till many ages after they were granted, any
   more than the blessing on Japhet, expressed in those words, God shall
   enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem.

   But that Noah's posterity have such blessings given them through the
   great Redeemer, who suspends and removes the curse which came through
   Adam's sin, surely is no argument, that they originally, as in their
   natural state, are not under the curse. That men have blessings through
   grace, is no evidence of their being not justly exposed to the curse by
   nature; but it rather argues the contrary. For if they did not deserve
   the curse, they would not depend on grace and redemption for the
   removal of it, and for bringing them into a state of favour with God.

   Another objection, which our author strenuously urges against the
   doctrine of original sin, is, that it disparages the divine goodness in
   giving us our being; which we ought to receive with thankfulness, as a
   great gift of God's beneficence, and look upon as the first, original,
   and fundamental fruit of the divine liberality. [389]

   To this I answer, in the following observations:

   1. This argument is built on the supposed truth of a thing in dispute;
   and so is a begging of the question. It is built on this supposition,
   that we are not properly looked upon as one with our first father, in
   the state wherein God at first created him, and in his fall from that
   state. If we are so, it becomes the whole race to acknowledge God's
   great goodness to them, in the state wherein mankind was made at first;
   in the happy state they were then in, and the fair opportunity they
   then had of obtaining confirmed and eternal happiness; and to
   acknowledge it as an aggravation of their apostacy; and to humble
   themselves, that they were so ungrateful as to rebel against their good
   Creator. Certainly, we may all do this with as much reason, as the
   people of Israel in Daniel's and Nehemiah's times who did with
   thankfulness acknowledge God's great goodness to their fathers, many
   ages before; and in their confessions they bewailed, and took shame to
   themselves, for the sins committed by their fathers, notwithstanding
   such great goodness. (See the 9th chapter of Daniel, and the 9th of
   Nehemiah.)

   2. If Dr. T. would imply in his objection, that it doth not consist
   with the goodness of God, to give mankind being in a state of misery,
   what ever was done before by Adam, whether he sinned or did not sin. I
   reply, if it be justly so ordered, that there should be a posterity of
   Adam, which must be looked upon as one with him; then it is no more
   contrary to God's attribute of goodness to give being to his posterity
   in a state of punishment, than to continue the being of the same wicked
   and guilty person, who has made himself guilty, in a state of
   punishment. The giving of being, and the continuing of being, are both
   alike the work of God's power and will, and both are alike fundamental
   to all blessings of man's present and future existence. And if it be
   said, it cannot be justly so ordered, that there should be a posterity
   of Adam, which should be looked upon as one with him, this is begging
   the question.

   3. If our author would have us to suppose, that it is contrary to the
   attribute of goodness for God, in any case, by an immediate act of his
   power, to cause evidence, and to cause new existence, which shall be an
   exceeding miserable existence, by reason of exposedness to eternal
   ruin; then his own scheme must be supposed contrary to the attribute of
   God's goodness: for he supposes that God will raise multitudes from the
   dead at the last day (which will be giving new existence to their
   bodies, and to bodily life and sense) in order only to their suffering
   eternal destruction.

   4. Notwithstanding we are so sinful and miserable, as we are by nature,
   yet we may have great reason to bless God, that he has given us our
   being under so glorious a dispensation of grace through Jesus Christ:
   by which we have a happy opportunity to be delivered from this sin and
   misery, and to obtain unspeakable eternal happiness. And because,
   through our own wicked inclinations, we are disposed so to neglect and
   abuse this mercy, as to fail of final benefit by it, this is no reason
   why we ought not to be thankful for it, even according to our author's
   own sentiments. What (says he [390] ) if the whole world lies in
   wickedness, and few therefore shall be saved? Have men no reason to be
   thankful, because they are wicked and ungrateful, and abuse their being
   and God's bounty? Suppose our own evil inclinations do withhold us,
   viz. from seeking after happiness, of which under the light of the
   gospel we are placed within the nearer and easier reach, "suppose, the
   whole Christian world should lie in wickedness, and but few Christians
   should be saved, is it therefore certainly true, that we cannot
   reasonably thank God for the gospel?" Well, and though the evil
   inclinations, which hinder our seeking and obtaining happiness by so
   glorious an advantage, are what we are born with, yet if those
   inclinations are our fault or sin, that alters not the case: and to
   say, they are not our sin, is still begging the question. Yea, it will
   follow from several things asserted by our author, that notwithstanding
   men are born in such circumstances, as that they are under a very great
   improbability of ever becoming righteous, yet they may have reason to
   be thankful for their being. Thus particularly, Dr. T. asserts, that
   all men have reason of thankfulness for their being; and yet he
   supposes, that the heathen world, taken as a collective body, were dead
   in sin, and could not deliver or help themselves, and therefore stood
   in necessity of the christian dispensation. And not only so, but he
   supposes, that the christian world is now at length brought to the like
   deplorable and helpless circumstances, and needs a new dispensation for
   its relief. According to these things, the world in general, not only
   formerly but even at this day, are dead in sin, and helpless as to
   their salvation; and therefore the generality of them that are born
   into it, are much more likely to perish, than otherwise, till the new
   dispensation comes: and yet he supposes, we all have reason to be
   thankful for our being. Yea, further still, I think, according to our
   author's doctrine, men may have great reason to be thankful to God for
   bringing them into a state, which yet, as the case is, is attended with
   misery, as its certain consequence. As, with respect to God's raising
   the wicked to life, at the last day; which, he supposes, is in itself a
   great benefit, procured by Christ, and the wonderful grace of God
   through him: and if it be the fruit of God's wonderful grace, surely
   men ought to be thankful for that grace, and praise God for it. Our
   doctrine of original sin, therefore, no more disparages God's goodness
   in man's formation in the womb, than his doctrine disparages God's
   goodness in their resurrection from the grave.

   Another argument, which Dr. T. makes use of, against the doctrine of
   original sin, is what the Scripture reveals of the process of the day
   of judgment; which represents the judge as dealing with men singly and
   separately, rendering to every man according to his deeds, and
   according to the improvement he has made of the particular powers and
   talents God has given him personally. [391]

   But this objection will vanish, if we consider what is the end or
   design of that public judgment. Now this will not be, that God may find
   out what men are, or what punishment or reward is proper for them, or
   in order to the passing of a right judgment of these things within
   himself, which is the end of human trials; but it is to manifest what
   men are to their own consciences, and to the world. As the day of
   judgment is called the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment
   of God; in order to this, God will make use of evidences, or proofs.
   But the proper evidences of the wickedness of men's hearts (the true
   seat of all wickedness) both as to corruption of nature, and additional
   pollution and guilt, are men's works.

   The special end of God's public judgment will be, to make a proper,
   perfect, open distinction among men, rightly to state and manifest
   their difference one from another, in order to that separation and
   difference in the eternal retribution that is to follow: and this
   difference will be made to appear, by their personal works.

   There are two things, with regard to which men will be tried, and
   openly distinguished, by the perfect judgment of God at the last day;
   according to the twofold real distinction subsisting among mankind:
   viz. (1.) The difference of state; that primary and grand distinction,
   whereby all mankind are divided into two sorts, the righteous and the
   wicked. (2.) That secondary distinction, whereby both sorts differ from
   others in the same general state, in degrees of additional fruits of
   righteousness and wickedness. Now the Judge, in order to manifest both
   these, will judge men according to their personal works. But to inquire
   at the day of judgment, whether Adam sinned or no, or whether men are
   to be looked upon as one with him, and so partakers in his sin, is what
   in no respect tends to manifest either of these distinctions.

   1. The first thing; to be manifest, will be the state, that each man is
   in, with respect to the grand distinction of the whole world of mankind
   into righteous and wicked; or, in metaphorical language, wheat and
   tares; or, the children of the kingdom of Christ, and the children of
   the wicked one; the latter, the head of the apostacy; but the former,
   the head of the restoration and recovery. The Judge, in manifesting
   this, will prove men's hearts by their works, in such as have had
   opportunity to perform any works in the body. The evil works of the
   children of the wicked one will be the proper manifestation and
   evidence or proof of whatever belongs to the general state of such; and
   particularly they will prove, that they belong to the kingdom of the
   great deceiver, and head of the apostacy, as they will demonstrate the
   exceeding corruption of their nature, and full consent of their hearts
   to the common apostacy; and also that their hearts never relinquished
   the apostacy, by a cordial adherence to Christ, the great restorer. The
   Judge will also make use of the good works of the righteous to show
   their interest in the redemption of Christ; as thereby will be
   manifested the sincerity of their hearts in their acceptance of, and
   adherence to, the Redeemer and his righteousness. And in thus proving
   the state of men's hearts by their actions, the circumstances of those
   actions must necessarily come into consideration, to manifest the true
   quality of their actions; as, each one's talents, opportunities,
   advantages, light, motives, &c.

   2. The other thing to be manifested, will be that secondary
   distinction,, wherein particular persons, both righteous and wicked,
   differ from one another, in the degree of secondary good or evil; the
   degree of evil fruit, which is additional to the guilt and corruption
   of the whole body of apostates and enemies; and the degree of personal
   goodness and good fruit, which is a secondary goodness, with respect to
   the righteousness and merits of Christ, which belong to all by that
   sincere faith manifested in all. Of this also each one's works, with
   their circumstances, opportunities, talents, &c. will be the proper
   evidence.

   As to the nature and aggravations of the general apostacy by Adam's
   sin, and also the nature and sufficiency of the redemption by Jesus
   Christ, the great restorer, though both these will have vast influence
   on the eternal state, which men shall be adjudged to, yet neither of
   them will properly belong to the trial men will be the subjects of at
   that day, in order to the manifestation of their state, wherein they
   are distinguished one from another. They will belong to the business of
   that day no otherwise, than the manifestation of the great truths of
   religion in general; as the nature and perfections of God, the
   dependence of mankind on God, as their creator and preserver, &c. Such
   truths as these will also have great influence on the eternal state, to
   which men will then be adjudged, as they aggravate the guilt of man's
   wickedness, and must be considered in order to a due estimate of
   Christ's righteousness, and men's personal virtue; yet being of general
   and equal concernment, will not properly belong to the trial of
   particular persons.

   Another thing urged by our author particularly against the imputation
   of Adam's sin, is this: "Though, in Scripture, action is frequently
   said to be imputed, reckoned, accounted to a person, it is no other
   than his own act and deed." [392] In the same place he cites a number
   of places of Scripture, where these words are used, which he says are
   all that he can find in the Bible.

   But we are no way concerned with this argument at present, any further
   than it relates to imputation of sin, or sinful action. Therefore all
   that is in the argument, which relates to the present purpose, is this:
   that the word is so often applied in Scripture to signify God's
   imputing of personal sin, but never once to his imputing of Adam's
   sin.--So often!--How often?--But twice. There are but two of all those
   places which he reckons up, that have any reference to God imputing sin
   to any person, where there is any evidence that only personal sin is
   meant; (Levit. xvii. 3, 4. and 2 Tim. iv. 16.) All therefore that the
   argument comes to, is this: that the word impute, is applied twice in
   Scripture to the case of God imputing sin, and neither of those times
   to signify the imputing of Adam's sin, but both times it has reference
   to personal sin; therefore Adam's sin is not imputed to his posterity.
   And this is to be noted, that one of these two places, even that in
   Levit. xvii. 3, 4. does not speak of imputing the act committed, but
   another not committed. The words are, "what man soever there be of the
   house of Israel, that killeth an ox or lamb or goat in the camp, or
   that killeth it out of the camp, and bringeth it not unto the door of
   the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the Lord,
   before the tabernacle of the Lord, blood shall be imputed unto that
   man; he hath shed blood; that man shall be cut off from among his
   people," i. e. plainly, murder shall be imputed to him: he shall be put
   to death for it, and therein punished with the same severity as if he
   had slain a man. It is plain by Isa. lxvi. 3. that, in some cases,
   shedding the blood of beasts, in an unlawful manner, was imputed to
   them, as if they slew a man.

   But whether it be so or not, although in both these places the word
   impute, be applied to personal sin, and to the very act, or although
   this could be said of all the places which our author reckons up; yet
   that the word impute, is never expressly applied to Adam's sin, does no
   more argue, that it is not imputed to his posterity, than it argues,
   that pride, unbelief, lying, theft, oppression, persecution,
   fornication, adultery, sodomy, perjury, idolatry, and innumerable other
   particular moral evils, are never imputed to the persons that committed
   them, or in whom they are; because the word impute, though so often
   used in Scripture, is never applied to any of these kinds of
   wickedness.

   I know not what can be said here, except one of these two things: that
   though these sins are not expressly said to be imputed, yet other words
   are used that do as plainly and certainly imply that they are imputed,
   as if it were said so expressly. Very well, and so I say with respect
   to the imputation of Adam's sin. The thing meant by the word impute,
   may be as plainly and certainly expressed by using other words, as if
   that word were expressly used; and more certainly, because the words
   used instead of it, may amount to an explanation of this word. And
   this, I think, is the very case here. Though the word, impute, is not
   used with respect to Adam's sin, yet it is said, all have sinned;
   which, respecting infants, can be true only of their sinning by his
   sin. And, it is said, by his disobedience many were made sinners; and,
   judgment and condemnation came upon all by that sin; and that by this
   means death, the wages of sin, passed on all men, &c. Which phrases
   amount to full and precise explanations of the word, impute; and
   therefore do more certainly determine the point really insisted on.

   Or, perhaps it will be said, with respect to those personal sins
   before-mentioned, pride, unbelief, &c. it is no argument they are not
   imputed to those who are guilty of them, that the very word impute, is
   not applied to them; for the word itself is rarely used; not one time
   in a hundred, and perhaps five hundred, of those wherein the thing
   meant is plainly implied, or may be certainly inferred. Well, and the
   same also may be applied likewise, with respect to Adam's sin.

   It is probable, Dr. T. intends an argument against original sin, by
   that which he says in opposition to what R. R. suggests of children
   discovering the principles of iniquity, and seeds of sin, before they
   are capable of moral action, [393] viz. That little children are made
   patterns of humility, meekness, and innocence, (Matt. xviii. 3. 1 Cor.
   xiv. 20. and Psal. cxxxi. 2.)

   But when the utmost is made of this, there can be no shadow of reason,
   to understand more by these texts, than that little children are
   recommended as patterns in regard of a negative virtue, innocence with
   respect to the exercises and fruits of sin, harmlessness as to the
   hurtful effects of it; and that image of meekness and humility arising
   from this, in conjunction with a natural tenderness of mind, fear,
   self-diffidence, yieldableness, and confidence in parents and others
   older than themselves. And so, they are recommended as patterns of
   virtue no more than doves, which are an harmless sort of creatures, and
   have an image of the virtues of meekness and love. Even according to
   Dr. T.s own doctrine, no more can be made of it than this: for his
   scheme will not admit of any such thing as positive virtue, or virtuous
   disposition, in infants; he insisting (as was observed before) that
   virtue must be the fruit of thought and reflection. But there can be no
   thought and reflection, that produces positive virtue, in children not
   yet capable of moral action; and it is such children he speaks of. And
   that little children have a negative virtue or innocence, in relation
   to the positive acts and hurtful effects of vice, is no argument that
   they have not a corrupt nature within them: for let their nature be
   ever so corrupt, yet surely it is no wonder that they be not guilty of
   positive wicked action, before they are capable of any moral action at
   all. A young viper has a malignant nature, though incapable of doing a
   malignant action, and at present appearing a harmless creature.

   Another objection, which Dr. T. and some others offer against this
   doctrine, is, That it pours contempt upon the human nature. [394]

   But their declaiming on this topic is like addressing the affections
   and conceits of children, rather than rational arguing with men. It
   seems this doctrine is not complaisant enough. I am sensible, it is not
   suited to the taste of some, who are so very delicate (to say no worse)
   that they can bear nothing but compliment and flattery. No contempt is
   by this doctrine cast upon the noble faculties and capacities of man's
   nature, or the exalted business, and divine and immortal happiness, of
   which he is made capable. And as to speaking ill of man's present moral
   state, I presume, it will not be denied, that shame belongs to them who
   are truly sinful; and to suppose, that this is not the native character
   of mankind, is still but meanly begging the question. If we, as we come
   into the world, are truly sinful, and consequently miserable, he acts
   but a friendly part to us, who endeavours fully to discover and
   manifest our disease. Whereas, on the contrary, he acts an unfriendly
   part, who to his utmost hides it from us: and so, in effect, does what
   in him lies to prevent our seeking a remedy from that, which if not
   remedied in time, must bring us finally to shame and everlasting
   contempt, and end in perfect and remediless destruction hereafter.

   Another objection, which some have made against this doctrine, much
   like the former, is, that it tends to beget in us an ill opinion of our
   fellow-creatures, and so to promote ill-nature and mutual hatred.

   To which I would say, if it be truly so, that we all come sinful into
   the world, then our heartily acknowledging it, tends to promote
   humility: but our disowning that sin and guilt which truly belongs to
   us, and endeavouring to persuade ourselves that we are vastly better
   than in truth we are, tends to a foolish self-exaltation and pride. And
   it is manifest, by reason, experience, and the word of God, that pride
   is the chief source of all the contention, mutual hatred, and ill-will
   which are so prevalent in the world; and that nothing so effectually
   promotes the contrary tempers and deportments, as humility. This
   doctrine teaches us to think no worse of others, than of ourselves: it
   teaches us, that we are all, as we are by nature, companions in a
   miserable helpless condition; which under a revelation of the divine
   mercy, tends to promote mutual compassion. And nothing has a greater
   tendency to promote those amiable dispositions of mercy, forbearance,
   long-suffering, gentleness, and forgiveness, than a sense of our own
   extreme unworthiness and misery, and the infinite need we have of the
   divine pity, forbearance, and forgiveness, together with a hope of
   obtaining mercy. If the doctrine which teaches that mankind are corrupt
   by nature, tends to promote ill-will, why should not Dr. T.s doctrine
   tend to it as much? For he teaches us, that the generality of mankind
   are very wicked, having made themselves so by their own free choice,
   without any necessity: which is a way of becoming wicked, that renders
   men truly worthy of resentment; but the other, not at all, even
   according to his own doctrine.

   Another exclamation against this doctrine is, that it tends to hinder
   comfort and joy, and to promote melancholy and gloominess of mind.
   [395]

   To which I shall briefly say, doubtless, supposing men are really
   become sinful, and so exposed to the displeasure of God, by whatever
   means, if they once come to have their eyes opened, and are not very
   stupid, the reflection on their case will tend to make them sorrowful;
   and it is fit it should. Men, with whom this is the case, may well be
   filled with sorrow, till they are sincerely willing to forsake their
   sins, and turn to God. But there is nothing in this doctrine, that in
   the least stands in the way of comfort and exceeding joy, to such as
   find in their hearts a sincere willingness wholly to forsake all sin,
   and give their hearts and whole selves to Christ, and comply with the
   gospel-method of salvation by him.

   Another thing objected, is, that to make men believe that wickedness
   belongs to their very nature, tends to encourage them in sin, and
   plainly to lead them to all manner of iniquity; because they are
   taught, that sin is natural, and therefore necessary and unavoidable.
   [396]

   But if this doctrine, which teaches that sin is natural to us, does
   also at the same time teach us, that it is never the better, or less to
   be condemned, for its being natural, then it does not at all encourage
   sin, any more than Dr. T.s doctrine encourages wickedness when it is
   become inveterate; who teaches that such as by custom have contracted
   strong habits of sin, are unable to help themselves. [397] And is it
   reasonable, to represent it as encouraging a man in boldly neglecting
   and wilfully continuing in his disease, without seeking a cure, to tell
   him of his disease, to show him that it is real and very fatal, and
   what he can never cure himself of; yet withal directing him to a great
   Physician, who is sufficient for his restoration? But for a more
   particular answer to what is objected against the doctrine of our
   natural impotence and inability, as being an encouragement to go on in
   sin, and a discouragement to the use of all means for our help, I must
   for brevity refer the reader to what has been largely written on this
   head in my discourse on the Freedom of the Will.

   Our author is pleased to advance another notion, among others, by way
   of objection against the doctrine of original sin: that if this
   doctrine be true, it would be unlawful to beget children. He says,
   [398] "If natural generation be the means of unavoidably conveying all
   sin and wickedness into the world, it must itself be a sinful and
   unlawful thing." Now, if there be any force of argument here, it lies
   in this proposition, whatsoever is a means or occasion of the certain
   infallible existence of sin and wickedness, must itself be sinful. But
   I imagine Dr. T. had not thoroughly weighed this proposition, nor
   considered where it would carry him. For, God continuing in being the
   devil, and others that are finally given up to wickedness, will be
   attended, most certainly and infallibly, with an eternal series of the
   most hateful and horrid wickedness. But will any be guilty of such vile
   blasphemy, as to say, therefore God's upholding of them in being is
   itself a sinful thing? In the same place our author says, "so far as we
   are generated in sin, it must be a sin to generate." But there is no
   appearance of evidence in that position, any more than in this: "So far
   as any is upheld in existence in sin, it is a sin to uphold them in
   existence." Yea, if there were any reason in the case, it would be
   strongest in the latter position: for parents, as Dr. T. himself
   observes, are not the authors of the beginning of existence: whereas,
   God is truly the author of the continuance of existence. As it is the
   known will of God, to continue Satan and millions of others in being,
   though the most sure consequence is the continuance of a vast infernal
   world, full of everlasting hellish wickedness: so it is part of the
   revealed will of God, that this world of mankind should be continued,
   and the species propagated, for his own wise and holy purposes; which
   will is complied with by the parents joined in lawful marriage. Their
   children, though they come into the world in sin, yet are capable
   subjects of eternal holiness and happiness: which infinite benefits for
   their children, parents have great reason to expect, in the way of
   giving up their children to God in faith, through a Redeemer, and
   bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. I think,
   this may be answer enough to such a cavil.

   Another objection is, That the doctrine of original sin is no oftener,
   and no more plainly, spoken of in Scripture; it being, if true, a very
   important doctrine. Dr. T. in many parts of his book suggests to his
   readers, that there are very few texts, in the whole Bible, wherein
   there is the least appearance of their teaching any such doctrine.

   Of this I took notice before, but would here say further: That the
   reader who has perused the preceding defence of this doctrine, must now
   be left to judge for himself, whether there be any ground for such an
   allegation; whether there be not texts in sufficient number, both in
   the Old Testament and New, that exhibit undeniable evidence of this
   great article of christian divinity; and whether it be not a doctrine
   taught in the Scripture with great plainness. I think, there are few,
   if any, doctrines of revelation, taught more plainly and expressly.
   Indeed it is taught in an explicit manner more in the New Testament
   than in the Old. Which is not to be wondered at; it being thus with
   respect to all the most important doctrines of revealed religion.

   But if it had been so, that this doctrine were but rarely taught in
   Scripture; yet if we find that it is indeed declared to us by God, if
   held forth to us by any word of his; then what belongs to us, is, to
   believe his word, and receive the doctrine which he teaches us; and not
   to prescribe to him how often he shall speak of it, and to insist upon
   knowing what reasons he has for speaking of it no oftener, before we
   will receive what he teaches us; or to pretend that he should give us
   an account, why he did not speak of it so plainly as we think he ought
   to have done, sooner than he did. In this way of proceeding, if it be
   reasonable, the Sadducees of old, who denied any resurrection or future
   state, might have maintained their cause against Christ, when he blamed
   them for not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; and for not
   understanding by the Scripture, that there would be a resurrection to
   spiritual enjoyment, and not to animal life, and sensual
   gratifications; and they might have insisted, that these doctrines, if
   true, were very important, and therefore ought to have been spoken of
   in the Scriptures oftener and more explicitly, and not that the church
   of God should be left, till that time, with only a few obscure
   intimations of that which so infinitely concerned them. And they might
   with disdain have rejected Christ's argument, by way of inference from
   God calling himself in the books of Moses, the god of Abraham, Isaac,
   and Jacob. For answer, they might have said, that Moses was sent on
   purpose to teach the people the mind and will of God; and therefore, if
   these doctrines were true, he ought in reason and in truth to have
   taught them plainly and frequently, and not have left the people to
   spell out so important a doctrine, only from God's saying, that he was
   the God of Abraham, &c.

   One great end of the Scripture is; to teach the world what manner of
   being GOD is; about which the world, without revelation, has been so
   wofully in the dark: and that God is an infinite being, is a doctrine
   of great importance, and a doctrine sufficiently taught in the
   Scripture. But yet, it appears to me, this doctrine is not taught
   there, in any measure, with such explicitness and precision, as the
   doctrine of original sin: and the Socinians, who denied God's
   omnipresence and omniscience, had as much room left them for cavil, as
   the Pelagians who deny original sin.

   Dr. T. particularly urges, that Christ says not one word of this
   doctrine throughout the four Gospels; which doctrine, if true, being so
   important, and what so nearly concerned the great work of redemption,
   which he came to work out, (as is supposed,) one would think, it should
   have been emphatically spoken of in every page, of the Gospels. [399]

   In reply to this, it may be observed, that by the account given in the
   four Gospels, Christ was continually saying, those things which plainly
   implied, that all men in their original state are sinful and miserable.
   As, when he declared, that they which are whole, need not a physician,
   but they which are sick; [400] That he came to seek and to save that
   which was lost. [401] That it was necessary for all to be born again,
   and to be converted, and that otherwise they could not enter into the
   kingdom of heaven; [402] --and, that all were sinners, as well as those
   whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, &c. and that every
   one who did not repent, should perish; [403] --Withal directing
   everyone to pray to God for forgiveness of sin; [404] --Using our
   necessity of forgiveness from God, as an argument with all to forgive
   the injuries of their neighbours; [405] --Teaching, that earthly
   parents, though kind to their children, are in themselves evil; [406]
   --And signifying, that things carnal and corrupt are properly the
   things of men; [407] --Warning his disciples rather to beware of men,
   than of wild beasts; [408] --Often representing the world as evil, as
   wicked in its works, at enmity with truth and holiness, and hating him;
   [409] --Yea, and teaching plainly, that all men are extremely and
   inexpressibly sinful, owing ten thousand talents to their divine
   creditor. [410]

   And whether Christ did not plainly teach Nicodemus the doctrine of
   original total depravity, when he came to him to know what his doctrine
   was, must be left to the reader to judge, from what has been already
   observed on John iii. 1-11. And besides, Christ in the course of his
   preaching took the most proper method to convince men of the corruption
   of their nature, and to give them an effectual and practical knowledge
   of it, in application to themselves in particular, by teaching and
   urging the holy and strict law of God, in its extent, and spirituality,
   and dreadful threatenings: which, above all things, tends to search the
   hearts of men, and to teach them their inbred exceeding depravity; not
   merely as a matter of speculation, but by proper conviction of
   conscience; which is the only knowledge of original sin, that can avail
   to prepare the mind for receiving Christ's redemption; as a man's sense
   of his own sickness prepares him to apply in good earnest to the
   physician.

   And as to Christ being no more frequent and particular in mentioning
   and inculcating this point in a doctrinal manner, it is probable, one
   reason to be given for it, is the same that is to be given for his
   speaking no oftener of God's creating of the world: which, though so
   important a doctrine, is scarce ever spoken of in any of Christ's
   discourses; and no wonder, seeing this was a matter which the Jews, to
   whom he confined his personal ministry, had all been instructed in from
   their forefathers, and never was called in question among them. And
   there is a great deal of reason, from the ancient Jewish writers, to
   suppose, that the doctrine of original sin had ever been allowed in the
   open profession of that people; [411] though they were generally, in
   that corrupt time, very far from a practical conviction of it; and many
   notions were then prevalent, especially among the Pharisees, which were
   indeed inconsistent with it. And though on account of these prejudices
   they might need to have this doctrine explained and applied to them,
   yet it is well known, by all acquainted with their Bibles, that Christ,
   for wise reasons, spake more sparingly and obscurely of several of the
   most important doctrines of revealed religion, relating to the
   necessity, grounds, nature, and way of his redemption, and the method
   of the justification of sinners, while he lived here in the flesh; and
   left these doctrines to be more plainly and fully opened and inculcated
   by the Holy Spirit after his ascension.

   But if, after all, Christ did not speak of this doctrine often enough
   to suit Dr. T. he might be asked, Why he supposes Christ did no oftener
   and no more plainly teach some of his, Dr. T.s, doctrines, which he so
   much insists on? As, that temporal death comes on all mankind by Adam;
   and that it comes on them by him, not as a punishment or calamity, but
   as a great favour, being made a rich benefit, and a fruit of God's
   abundant grace, by Christ's redemption, who came into the world as a
   second Adam for this end. Surely, if this were so, it was of vast
   importance, that it should be known to the church of God in all ages,
   who saw death reigning over infants, as well as others. If infants were
   indeed perfectly innocent, was it not needful, that the design of that
   which was such a melancholy and awful dispensation towards so many
   millions of innocent creatures, should be known, in order to prevent
   the worst thoughts of God from arising in the minds of the constant
   spectators of so mysterious and gloomy a dispensation? But why then
   such a total silence about it, for four thousand years together, and
   not one word of it in all the Old Testament; nor one word of it in all
   the four Gospels: and indeed not one word of it in the whole Bible, but
   only as forced and wrung out by Dr. T.s arts of criticism and
   deduction, against the plainest and strongest evidence?

   As to the arguments, made use of by many late writers, from the
   universal moral sense, and the reasons they offer from experience, and
   observation of the nature of mankind, to show that we are born into the
   world with principles of virtue; with a natural prevailing relish,
   approbation, and love of righteousness, truth, and goodness, and of
   whatever tends to the public welfare; with a prevailing natural
   disposition to dislike, to resent, and condemn what is selfish, unjust,
   and immoral; and a native bent in mankind to mutual benevolence, tender
   compassion, &c. those who have had such objections against the doctrine
   of original sin thrown in their way, and desire to see them
   particularly considered, I ask leave to refer them to a treatise on the
   nature of true virtue, lying by me prepared for the press, which may
   ere long be exhibited to public view. [412]

      CONCLUSION.

   On the whole, I observe, there are some other things, besides
   arguments, in Dr. T.s book, which are calculated to influence the
   minds, and bias the judgment, of some sorts of readers. Here, not to
   insist on the profession he makes, in many places, of sincerity,
   humility, meekness, modesty, charity, &c. in searching after truth; and
   freely proposing his thoughts, with the reasons of them, to others;
   [413] nor on his magisterial assurance, appearing on many occasions,
   and the high contempt he sometimes expresses of the opinions and
   arguments of very excellent divines and fathers in the church of God,
   who have thought differently from him [414] --both of which, it is not
   unlikely, may have a degree of influence on some of his readers--I
   would take some notice of another thing, observable in the writings of
   Dr. T. and many of the late opposers of the more peculiar doctrines of
   Christianity, tending (especially with juvenile and unwary readers) not
   a little to abate the force, and prevent the due effect, of the
   clearest scripture-evidences in favour of those important doctrines;
   and particularly to make void the arguments taken from the writings of
   the apostle Paul, in which those doctrines are more plainly and fully
   revealed, than in any other part of the Bible. What I mean, is this:
   These gentlemen express a high opinion of this apostle, and that very
   justly, for his eminent genius, his admirable sagacity, strong powers
   of reasoning, acquired learning, &c. They speak of him as a writer of
   masterly address, of extensive reach, and deep design, every where in
   his epistles, almost in every word he says. This looks exceedingly
   specious: it carries a plausible appearance of christian zeal and
   attachment to the Holy Scriptures, to bear such a testimony of high
   veneration for that great apostle, who was not only the principal
   instrument of propagating Christianity, but with his own hand wrote so
   considerable a part of the New Testament. And I am far from
   determining, with respect at least to some of these writers, that they
   are not sincere in their declarations; or, that all is mere artifice,
   only to make way for the reception of their own peculiar sentiments.
   However, it tends greatly to subserve such a purpose; as much as if it
   were designedly contrived, with the utmost subtilty, for that end.
   Hereby their incautious readers are prepared the more easily to be
   drawn into a belief, that they, and others in their way of thinking,
   have not rightly understood many of those things in this apostle's
   writings, which before seemed very plain to them. Thus they are
   prepared, by a prepossession in favour of these new writers, to
   entertain a favourable thought of the interpretations put by them upon
   the words and phrases of this apostle; and to admit in many passages a
   meaning which before lay entirely out of sight; quite foreign to all
   that in the view of a common reader seems to be their obvious sense;
   and most remote from the expositions agreed in by those who used to be
   esteemed the greatest divines, and best commentators. As to this
   apostle, being a man of no vulgar understanding, it is nothing strange
   if his meaning lies very deep; and no wonder then, if the superficial
   observation of vulgar Christians, or indeed of the herd of common
   divines, such as the Westminster Assembly, &c. falls vastly short of
   the apostle's reach, and frequently does not enter into the true spirit
   and design of his epistles. They must understand, that the first
   reformers, and indeed preachers and expositors in general, for fifteen
   or sixteen hundred years past, were too unlearned and short-sighted, to
   be capable of penetrating into the sense, or fit to make comments on
   the writings, of so great a man as this apostle; or else had dwelt in a
   cave of bigotry and superstition, too gloomy to allow them to use their
   own understandings with freedom, in reading the Scripture. But, at the
   same time, it must be understood, that there is risen up now at length,
   in this happy age of light and liberty, a set of men, of a more free
   and generous turn of mind, of a more inquisitive genius, and of better
   discernment. By such insinuations, they seek advantage to their cause;
   and thus the most unreasonable and extravagant interpretations of
   Scripture are palliated and recommended: so that, if the simple reader
   is not very much on his guard, if he does not clearly see with his own
   eyes, or has too much indolence, or too little leisure, thoroughly to
   examine for himself, he is in danger of being imposed on with delusive
   appearances.

   But I humbly conceive, that their interpretations--particularly of the
   apostle Paul's writings, though in some things ingenious--are in many
   things extremely absurd, and demonstrably disagreeable, in the highest
   degree, to his real design, to the language he commonly uses, and to
   the doctrines currently taught in his epistles. Their criticisms, when
   examined, appear far more subtile, than solid; and it seems as if
   nothing can possibly be strong enough, nothing perspicuous enough, in
   any composure whatever, to stand before such liberties as these writers
   indulge. The plainest and most nervous discourse is analyzed and
   criticized, till it either dissolves into nothing, or becomes a thing
   of little significance. The Holy Scripture is subtilized into a mere
   mist; or made to evaporate into a thin cloud, that easily puts on any
   shape, and is moved in any direction, with a puff of wind, just as the
   manager pleases. It is not in the nature and power of language, to
   afford sufficient defence against such an art, so abused; as, I
   imagine, a due consideration of some things I have had occasion in the
   preceding discourse to observe, may abundantly convince us.

   But this, with the rest of what I have offered on the subject, must be
   left with every candid reader's judgment; and the success of the whole
   must now be left with God, who knows what is agreeable to his own mind,
   and is able to make his own truths prevail; however mysterious they may
   seem to the poor, partial, narrow, and extremely imperfect views of
   mortals, while looking through a cloudy and delusory medium; and
   however disagreeable they may be to the innumerable prejudices of men's
   hearts:-- and who has promised, that the gospel of christ, such as is
   really his, shall finally be victorious; and has assured us, that the
   word which goes out of his mouth, shall not return to him void, but
   shall accomplish that which he pleaseth, and shall prosper in the thing
   whereto he sends it.--Let god arise, and plead his own cause, and
   glorify his own great name. amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [388] It may be noted, that Dr. T himself signifies it as his mind,
   that these blessings on Noah were on account of the covenant of grace,
   p. 84, 90, 91. 92. S.

   [389] Page 256, 357, 260, 71-74. S.

   [390] Page 72, 73. S.

   [391] Page 65, 66, 111. S.

   [392] Page 3, &c. 105.

   [393] Page 77, 78. S.

   [394] Page 74, 75. S.

   [395] Page 231, and some other places.

   [396] Page 139, and 259.

   [397] See his exposition on Rom. vii. p. 205 -220. But especially in
   his paraphrase and notes on the epistle.

   [398] Page 145.

   [399] Page 242, 243.

   [400] Matt. ix.12.

   [401] Matt. xviii.11. Luke xix.10.

   [402] Matt. xviii. 3.

   [403] Luke xiii.1-5.

   [404] Matt.vi.12. Luke xi.4.

   [405] Matt. vi. 14, 15.

   [406] Matt. vii. 11.

   [407] Matt. xvi. 23.

   [408] Matt. x.16, 17.

   [409] John vii.7, viii.23, xiv. 17, xv. 18, 19.

   [410] Matt. xviii. 21, to the end

   [411] What is found in the more ancient of the Jewish rabbies, who have
   written since the coming of Christ, is an argument of this. Many things
   of this sort are taken notice of by Stapferus, in his Theologia
   Polemica before mentioned. Some of these things which are there cited
   by him in Latin, I shall here faithfully give in English, for the sake
   of the English reader. "--So Manasseh, concerning Human Frailty. p.
   129.--Gen viii. 21. I will not any more curse the earth for man's sake;
   for the appetite of man is evil from his youth; that is, from the time
   when he comes forth from his mother's womb. For at the same time that
   he sucks the breasts, he follows his lust; and while he is yet an
   infant, he is under the dominion of anger, envy, hatred, and other
   vices to which that tender age is obnoxious."-- "Prov. xxii. 15.
   Solomon says, Foolishness is bound to the mind of a child." Concerning
   which place R. Levi Ben Gersom observes thus, "Foolishness as it were
   grows to him in his very beginning." Concerning this sin, which is
   common and original to all men, David said, Psal. ii. 5. Behold I was
   begotten in iniquity, and in sin did my mother warm me. Upon which
   place Ebeb-Ezra says thus: "Behold, because of the concupiscence which
   is innate in the heart of man, it is said, I am begotten in iniquity.
   And the sense is, that there is implanted in the heart of man, jetzer
   harang, an evil figment, from his nativity." And Manasseh Ben Israel,
   de Fragil. pag. 2. "Behold, I was formed in iniquity, and in sin hath
   my mother warmed me. But whether this be understood concerning the
   common mother, which was Eve, or whether David spake only of his own
   mother, he would signify, that sin is as it were natural, and
   inseparable in this life. For it is to be observed, that Eve conceived
   after the transgression was committed: and as many as were begotten
   afterwards, were not brought forth in conformity to the rule of right
   reason, but in conformity to disordly and lustful affections." He adds,
   "One of the wise men of the Jews, namely, R. Aha, rightly observed,
   David would signify that it is impossible, even for pious men who excel
   in virtue, never to commit any sin." "Job also asserts the same thing
   with David, chap xiv. 4. saying, "Who will give a clean thing for an
   unclean? Truly not one." Concerning which words Aben-Ezra says thus:
   "The sense is the same with that, I was begotten in iniquity, because
   man is made out of an unclean thing." Stapferus, Theolog. Polem. tom.
   iii. p. 36, 37. Id. Ibid. p. 132, &c. So Sal. Jarchi ad Gemaram, Cod.
   Schabbath, fol. 142. p. 2. "And this is not only to be referred to
   sinners; because all the posterity of the first man are in like manner
   subjected to all the curses pronounced on him." And Manasseh Ben
   Israel, in his preface to Human Fraility, says, "I had a mind to show
   by what means it came to pass, that when the first father of all had
   lost his righteousness, his posterity are begotten liable to the same
   punishment with him." And Munsterus on the Gospel of Matthew cites the
   following words, from the book called The Bundle of Myrrh:" The blessed
   Lord said to the first man, when he cursed him, Thorns and thistles
   shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.
   The thing which he means is, that because of his sin all who should
   descend from him, should be wicked and perverse, like thorns and
   thistles, according to that word of the Lord, speaking to the prophet:
   Thorns and irritators are with thee, and thou dwellest among scorpions.
   And all this from the serpent, who was the devil, Sammael, who emitted
   a mortiferous and corruptive poison into Eve, and became the cause of
   death to Adam himself, when he eat the the fruit." Remarkable is the
   place quoted in Joseph de Voisin, against Martin Raymond, p. 471. of
   Master Menachem Rakanatensis, sect. Bereschit, from Midrasch Tehillim:
   which is cited by Hoerndekius, against the Jews, in these words: "It is
   no wonder, that the sin of Adam and Eve is written and sealed with the
   king's ring, and to be propagated to all following generations; because
   on the day that Adam was created, all things were finished: so that he
   stood forth the perfection and completion of the whole workmanship of
   the world: so when he sinned, the whole world sinned; whose sin we bear
   and suffer. But the matter is not thus with respect to the sins of his
   posterity." --Thus far Stapferus. Besides these, as Ainsworth on Gen.
   viii. 21. observes, "In Bereshith Rabba, a Hebrew commentary on this
   place, a rabbin is said to be asked, When is the evil imagination put
   into man? And he answered, From the hour that he is formed." And in
   Pool's Synopsis it is added, from Grotius, "So Rabbi Salomon interprets
   Gen. viii. 21. The imagination of man's heart, is evil from his youth,
   of its being evil from the time that he is taken out of his mother's
   bowels." Aben-Ezra thus interprets Psal. li. 5. "I was shapen in
   iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me; that evil concupiscence
   is implanted in the heart from childhood, as if he were formed in it;
   and by my mother, he understands Eve, who did not bear children till
   she had sinned. And so Kafvenaki says, How shall I avoid sinning? My
   ORIGINAL is corrupt, and from thence are those sins. So Manasseh Ben
   Israel, from this place (Psal. li. 5.) concludes, that not only David,
   but all mankind, ever since sin was introduced into the world, do sin
   from their original. To this purpose is the answer of Rabbi Hakkadosch
   which there is an account of in the Talmud. From what time does
   concupiscence rule over man? From the very moment of his first
   formation, or from his nativity? Ans. From his formation."'--Pool's
   Synops. in Loc. On these things I observe, there is the greatest reason
   to suppose, that these old rabbies of the Jewish nation, who give such
   heed to the tradition of the elders, would never have received this
   doctrine of original sin, had it not been delivered down to them from
   their forefathers. For it is a doctrine very disagreeable to those
   practical principles and notions, wherein the religion of the
   unbelieving Jews most fundamentally differs from the religion
   maintained among Christians: particularly their notion of justification
   by their own righteousness, and privileges as the children of Abraham.
   &c. without standing in need of any satisfaction, by the sufferings of
   the Messiah. On which account the modern Jews do now universally reject
   the doctrine of original sin, and corruption of nature: as Stapferus
   observes. And it is not at all likely, that the ancient Jews, if no
   such doctrine had been received by tradition from the fathers would
   have taken it up from the Christians, whom they had in such great
   contempt and enmity; especially as it is a doctrine so peculiarly
   agreeable to the christian notion of the spiritual salvation of Jesus,
   and so contrary to their carnal notions of the Messiah, and of his
   salvation and kingdom, and so contrary to their opinion of themselves;
   and a doctrine, which men in general are so apt to be prejudiced
   against. And besides, these rabbies do expressly refer to the opinion
   of their forefathers; as R. Manasseh says, "according to the opinion of
   the ancients, none are subject to death, but those which have sinned;
   for where there is no sin, there is no death." Stapfer. tom. iii. p.
   37, 38. But where we have more direct evidence, that the doctrine of
   original sin was truly a received doctrine among the ancient Jews, even
   before the coming of Christ. This appears by ancient Jewish writings,
   which were written before Christ: as, in the apocrypha, 2 Esdras iii.
   21. "For the first Adam, bearing a wicked heart, transgressed, and was
   overcome: and so be all they that are born of him. Thus infirmity was
   made permanent; and the law also in the heart of the people, with the
   malignity of the root; so that the good departed away, and the evil
   abode still." 2 Esdras iv. 30. "For the grain of evil seed hath been
   sown in the heart of Adam, from the beginning; and how much ungodliness
   hath it brought up unto this time? And how much shall it yet bring
   forth, till the time of threshing shall come?" And chap. vii. 46. "It
   had been better, not to have given the earth unto Adam; or else, when
   it was given to him, to have restrained him from sinning; for what
   profit is it, for men now in this present time, to live in heaviness,
   and after death to look for punishment? O thou Adam, what hast thou
   done? For though it was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone,
   but we all that came of thee." And we read Eccl. xxv. 24. "Of the woman
   came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die." As this
   doctrine of original corruption was constantly maintained in the church
   of God from the beginning; so from thence, in all probability, as well
   as from the evidennce of it in universal experience, it was, that the
   wiser heathens maintained the like doctrine. Particularly Plato, that
   great philosopher, so distinguished for his veneration of ancient
   traditions, and diligent inquiries after them. Gale, in his Court of
   the Gentiles, observes as follows: "PLATO says, (Gorg. fol. 493.) I
   have heard from the wise men, that are now dead, and that the body is
   but our sepulchre. And in his Timaeus Locrus (fol. 103) he says, The
   cause of vitiosity is from our parents, and first principles, rather
   than from ourselves. So that we never relinquish those actions, which
   lead us to follow those primitive blemishes of our first parents. Plato
   mentions the corruption of the will, and seems to disown free will to
   true good; albeit he allows some (NOT ENGLISH), or natural
   dispositions, to civil good, in some great heroes. Socrates asserted
   the corruption of human nature, or (NOT ENGLISH) .--Grotius affirms,
   that the philosophers acknowledged, it was con-natural to men to sin.
   Seneca (Benef. 5. 14.) says, wickedness has not its first beginning in
   wicked practice; though by that it is first exercised and made
   manifest. And Plutarch (de sera vindictis) says man does not first
   become wicked, when he first manifests himself so: but he hath
   wickedness from the beginning; and he shows it as soon as he finds
   opportunity and ability. As men rightly judge, that the sting is not
   first engendered in scorpions when they strike, or the poison in vipers
   when they bite.--Pool's Synopsis on Gen. viii. 21. To which may be
   subjoined what Juvenal says, --Admores natura recurrit Damnates fixa et
   mutari nescia. Englished thus, in prose: Nature, a thing fixed and not
   knowing how to change, returns to its wicked manners.--WATTS, Ruin and
   Recovery.

   [412] See Dissertation concerning the Nature of True Virtue, p. 122.

   [413] See his Preface, and p. 6. 237, 263, 267, 175. S.

   [414] Page 110, 125, 150, 151, 159, 161, 183, 188. 77. S.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [359] Page 125, 128-130, 186-188, 190, 200, 245, 246, 253, 258, 63, 64,
   161. S. and other places.

   [360] Page. 128

   [361] Page 190.

   [362] Page 200. See also p. 216.

   [363] Contents of Rom. chap. vii. in Notes on the epistle.

   [364] Page 125.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

      TREATISE

        CONCERNING

  RELIGIOUS AFFECTIONS

    IN THREE PARTS

   I. Concerning the nature of the affections and their importance in
   religion.

   II. Showing what are no certain signs that religious affections are
   gracious, or that they are not.

   III. Showing what are distinguishing signs of truly gracious and holy
   affections.

   Lev. ix. 24 x. 1, 2.--And there came a fire out from before the
   Lord,--Upon the altar--which when all the People saw. they shouted, and
   fell on their faces. And Nadab and Abihu--offered strange fire before
   the Lord, which he commanded them not: and there went out fire from the
   Lord. and devoured them, and they died before the Lord."

   Cant. ii. 12,13--The flowers appear on the earth. the time of the
   singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
   land. The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the
   tender grapes give a good smell. Cant. ii. 15 Take us the foxes, the
   little foxes which spoil the vines; for our vines have tender grapes.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PREFACE.

   There is no question of greater importance to mankind, and that it more
   concerns every individual person to be well resolved in, than this:
   What are the distinguishing qualifications of those that are in favour
   with God, and entitled to his eternal rewards? Or, which comes to the
   same thing, What is the nature of true religion? and wherein lie the
   distinguishing notes of that virtue which is acceptable in the sight of
   God? But though it be of such importance, and though we have clear and
   abundant light in the word of God to direct us in this matter, yet
   there is no one point wherein professing Christians differ more one
   from another. It would be endless to reckon up the variety of opinions,
   in this point, that divide the Christian world; making manifest the
   truth of that declaration of our Saviour, "Strait is the gate, and
   narrow is the way, that leads to life, and few there be that find it."

   The consideration of these things has long engaged me to attend to this
   matter with the utmost diligence and care, and all the exactness of
   search and inquiry of which I have been capable. It is a subject on
   which my mind has been peculiarly intent, ever since I first entered on
   the study of divinity.--But as to the success of my inquiries, it must
   be left to the judgment of the reader of the following treatise.

   I am sensible it is difficult to judge impartially of the subject of
   this discourse, in the midst of the dust and smoke of present
   controversy, about things of this nature. As it is more difficult to
   write impartially, so it is more difficult to read impartially.--Many
   will probably be hurt, to find so much that appertains to religious
   affection here condemned: and perhaps indignation and contempt will be
   excited in others, by finding so much justified and approved. And it
   may be, some will be ready to charge me with inconsistence with myself,
   in so much approving some things, and so much condemning others; as I
   have found that this has always been objected to by some, ever since
   the beginning of our late controversies about religion. It is a
   difficult thing to be a hearty zealous friend of what has been good and
   glorious in the late extraordinary appearances, and to rejoice much in
   it; and, at the same time, to see the evil and pernicious tendency of
   what has been bad, and earnestly to oppose that. Yet, I am humbly but
   fully persuaded, we shall never be in the way of truth, a way
   acceptable to God, and tending to the advancement of Christ's kingdom,
   till we do so. There is indeed something very mysterious in it, that so
   much good, and so much bad, should be mixed together in the church of
   God: as it is a mysterious thing, and what has puzzled and amazed many
   a good Christian, that there should be that which is so divine and
   precious, as the saving grace of God, dwelling in the same heart, with
   so much corruption, hypocrisy, and iniquity, in a particular saint. Yet
   neither of these is more mysterious than real. And neither of them is a
   new thing. It is no new thing, that much false religion should prevail,
   at a time of great revival; and that, at such a time, multitudes of
   hypocrites should spring up among true saints. It was so in that great
   reformation, and revival of religion, in Josiah's time; as appears by
   Jer. iii. 10. and Jer. iv. 3, 4. and also by the great apostacy there
   was in the land, so soon after his reign. So it was in that great
   outpouring of the Spirit upon the Jews, in the days of John the
   Baptist; as appears by the great apostacy of that people, so soon after
   so general an awakening, and the temporary religious comforts and joys
   of many; John v. 35. "Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
   light." So it was in those great commotions among the multitude,
   occasioned by the preaching of Jesus Christ. Of the many that were then
   called, but few were chosen; of the multitude that were roused and
   affected by his preaching--and at one time or other appeared mightily
   engaged, full of admiration of Christ, and elevated with joy--but few
   were true disciples, that stood the shock of trials, and endured to the
   end. Many were like the stony or thorny ground; and but few,
   comparatively, like the good ground. Of the whole heap that was
   gathered, great part was chaff, that the wind afterwards drove away;
   and the heap of wheat that was left, was comparatively small; as
   appears abundantly by the history of the New Testament. So it was in
   that great outpouring of the Spirit in the apostles' days; as appears
   by Matt. xxiv. 10-13. Gal. iii. 1. and Gal. iv. 11, 15. Phil. ii. 21.
   and Phil. iii. 18, 19. 1 Cor. and 2 Cor. the two Epistles to the
   Corinthians, and many other parts of the New Testament. And so it was
   in the great reformation from popery.--It appears plainly to have been
   in the visible church of God, in times of great revivals, as it is with
   the fruit-trees in the spring; there are multitudes of blossoms, which
   appear fair and beautiful, and there is a promising appearance of young
   fruits: but many of them are of short continuance; they soon fall off,
   and never come to maturity.

   It is not, however, to be supposed, that it will always be so; for,
   though there never will, in this world, be an entire purity, either in
   particular saints, by a perfect freedom from mixture of corruption; or
   in the church of God, without any mixture of hypocrites with saints--or
   counterfeit religion and false appearances of grace with true religion
   and real holiness--yet, it is evident, there will come a time of much
   greater purity in the church, than has been in ages past. [415] And one
   great reason of it will be, that at that time, God will give much
   greater light to his people, to distinguish between true religion and
   counterfeits; Mal. iii. 3. "And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier
   of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold
   and silver, that they may offer to the Lord an offering in
   righteousness." With Mal. iii. 18. which is a continuation of the
   prophecy of the same happy times, "Then shall ye return, and discern
   between the righteous and the wicked; between him that serveth God, and
   him that serveth him not."

   It is by the mixture of counterfeit religion with true, not discerned
   and distinguished, that the devil has had his greatest advantage
   against the cause and kingdom of Christ. It is plainly by this means,
   principally, that he has prevailed against all revivals of religion,
   since the first founding of the christian church. By this he hurt the
   cause of Christianity, in and after the apostolic age, much more than
   by all the persecutions of both Jews and heathens. The apostles, in all
   their epistles, show themselves much more concerned at the former
   mischief, than the latter. By this, Satan prevailed against the
   reformation, begun by Luther, Zuinglius, &c. to put a stop to its
   progress, and bring it into disgrace, ten times more than by all the
   bloody and cruel persecutions of the church of Rome. By this,
   principally, has he prevailed against revivals of religion in our
   nation. By this he prevailed against New England, to quench the love
   and spoil the joy of her espousals, about a hundred years ago. And, I
   think, I have had opportunity enough to see plainly, that by this the
   devil has prevailed against the late great revival of religion in New
   England, so happy and promising in its beginning. Here, most evidently,
   has been the main advantage Satan has had against us; by this he has
   foiled us. It is by this means that the daughter of Zion in this land
   now lies on the ground, in such piteous circumstances, with her
   garments rent, her face disfigured, her nakedness exposed, her limbs
   broken, and weltering in the blood of her own wounds, and in no wise
   able to arise; and this, so quickly after her late great joys and
   hopes: Lam. i. 17. "Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none
   to comfort her: the Lord hath commanded concerning Jacob, that his
   adversaries shall be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous
   woman among them." I have seen the devil prevail the same way, against
   two great revivals of religion in this country.--Satan goes on with
   mankind as he began with them. He prevailed against our first parents,
   cast them out of paradise, and suddenly brought all their happiness and
   glory to an end, by appearing to be a friend to their happy state, and
   pretending to advance it to higher degrees. So the same cunning serpent
   that beguiled Eve through his subtilty, by perverting us from the
   simplicity that is in Christ, hath suddenly prevailed to deprive us of
   that fair prospect we had, a little while ago, of a kind of
   paradisiacal state of the church of God in New England.

   After religion has revived in the church of God, and enemies appear,
   people that are engaged to defend its cause are commonly most exposed,
   where they are least sensible of danger. While they are wholly intent
   upon the opposition that appears openly before them, in order to make
   head against that, and while they neglect carefully to look around, the
   devil comes behind them, and gives a fatal stab unseen; and he has
   opportunity to give a more home stroke, and to wound the deeper,
   because he strikes at his leisure, being obstructed by no resistance or
   guard.

   And so it is likely ever to be in the church, whenever religion revives
   remarkably, till we have learned well to distinguish between true and
   false religion, between saving affections and experiences, and those
   manifold fair shows, and glistering appearances, by which they are
   counterfeited; the consequences of which, when they are not
   distinguished, are often inexpressibly dreadful. By this means, the
   devil gratifies himself, that multitudes should offer to God, under the
   notion of acceptable service, what is indeed above all things
   abominable to him. By this means, he deceives great multitudes about
   the state of their souls; making them think they are something, when
   they are nothing; and so eternally undoes them: and not only so, but
   establishes many in a strong confidence of their eminent holiness, who,
   in God's sight, are some of the vilest hypocrites. By this means, he
   many ways damps religion in the hearts of the saints, obscures and
   deforms it by corrupt mixtures, causes their religious affections
   wofully to degenerate, and sometimes, for a considerable time, to be
   like the manna that bred worms and stank; and dreadfully insnares and
   confounds the minds of others, brings them into great difficulties and
   temptations, and entangles them in a wilderness, out of which they can
   by no means extricate themselves. By this means, Satan mightily
   encourages the hearts of open enemies, strengthens their hands, fills
   them with weapons, and makes strong their fortresses; when at the same
   time, religion and the church of God lie exposed to them, as a city
   without walls. By this means, he brings it to pass, that men work
   wickedness under a notion of doing God service, and so sin without
   restraint, yea with earnest forwardness and zeal, and with all their
   might. By this means, he brings in even the friends of religion,
   insensibly, to do the work of enemies, by destroying religion in a far
   more effectual manner than open enemies can do, under a notion of
   advancing it. By this means, the devil scatters the flock of Christ,
   and sets them one against another with great heat of spirit, under a
   notion of zeal for God; and religion, by degrees, degenerates into vain
   jangling. During the strife, Satan leads both parties far out of the
   right way, driving each to great extremes, one on the right hand, and
   the other on the left, according as he finds they are most inclined, or
   most easily moved and swayed, till the right path in the middle is
   almost wholly neglected. In the midst of this confusion, the devil has
   great opportunity to advance his own interest, to make it strong in
   ways innumerable, to get the government of all into his own hands, and
   to work his own will. And by what is seen of the terrible consequences
   of this counterfeit, when not distinguished from true religion, God's
   people in general have their minds unsettled in religion, and know not
   where to set their foot, or what to think, and many are brought into
   doubts, whether there be any thing at all in religion; and heresy,
   infidelity, and atheism greatly prevail.

   Therefore, it greatly concerns us to use our utmost endeavours, clearly
   to discern, and have it well settled and established, wherein true
   religion does consist. Till this be done, it may be expected that great
   revivals of religion will be but of short continuance; till this be
   done, there is but little good to be expected of all our warm debates,
   in conversation and from the press, not knowing clearly and distinctly
   what we ought to contend for.

   My design is to contribute my mite, and use my best (however feeble)
   endeavours to this end, in the ensuing treatise: wherein it must be
   noted, that it is somewhat diverse from the design of what I formerly
   published, which was to show The distinguishing marks of a work of the
   Spirit of God, including both his common and saving operations. What I
   aim at now, is to show the nature and signs of the gracious operations
   of God's Spirit, by which they are to be distinguished from all things
   whatsoever which are not of a saving nature. If I have succeeded in
   this my aim, in any tolerable measure, I hope it will tend to promote
   the interest of religion. And whether I have succeeded to bring any
   light to this subject, or not, and however my attempt may be
   reproached, in these captious, censorious times, I hope in the mercy of
   a gracious and righteous God, for the acceptance of the sincerity of my
   endeavours; and hope also, for the candour and prayers of the true
   followers of the meek and charitable Lamb of God.

      A TREATISE

  CONCERNING RELIGIOUS AFFECTIONS
     __________________________________________________________________

   [415] This appears plain by these texts of Scripture, Isa. lii. 1 Ezek.
   xliv. 6,7,9 Joel iii. 17 Zech. xiv. 21 Psal. lxix. 32,35,36 Isa. xxxv.
   8,10 iv. 3,4 Ezek. xx. 38 Psal. xxxvii. 9,10,11,29
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   CONCERNING THE NATURE OF THE AFFECTIONS AND THEIR IMPORTANCE IN
   RELIGION.

   1 Peter i. 8.

   Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
   believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Introductory remarks respecting the affections.

   In these words, the apostle represents the state of the Christians to
   whom he wrote, under persecutions. To these persecutions he has
   respect, in the two preceding verses, when he speaks of the trial of
   their faith, and of their being in heaviness through manifold
   temptations.

   Such trials are of threefold benefit to true religion.--Hereby the
   truth of it is manifested, it appears to be indeed true religion.
   Trials, above all other things, have a tendency to distinguish true
   religion and false, and to cause the difference between them evidently
   to appear. Hence they are called by the name of trials, in the verse
   preceding the text, and innumerable other places. They try the faith
   and religion of professors, of what sort it is, as apparent gold is
   tried in the fire, and manifested, whether it be true gold or not And
   the faith of true Christians, being thus tried and proved to be true,
   is found to praise, and honour, and glory.

   And then, these trials not only manifest the truth of true religion,
   but they make its genuine beauty and amiableness remarkably to appear.
   True virtue never appears so lovely, as when it is most oppressed: and
   the divine excellency of real Christianity is never exhibited with such
   advantage, as when under the greatest trials. Then it is that true
   faith appears much more precious than gold; and upon this account, is
   found to praise, and honour, and glory.

   Again, another benefit of such trials to true religion, is that they
   purify and increase it. They not only manifest it to be true, but also
   tend to refine it, and deliver it from those mixtures of what is false,
   which encumber and impede it; that nothing may be left but that which
   is true. They not only show the amiableness of true religion to the
   best advantage, but they tend to increase its beauty by establishing
   and confirming it; making it more lively and vigorous, and purifying it
   from those things that obscured its lustre and glory. As gold that is
   tried in the fire is purged from its alloy, and all remainders of
   dross, and comes forth more beautiful; so true faith being tried as
   gold is tried in the fire, becomes more precious; and thus also is
   found unto praise, and honour, and glory. The apostle seems to have
   respect to each of these benefits in the verse preceding the text.

   And, in the text, the apostle observes how true religion operated in
   these Christians under their persecutions, whereby these benefits
   appeared in them; or what manner of operation it was, whereby their
   religion, under persecution, was manifested to be true religion in its
   genuine beauty and amiableness, and also appeared to be increased and
   purified, and so was like to be found unto praise, and honour, and
   glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And there were two kinds of
   operation, or exercise of true religion, in them, under sufferings,
   that the apostle takes notice of in the text, wherein these benefits
   appeared.

   1. Love to Christ. Whom having not seen, ye love. The world was ready
   to wonder, what strange principle it was, that influenced them to
   expose themselves to so great sufferings, to forsake the things that
   were seen, and renounce all that was dear and pleasant, which was the
   object of sense. They seemed to the men of the world as if they were
   beside themselves, and to act as though they hated themselves; there
   was nothing in their view, that could induce them thus to suffer, or to
   support them under and carry them through such trials. But although
   there was nothing that the world saw, or that the Christians themselves
   ever saw with their bodily eyes, that thus influenced and supported
   them, yet they had a supernatural principle of love to something
   unseen; they loved Jesus Christ, for they saw him spiritually, whom the
   world saw not, and whom they themselves had never seen with bodily
   eyes.

   2. Joy in Christ. Though their outward sufferings were very grievous,
   yet their inward spiritual joys were greater than their sufferings; and
   these supported them, and enabled them to suffer with cheerfulness.

   There are two things which the apostle takes notice of in the text
   concerning this joy. 1. The manner in which it rises, the way in which
   Christ, though unseen, is the foundation of it, viz. by faith; which is
   the evidence of things not seen; In whom, though now ye see him not,
   yet BELIEVING, ye rejoice. 2. The nature of this joy; unspeakable, and
   full of glory. Unspeakable in the kind of it; very different from
   worldly joys, and carnal delights; of a vastly more pure, sublime, and
   heavenly nature, being something supernatural, and truly divine, and so
   ineffably excellent! the sublimity and exquisite sweetness of which,
   there were no words to set forth. Unspeakable also in degree; it having
   pleased God to give them this holy joy with a liberal hand, in their
   state of persecution.

   Their joy was full of glory. Although the joy was unspeakable, and no
   words were sufficient to describe it; yet something might be said of
   it, and no words more fit to represent its excellency than these, that
   it was full of glory; or, as it is in the original, glorified joy. In
   rejoicing with this joy, their minds were filled, as it were, with a
   glorious brightness, and their natures exalted and perfected. It was a
   most worthy, noble rejoicing, that did not corrupt and debase the mind,
   as many carnal joys do; but did greatly beautify and dignify it. It was
   a prelibation of the joy of heaven, that raised their minds to a degree
   of heavenly blessedness; it filled their minds with the light of God's
   glory, and made themselves to shine with some communication of that
   glory.

   Hence the proposition or doctrine, that I would raise from these words
   is this, true religion, in great part, consists in holy affections.

   We see that the apostle, in remarking the operations and exercises of
   religion in these Christians, when it had its greatest trial by
   persecution, as gold is tried in the fire--and when it not only proved
   true, but was most pure from dross and mixtures--and when it appeared
   in them most in its genuine excellency and native beauty, and was found
   to praise, and honour, and glory--he singles out the religious
   affections of love and joy, as those exercises, wherein their religion
   did thus appear true, pure, and glorious.

   Here it may be inquired, what the affections of the mind are?--I
   answer, The affections are no other, than the more vigorous and
   sensible exercises of the inclination and will of the soul.

   God has endued the soul with two principal faculties: The one, that by
   which it is capable of perception and speculation, or by which it
   discerns and judges of things; which is called the understanding. The
   other, that by which the soul is some way inclined with respect to the
   things it views or considers; or it is the faculty by which the soul
   beholds things--not as an indifferent unaffected spectator, but--either
   as liking or disliking, pleased or displeased, approving or rejecting.
   This faculty is called by various names: it is sometimes called the
   inclination; and, as it respects the actions determined and governed by
   it, the will: and the mind, with regard to the exercises of this
   faculty, is often called the heart.

   The exercises of this last faculty are of two sorts; either, those by
   which the soul is carried out towards the things in view in approving
   them, being pleased with and inclined to them; or, those in which the
   soul opposes the things in view, in disapproving them; and in being
   displeased with, averse from. and rejecting them.--And as the exercises
   of the inclination are various in their kinds, so they are much more
   various in their degrees. There are some exercises of pleasedness or
   displeasedness, inclination or disinclination, wherein the soul is
   carried but a little beyond a state of perfect indifference. And there
   are other degrees, wherein the approbation or dislike, pleasedness or
   aversion, are stronger; wherein we may rise higher and higher, till the
   soul comes to act vigorously and sensibly, and its actings are with
   that strength, that (through the laws of union which the Creator has
   fixed between soul and body) the motion of the blood and animal spirits
   begins to be sensibly altered: whence oftentimes arises some bodily
   sensation, especially about the heart and vitals, which are the
   fountain of the fluids of the body. Whence it comes to pass, that the
   mind, with regard to the exercises of this faculty, perhaps in all
   nations and ages, is called the heart. And it is to be noted, that they
   are these more vigorous and sensible exercises of this facility, which
   are called the affections.

   The will, and the affections of the soul, are not two faculties; the
   affections are not essentially distinct from the will, nor do they
   differ from the mere actings of the will and inclination, but only in
   the liveliness and sensibility of exercise.--It must be confessed, that
   language is here somewhat imperfect, the meaning of words in a
   considerable measure loose and unfixed, and not precisely limited by
   custom which governs the use of language. In some sense, the affection
   of the soul differs nothing at all from the will and inclination, and
   the will never is in any exercise further than it is affected; it is
   not moved out of a state of perfect indifference, any otherwise than as
   it is affected one way or other. But yet there are many actings of the
   will and inclination, that are not so commonly called affections. In
   every thing we do, wherein we act voluntarily, there is an exercise of
   the will and inclination. It is our inclination that governs us in our
   actions; but all the actings of the inclination and will, are not
   ordinarily called affections. Yet, what are commonly called affections
   are not essentially different from them, but only in the degree and
   manner of exercise. In every act of the will whatsoever, the soul
   either likes or dislikes, is either inclined or disinclined to what is
   in view. These are not essentially different from the affections of
   love and hatred. A liking or inclination of the soul to a thing, if it
   be in a high degree vigorous and lively, is the very same thing with
   the affection of love: and a disliking and disinclining, if in a great
   degree, is the very same with hatred. In every act of the will for or
   towards something not present, the soul is in some degree inclined to
   that thing; and that inclination, if in a considerable degree, is the
   very same with the affection of desire. And in every degree of an act
   of the will, wherein the soul approves of something present, there is a
   degree of pleasedness; and that pleasedness, if it be in a considerable
   degree, is the very same with the affection of joy or delight. And if
   the will disapproves of what is present, the soul is in some degree
   displeased, and if that displeasedness be great, it is the very same
   with the affection of grief or sorrow.

   Such seems to be our nature, and such the laws of the union of soul and
   body, that there never is in any case whatsoever, any lively and
   vigorous exercise of the inclination, without some effect upon the
   body, in some alteration of the motion of its fluids, and especially of
   the animal spirits.--And, on the other hand, from the same laws of
   union, over the constitution of the body, and the motion of its fluids,
   may promote the exercise of the affections. But yet, it is not the
   body, but the mind only, that is the proper seat of the affections. The
   body of man is no more capable of being really the subject of love or
   hatred, joy or sorrow, fear or hope, than the body of a tree, or than
   the same body of man is capable of thinking and understanding. As it is
   the soul only that has ideas, so it is the soul only that is pleased or
   displeased with its ideas. As it is the soul only that thinks, so it is
   the soul only that loves or hates, rejoices or is grieved at, what it
   thinks of. Nor are these motions of the animal spirits, and fluids of
   the body, any thing properly belonging to the nature of the affections;
   though they always accompany them, in the present state; but are only
   effects or concomitants of the affections, which are entirely distinct
   from the affections themselves, and no way essential to them; so that
   an unbodied spirit may be as capable of love and hatred, joy or sorrow,
   hope or fear, or other affections, as one that is united to a body.

   The affections and passions are frequently spoken of as the same; and
   yet, in the more common use of speech, there is in some respect a
   difference. Affection is a word, that, in its ordinary signification,
   seems to be something more extensive than passion, being used for all
   vigorous lively actings of the will or inclination; but passion is used
   for those that are more sudden, and whose effects on the animal spirits
   are more violent, the mind being more overpowered, and less in its own
   command.

   As all the exercises of inclination and will, are concerned either in
   approving and liking, or disapproving and rejecting; so the affections
   are of two sorts; they are those by which the soul is carried out to
   what is in view, cleaving to it, or seeking it; or those by which it is
   averse from it, and opposes it. Of the former sort are love, desire,
   hope, joy, gratitude, complacence. Of the latter kind are hatred, fear,
   anger, grief, and such like; which it is needless now to stand
   particularly to define.

   And there are some affections wherein there is a composition of each of
   the aforementioned kinds of actings of the will; as in the affection of
   pity, there is something of the former kind, towards the person
   suffering, and something of the latter, towards what he suffers. And so
   in zeal, there is in it high approbation of some person or thing,
   together with vigorous opposition to what is conceived to be contrary
   to it.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   True religion, in great part, consists in the affections.

   1. What has been said of the nature of the affections makes this
   evident; and may be sufficient, without adding any thing further, to
   put this matter out of doubt: for who will deny that true religion
   consists, in a great measure, in vigorous and lively actings of the
   inclination and will of the soul, or the fervent exercises of the
   heart? That religion which God requires, and will accept, does not
   consist in weak, dull, and lifeless wishes, raising us but a little
   above a state of indifference. God, in his word, greatly insists upon
   it, that we be in good earnest, fervent in spirit, and our hearts
   vigorously engaged in religion: Rom. xii. 11. "Be ye fervent in spirit,
   serving the Lord. " Deut. x. 12. "And now Israel, what doth the Lord
   thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all
   his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
   heart, and with all thy soul?" And chap. vi. 4, 5. "Hear, O Israel, the
   Lord our God is one Lord: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
   thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might." It is such a
   fervent, vigorous engagedness of the heart in religion, that is the
   fruit of a real circumcision of the heart, or true regeneration, and
   that has the promises of life: Deut. xxx. 6. "And the Lord thy God will
   circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy
   God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live. "

   If we be not in good earnest in religion, and our wills and
   inclinations be not strongly exercised, we are nothing. The things of
   religion are so great, that there can be no suitableness in the
   exercises of our hearts, to their nature and importance, unless they be
   lively and powerful. In nothing is vigour in the actings of our
   inclinations so requisite, as in religion; and in nothing is
   lukewarmness so odious. True religion is evermore a powerful thing; and
   the power of it appears, in the first place, in its exercises in the
   heart, its principal and original seat. Hence true religion is called
   the power of godliness, in distinction from external appearances, which
   are the form of it, 2 Tim. iii. 5. "Having a form of godliness, but
   denying the power of it." The Spirit of God, in those who have sound
   and solid religion, is a Spirit of powerful holy affection; and
   therefore, God is said "to have given them the Spirit of power, and of
   love, and of a sound mind," (2 Tim. i. 7.) And such, when they receive
   the Spirit of God in his sanctifying and saving influences, are said to
   be "baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire;'' by reason of the
   power and fervour of those exercises which the Spirit of God excites in
   them, and whereby their hearts, when grace is in exercise, may be said
   to burn within them. (Luke xxiv. 32. .)

   The business of religion is, from time to time, compared to those
   exercises, wherein men are wont to have their hearts and strength
   greatly exercised and engaged; such as running, wrestling, or agonizing
   for a great prize or crown, and fighting with strong enemies that seek
   our lives, and warring as those that by violence take a city or
   kingdom. Though true grace has various degrees, and there are some who
   are but babes in Christ, in whom the exercise of the inclination and
   will towards divine and heavenly things, is comparatively weak; yet
   every one that has the power of godliness, has his inclinations and
   heart exercised towards God and divine things with such strength and
   vigour, that these holy exercises prevail in him above all carnal or
   natural affections, and are effectual to overcome them: for every true
   disciple of Christ "loves him above father or mother, wife and
   children, brethren and sisters, houses and lands; yea more than his own
   life. " Hence it follows, that wherever true religion is, there are
   vigorous exercises of the inclination and will towards divine objects:
   but by what was said before, the vigorous, lively, and sensible
   exercises of the will, are no other than the affections of the soul.

   2. The Author of our nature has not only given us affections, but has
   made them very much the spring of actions. As the affections not only
   necessarily belong to the human nature, but are a very great part of
   it; so (inasmuch as by regeneration persons are renewed in the whole
   man) holy affections not only necessarily belong to true religion, but
   are a very great part of such religion. And as true religion is
   practical, and God hath so constituted the human nature, that the
   affections are very much the spring of men's actions, this also shows,
   that true religion must consist very much in the affections.

   Such is man's nature, that he is very inactive, any otherwise than he
   is influenced by either love or hatred, desire, hope, fear, or some
   other affection. These affections we see to be the moving springs in
   all the affairs of life, which engage men in all their pursuits; and
   especially in all affairs wherein they are earnestly engaged, and which
   they pursue with vigour. We see the world of mankind exceedingly busy
   and active; and their affections are the springs of motion: take away
   all love and hatred, all hope and fear, all anger, zeal, and
   affectionate desire, and the world would be, in a great measure,
   motionless and dead: there would be no such thing as activity amongst
   mankind, or any earnest pursuit whatsoever. It is affection that
   engages the covetous man, and him that is greedy of worldly profits; it
   is by the affections that the ambitious man is put forward in his
   pursuit of worldly glory; and the affections also actuate the
   voluptuous man, in his pleasure and sensual delights. The world
   continues from age to age, in a continual commotion and agitation, in
   pursuit of these things; but take away affection, and the spring of all
   this motion would be gone; the motion itself would cease. And as in
   worldly things, worldly affections are very much the spring of men's
   motion and action; so in religious matters, the spring of their actions
   are very much religious affections: he that has doctrinal knowledge and
   speculation only, without affection, never is engaged in the business
   of religion.

   3. Nothing is more manifest in fact, than that the things of religion
   take hold of men's souls no further than they affect them. There are
   multitudes who often hear the word of God, of things infinitely great
   and important, and which most nearly concern them, yet all seems to be
   wholly ineffectual upon them, and to make no alteration in their
   disposition or behaviour; the reason is, they are not affected with
   what they hear. There are many who often hear of the glorious
   perfections of God, his almighty power, boundless wisdom, infinite
   majesty, and that holiness by which he is of purer eyes than to behold
   evil, and cannot look on iniquity; together with his infinite goodness
   and mercy. They hear of the great works of God's wisdom, power, and
   goodness, wherein there appear the admirable manifestations of these
   perfections. They hear particularly of the unspeakable love of God and
   Christ, and what Christ has done and suffered. They hear of the great
   things of another world, of eternal misery, in bearing the fierceness
   and wrath of almighty God; and of endless blessedness and glory in the
   presence of God, and the enjoyment of his love. They also hear the
   peremptory commands of God, his gracious counsels and warnings, and the
   sweet invitations of the gospel. Yet they remain as before, with no
   sensible alteration, either in heart or practice, because they are not
   affected with what they hear. I am bold to assert, that there never was
   any considerable change wrought in the mind or conversation of any
   person, by any thing of a religious nature that ever he read, heard, or
   saw, who had not his affections moved. Never was a natural man engaged
   earnestly to seek his salvation; never were any such brought to cry
   after wisdom, and lift up their voice for understanding, and to wrestle
   with God in prayer for mercy; and never was one humbled, and brought to
   the foot of God, from any thing that ever he heard or imagined of his
   own unworthiness and deservings of God's displeasure; nor was ever one
   induced to fly for refuge unto Christ, while his heart remained
   unaffected. Nor was there ever a saint awakened out of a cold, lifeless
   frame, or recovered from a declining state in religion, and brought
   back from a lamentable departure from God, without having his heart
   affected. And, in a word, there never was any thing considerable
   brought to pass in the heart or life of any man living, by the things
   of religion, that had not his heart deeply affected by those things.

   4. The Holy Scriptures every where place religion very much in the
   affections; such as fear, hope, love, hatred, desire, joy, sorrow,
   gratitude, compassion, and zeal.

   The Scriptures place much of religion in godly fear; insomuch that an
   experience of it is often spoken of as the character of those who are
   truly religious persons. They tremble at God's word, they fear before
   him, their flesh trembles for fear of him, they are afraid of his
   judgments, his excellency makes them afraid, and his dread falls upon
   them, &c. An appellation commonly given the saints in Scripture, is,
   fearers of God, or they "that fear the Lord. And because this is a
   great part of true godliness, hence true godliness in general is very
   commonly called the fear of God.

   So hope in God, and in the promises of his word, is often spoken of in
   the Scripture, as a very considerable part of true religion. It is
   mentioned as one of the three great things of which religion consists,
   1 Cor. xiii. 13. Hope in the Lord is also frequently mentioned as the
   character of the saints: Psal. cxlvi. 5. "Happy is he that hath the God
   of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God." Jer. xvii.
   7. "Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope, the
   Lord is." Psal. xxxi. 24. "Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
   your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." And the like in many other
   places. Religious fear and hope are, once and again, joined together,
   as jointly constituting the character of the true saints: Psal. xxxiii.
   18. "Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them
   that hope in his mercy." Psal. cxlvii. 11. "The Lord taketh pleasure in
   them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy." Hope is so great
   a part of true religion, that the apostle says we are saved by hope,
   Rom. viii. 24.. And this is spoken of as the helmet of the Christian
   soldier, 1 Thess. v. 8. "And for an helmet, the hope of salvation;" and
   the sure and stedfast anchor of the soul, which preserves it from being
   cast away by the storms of this evil world, Heb. vi. 19. "Which hope we
   have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which
   entereth into that within the vail." It is spoken of as a great benefit
   which true saints receive by Christ's resurrection, 1 Pet. i. 3.
   "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which,
   according to his abundant mercy, hath begotten us again unto a lively
   hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead."

   The Scriptures place religion very much in the affection of love; love
   to God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; love to the people of God, and to
   mankind. The texts in which this is manifest, both in the Old Testament
   and New, are innumerable. But of this more afterwards. The contrary
   affection of hatred also, as having sin for its object, is spoken of in
   Scripture as no inconsiderable part of true religion. It is spoken of
   as that by which true religion may be known and distinguished. Prov.
   viii. 13. "The fear of the Lord is to hate evil." Accordingly, the
   saints are called upon to give evidence of their sincerity by this,
   Psal. xcvii. 10. "Ye that love the Lord, hate evil." And the psalmist
   often mentions it as an evidence of his sincerity; Psal. ci. 2, 3. "I
   will walk within my house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked
   thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside." Psal.
   cxix. 104. "I hate every false way." So ver. 128. Again, Psal. cxxxix.
   21. "Do I not hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?"

   So holy desire, exercised in longings, hungerings, and thirstings after
   God and holiness, is often mentioned in Scripture as an important part
   of true religion: Isa. xxvi. 8. " The desire of our soul is to thy
   name, and to the remembrance of thee." Psal. xxvii. 4. "One thing have
   I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
   the house of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold the beauty of
   the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." Psal. xlii. 1, 2. "As the hart
   panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God.
   My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and
   appear before God?" Psal. lxiii. 1, 2. "My soul thirsteth for thee, my
   flesh longeth for thee, in a dry and thirsty land where no water is: to
   see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary."
   Psal. lxxxiv. 1, 2. "How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!
   My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my
   heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God." Psal. cxix. 20. "My
   soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all
   times." [416] Such a holy desire, or thirst of soul, denotes a man
   truly blessed: Matt. v. 6. "Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst
   after righteousness: for they shall be filled." And this holy thirst is
   connected with the blessings of eternal life: Rev. xxi. 6. "I will give
   unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely."

   The Scriptures speak of holy joy, as a great part of true religion. So
   it is represented in the text. And as an important part of religion, it
   is often pressed with great earnestness; Psal. xxxvii. 4. "Delight
   thyself in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thine
   heart." Psal. xcvii. 12. "Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous." So Psal.
   xxxiii. 1. "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous." Matt. v. 12.
   "Rejoice, and be exceeding glad." Phil. iii. 1. "Finally, brethren,
   rejoice in the Lord." And Phil. iv. 4. "Rejoice in the Lord alway: and
   again I say, rejoice." 1 Thess. v. 16. "Rejoice evermore." Psal. cxlix.
   2. "Let Israel rejoice in Him that made him: let the children of Zion
   be joyful in their King." This is mentioned among the principal fruits
   of the Spirit of grace, Gal. v. 22. "The fruit of the Spirit is love,
   joy," &c.--The psalmist mentions his holy joy, as an evidence of his
   sincerity, Psal. cxix. 14. "I have rejoiced in the way of thy
   testimonies, as much as in all riches."

   Religious sorrow, mourning, and brokenness of heart, are also
   frequently spoken of as a great part of true religion. These things are
   often mentioned as distinguishing qualities of the true saints, and a
   great part of their character: Matt. v. 4. "Blessed are they that
   mourn: for they shall be comforted." Psal. xxxiv. 18. "The Lord is nigh
   unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth such as be of a
   contrite spirit." Isa. lxi. 1, 2. "The Lord hath anointed me--to bind
   up the broken hearted,--to comfort all that mourn." This godly sorrow
   and brokenness of heart is often spoken of, not only as a
   distinguishing character of the saints, but as that in them, which is
   peculiarly acceptable and pleasing to God: Psal. li. 17. "The
   sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
   God, thou wilt not despise." Isa. lvii. 15. "Thus saith the high and
   lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the
   high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble
   spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
   the contrite ones." Chap. lxvi. 2. "To this man will I look, even to
   him that is poor and of a contrite spirit."

   Another affection often mentioned, as that in the exercise of which
   much of true religion appears, is gratitude; especially as exercised in
   thankfulness and praise to God. This being so much spoken of in the
   book of Psalms, and other parts of the Holy Scriptures, I need not
   mention particular texts.

   Again, the Holy Scriptures frequently speak of compassion or mercy, as
   a very great and essential thing in true religion; insomuch that a
   merciful man, and a good man, are equivalent terms in Scripture: Isa.
   lvii. 1. "The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and
   merciful men are taken away." And the Scripture chooses out this
   quality, as that by which, in a peculiar manner, a righteous man is
   deciphered: Psal. xxxvii. 21. "The righteous showeth mercy, and giveth;
   and ver. 26. "He is ever merciful, and lendeth." And Prov xiv. 31. "He
   that honoureth the Lord, hath mercy on the poor." And Col. iii. 12.
   "Put ye on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels OF mercies,"
   &c. This is one of those great things, by which the truly blessed are
   described by our Saviour, Matt. v. 7. "Blessed are the merciful: for
   they shall obtain mercy." And this Christ also speaks of, as one of the
   weightier matters of the law, Matt. xxiii 23. "Woe unto you, scribes
   and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and
   cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment,
   mercy, and faith." To the like purpose is Mic. vi. 8. "He hath showed
   thee, O man, what is good: and what doth the Lord require of thee, but
   to do justice, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God?" And also
   Hos. vi. 6. "For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice;" a text much
   delighted in by our Saviour, it seems, by his manner of citing it once
   and again. (Matt. ix. 13. xii. 7. )

   Zeal is also spoken of, as a very essential part of the religion of
   true saints. This was a great thing which Christ had in view, in giving
   himself for our redemption: Tit. ii. 14. "Who gave himself for us, that
   he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
   peculiar people, zealous of good works." And this was the great thing
   wanting in the luke-warm Laodiceans. (Rev. iii. 15, 16, 19. )

   I have mentioned but a few texts, out of an innumerable multitude,
   which place religion very much in the affections. But what has been
   observed may be sufficient to show, that they who maintain the
   contrary, must throw away what we have been wont to own for our Bible,
   and get some other rule by which to judge of the nature of religion.

   5. The Scriptures represent true religion, as being summarily
   comprehended in love, the chief of the affections, and the fountain of
   all others. So our blessed Saviour represents the matter, in answer to
   the lawyer who asked him, Which was the great commandment of the law?
   (Matt. xxii. 37-40.) "Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy
   God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
   This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto
   it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments
   hang all the law and the prophets." These two commandments comprehend
   all the duty prescribed in the law and the prophets. And the apostle
   Paul makes the same representation of the matter; as in Rom. xiii. 8.
   "He that loveth another, hath fulfilled the law." And Rom. xiii.
   10.verse 10. "Love is the fulfilling of the law." And Gal. v. 14. "For
   all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself." So likewise in 1 Tim. i. 5. "Now the end of the
   commandment is charity, out of a pure heart," &c. The same apostle
   speaks of love, as the greatest thing in religion, as the essence and
   soul of it; without which, the greatest knowledge and gifts, the most
   glaring profession, and every thing else which appertains to religion,
   are vain and worthless. He also represents it as the fountain from
   whence proceeds all that is good, in 1 Cor. xiii. throughout; for that
   which is there rendered charity, is in the original NOT ENGLISH the
   proper English of which is love.

   Now, although it be true, that the love thus spoken of, includes the
   whole of a sincerely benevolent propensity of the soul towards God and
   man; yet, it is evident from what has been before observed, that this
   propensity or inclination of the soul, when in sensible and vigorous
   exercise, becomes affection, and is no other than affectionate love.
   And surely it is such vigorous and fervent love, which Christ
   represents as the sum of all religion, when he speaks of loving God
   with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our minds, and
   our neighbour as ourselves.

   Indeed it cannot be supposed, when this affection of love is spoken of
   as the sum of all religion, that hereby is meant the act, exclusively
   of the habit, or that the exercise of the understanding is excluded,
   which is implied in all reasonable affection. But it is doubtless true,
   and evident from the Scriptures, that the essence of all true religion
   lies in holy love; and that in this divine affection--and habitual
   disposition to it, that light which is the foundation to it, and those
   things which are its fruits--consists the whole of religion.

   From hence it clearly and certainly appears, that great part of true
   religion consists in the affections. For love is not only one of the
   affections, but it is the first and chief of them, and the fountain of
   all the others. From love arises hatred of those things which are
   contrary to what we love, or which oppose and thwart us in those things
   that we delight in: and from the various exercises of love and hatred,
   according to the circumstances of the objects of these affections, as
   present or absent, certain or uncertain, probable or improbable, arise
   all those other affections of desire, hope, fear, joy, grief,
   gratitude, anger, &c. From a vigorous, affectionate, and fervent love
   to God, will necessarily arise other religious affections; hence will
   arise an intense hatred and a fear of sin; a dread of God's
   displeasure; gratitude to God for his goodness; complacence and joy in
   God when he is graciously and sensibly present; grief when he is
   absent; a joyful hope when a future enjoyment of God is expected; and
   fervent zeal for the divine glory. In like manner, from a fervent love
   to men, will arise all other virtuous affections towards them.

   6. The religion of the most eminent saints of whom we have an account
   in the Scripture, consisted much in holy affections.--I shall take
   particular notice of three eminent saints, who have expressed the frame
   and sentiments of their own hearts, described their own religion, and
   the manner of their intercourse with God, in the writings which they
   have left us, and which are a part of the sacred canon.

   The first instance is David, that man after God's own heart; who has
   given us a lively portraiture of his religion in the book of Psalms.
   Those holy songs are nothing else but the expressions and breathings of
   devout and holy affections; such as an humble and fervent love to God,
   admiration of his glorious perfections and wonderful works, earnest
   desires, thirstings, and pantings of soul after him; delight and joy in
   God, a sweet and melting gratitude for his great goodness, a holy
   exultation and triumph of soul in his favour, sufficiency, and
   faithfulness; his love to, and delight in, the saints, the excellent of
   the earth, his great delight in the word and ordinances of God, his
   grief for his own and others' sins, and his fervent zeal for God, and
   against the enemies of God and his church. And these expressions of
   holy affection of which the Psalms of David are every where full, are
   the more to our present purpose, because those psalms are not only the
   expressions of the religion of so eminent a saint, but were also, by
   the direction of the Holy Ghost, penned for the use of the church of
   God in its public worship, not only in that age, but in after ages; as
   being fitted to express the religion of all saints, in all ages, as
   well as the religion of the psalmist. And it is moreover to be
   observed, that David, in the book of Psalms, speaks not as a private
   person, but as the Psalmist of Israel, as the subordinate head of the
   church of God, and leader in their worship and praises; and in many of
   the psalms, he speaks in the name of Christ, as personating him in
   these breathings forth of holy affections; and in many others he speaks
   in the name of the church.

   Another instance I shall observe, is the apostle Paul; who was, in many
   respects, the chief of all the ministers of the New Testament; being
   above all others a chosen vessel unto Christ, to bear his name before
   the Gentiles. He was made the chief instrument of propagating and
   establishing the christian church in the world, and of distinctly
   revealing the glorious mysteries of the gospel, for the instruction of
   the church in all ages; and (as not improbably thought by some) was the
   most eminent servant of Christ that ever lived, and received the
   highest rewards in the heavenly kingdom of his Master. By what is said
   of him in the Scripture, he appears to have been a person full of
   affection; and it is very manifest, that the religion he expresses in
   his epistles, consisted very much in holy affections. It appears by all
   his expressions of himself, that he was, in the course of his life,
   inflamed, actuated, and entirely swallowed up, by a most ardent love to
   his glorious Lord, esteeming all things as loss, for the excellency of
   the knowledge of him, and esteeming them but dung that he might win
   him. He represents himself as overpowered by this holy affection, and
   as it were compelled by it to go forward, in his service, through all
   difficulties and sufferings, 2 Cor. v. 14, 15. And his epistles are
   full of expressions of an overflowing affection towards the people of
   Christ: he speaks of his dear love to them, 2 Cor. xii. 19. Phil. iv.
   1, 2. 1 Tim. i. 2. of his abundant love, 2 Cor. ii. 4. and of his
   affectionate and tender love, as of a nurse towards her children, 1
   Thess. ii. 7, 8. "But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse
   cherisheth her children: so, being affectionately desirous of you, we
   were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but
   also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us." So also he speaks of
   his bowels of love, Phil. i. 8. Philem. 5, 12, 20. of his earnest care
   for others, 2 Cor. viii. 16. of his bowels of pity or mercy towards
   them, Phil. ii. 1. and of his concern for others, even to anguish of
   heart, 2 Cor. ii. 4. "For out of much affliction and anguish of heart,
   I wrote unto you with many tears; not that you should be grieved, but
   that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you." He
   speaks of the great conflict of his soul for them, Col. ii. 1. and of
   great and continual grief he had in his heart from compassion to the
   Jews, Rom. ix. 2. He speaks of his mouth being opened, and his heart
   enlarged towards Christians, 2 Cor. vi. 11. "O ye Corinthians, our
   mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged." He often speaks of his
   affectionate and longing desires,( 1 Thess. ii. 8. Rom. i. 11. Phil. i.
   8. iv. 1. 2 Tim. i. 4. )

   The same apostle very often, in his epistles, expresses the affection
   of joy, (2 Cor. i. 12. vii. 7 9, 16. Phil. i. 4 ii. 1,2. iii. 3. Col.
   i. 24. 1 Thess. iii. 9. ) He speaks of his rejoicing with great joy,
   (Phil. iv. 10. Philem. 1, 7. ) of his joying and rejoicing, (Phil. ii.
   1, 7. ) of his rejoicing exceedingly, (2 Cor. vii. 13. ) being filled
   with comfort, exceeding joyful, (2 Cor. vii. 4. ) and always rejoicing,
   (2 Cor. vi. 10.) So he speaks of the triumphs of his soul, (2 Cor. ii.
   14. ) and of his glorying in tribulation, (2 Thess. i. 4. Rom. v. 3.)
   In Phil. i. 20. he speaks of his earnest expectation, and his hope. He
   likewise expresses an affection of godly jealousy, 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3. And
   it appears by his whole history, after his conversion, that the
   affection of zeal, as having the cause of his Master and the interest
   and prosperity of his church for its object, was mighty in him,
   continually inflaming his heart, strongly engaging to great and
   constant labours, in instructing, exhorting, warning, and reproving
   others, travailing in birth with them; conflicting with those powerful
   and innumerable enemies who continually opposed him, wrestling with
   principalities and powers, not fighting as one who beats the air,
   running the race set before him, continually pressing forwards through
   all manner of difficulties and sufferings; so that others thought him
   quite beside himself. And how full he was of affection further appears
   by his being so full of tears; in 2 Cor. ii. 4. he speaks of his many
   tears; and so Acts xx. 19. and of his tears that he shed continually,
   night and day, ver. 31.

   Now if any one can consider these accounts given in the Scripture of
   this great apostle, and which he gives of himself, and yet not see that
   his religion consisted much in affection, he must have a strange
   faculty of managing his eyes in order to shut out the light which
   shines most full in his face.

   The other instance I shall mention, is that of the apostle John, the
   beloved disciple, who was the nearest and dearest to his Master of any
   of the twelve, and who was by him admitted to the greatest privileges
   of any of them. He was not only one of the three who were admitted to
   be present with him in the mount at his transfiguration, and at the
   raising of Jairus's daughter, and whom he took with him when he was in
   his agony, and one of three spoken of by the apostle Paul, as the three
   main pillars of the christian church; but he was favoured above all, in
   being admitted to lean on his Master's bosom at his last supper, and in
   being chosen by Christ as the disciple to whom he would reveal his
   wonderful dispensations towards his church, to the end of time. By him
   was shut up the canon of the New Testament, and of the whole Scripture;
   and he was preserved much longer than all the rest of the apostles, to
   set all things in order in the christian church after their death.

   It is evident by all his writings, that he was a person remarkably full
   of affection: his addresses to those whom he wrote to, being
   inexpressibly tender and pathetic, breathing nothing but the most
   fervent love; as though he were all made up of sweet and holy
   affection. The proofs of which cannot be given without disadvantage,
   unless we should transcribe his whole writings.

   7. He whom God sent into the world, to be the light of the world and
   the head of the whole church, and the perfect example of true religion
   and virtue for the imitation of all, the Shepherd whom the whole flock
   should follow wherever he goes, even the Lord Jesus Christ, was of a
   remarkably tender and affectionate heart; and his virtue was expressed
   very much in the exercise of holy affections. He was the greatest
   instance of ardency, vigour, and strength of love, to both God and man,
   that ever was. It was these affections which got the victory, in that
   mighty struggle and conflict of his affections, in his agonies, when he
   prayed more earnestly, and offered strong crying and tears, and
   wrestled in tears and in blood. Such was the power of the exercises of
   his holy love, that they were stronger than death, and in that great
   struggle, overcame those strong exercises of the natural affections of
   fear and grief, when he was sore amazed, and his soul was exceeding
   sorrowful, even unto death.

   He also appeared to be full of affection, in the course of his life. We
   read of his great zeal, fulfilling that expression in the 69th Psalm,
   "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up," John ii. 17. We read of his
   grief for the sins of men, Mark iii. 5. "He looked round about on them
   with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts;" and his
   breaking forth in tears and exclamations, from the consideration of the
   sin and misery of ungodly men, and on the sight of the city of
   Jerusalem, which was full of such inhabitants, Luke xix. 41, 42. "And
   when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If
   thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
   belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes." With
   chap. xiii. 34. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets,
   and stonest them that are sent unto thee: how often would I have
   gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under
   her wings, and ye would not!" We read of Christ's earnest desire, Luke
   xxii. 15. "With desire have I desired to eat this passover with you
   before I suffer." We often read of the affection of pity or compassion
   in Christ, (Matt. xv. 32. xviii. 34. Luke vii. 13. ) and of his being
   moved with compassion, (Matt. ix. 36. xiv. 14. Mark vi. 34. ) And how
   tender did his heart appear to be, on occasion of Mary's and Martha's
   mourning for their brother, and coming to him with their complaints and
   tears! Their tears soon drew tears from his eyes; he was affected with
   their grief, and wept with them; though he knew their sorrow should so
   soon be turned into joy, by their brother being raised from the dead:
   see John xi. And how ineffably affectionate was that last and dying
   discourse, which Jesus had with his eleven disciples the evening before
   he was crucified; when he told them he was going away, and foretold
   them the great difficulties and sufferings they should meet with in the
   world, when he was gone; and comforted and counselled them, as his dear
   little children; and bequeathed to them his Holy Spirit, and therein
   his peace, his comfort and joy, as it were in his last will and
   testament, in the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th chapters of John; . and
   concluded the whole with that affectionate intercessory prayer for
   them, and his whole church, in John xvii. Of all the discourses ever
   penned or uttered by the mouth of any man, this seems to be the most
   affectionate and affecting.

   8. The religion of heaven consists very much in affection.--There is
   doubtless true religion in heaven, and true religion in its utmost
   purity and perfection. But according to the scripture representation of
   the heavenly state, the religion of heaven consists chiefly in holy and
   mighty love and joy, and the expression of these in most fervent and
   exalted praises. So that the religion of the saints in heaven, consists
   in the same things with that religion of the saints on earth, which is
   spoken of in our text, viz. love, and joy unspeakable, and full of
   glory. Now, it would be very foolish to pretend, that because the
   saints in heaven are not united to flesh and blood, and have no animal
   fluids to be moved (through the laws of union of soul and body) with
   those great emotions of their souls, that therefore their exceeding
   love and joy are no affections. We are not speaking of the affections
   of the body, but those of the soul, the chief of which are love and
   joy. When these are in the soul, whether that be in the body or out of
   it, the soul is affected and moved. And when they are in the soul, in
   that strength in which they are in the saints in heaven, it is mightily
   affected and moved, or, which is the same thing, has great affections.
   It is true, we do not experimentally know what love and joy are in a
   soul out of a body, or in a glorified body; i. e. we have not had
   experience of love and joy in a soul in these circumstances; but the
   saints on earth do know what divine love and joy in the soul are, and
   they know that love and joy are of the same kind with the love and joy
   which are in heaven, in separate souls there. The love and joy of the
   saints on earth, is the beginning and dawning of the light, life, and
   blessedness of heaven, and is like their love and joy there; or rather,
   the same in nature, though not the same in degree and circumstances.
   [417] It is unreasonable therefore to suppose, that the love and joy of
   the saints in heaven differ not only in degree and circumstances, from
   the holy love and joy of the saints on earth, but also in nature, so
   that they are no affections; and merely because they have no blood and
   animal spirits to be set in motion by them. The motion of the blood and
   animal spirits is not of the essence of these affections, in men on the
   earth, but the effect of them; although by their reaction they may make
   some circumstantial difference in the sensation of the mind. There is a
   sensation of the mind which loves and rejoices, antecedent to any
   effects on the fluids of the body; and therefore, does not depend on
   these motions in the body, and so may be in the soul without the body.
   And wherever there are the exercises of love and joy, there is that
   sensation of the mind, whether it be in the body or out; and that
   inward sensation, or kind of spiritual feeling, is what is called
   affection. The soul, when it is thus moved, is said to be affected, and
   especially when this inward sensation and motion are to a very high
   degree, as they are in the saints in heaven. If we can learn any thing
   of the state of heaven from the Scripture, the love and joy that the
   saints have there, is exceeding great and vigorous; impressing the
   heart with the strongest and most lively sensation of inexpressible
   sweetness, mightily moving, animating, and engaging them, making them
   like to a flame of fire. And if such love and joy be not affections,
   then the word affection is of no use in language.--Will any say, that
   the saints in heaven, in beholding the face of their Father and the
   glory of their Redeemer, in contemplating his wonderful works, and
   particularly his laying down his life for them, have their hearts
   nothing moved and affected by all which they behold or consider?

   Hence, therefore, the religion of heaven, being full of holy love and
   joy, consists very much in affection: and therefore, undoubtedly, true
   religion consists very much in affection. The way to learn the true
   nature of any thing, is to go where that thing is to be found in its
   purity and perfection. If we would know the nature of true gold, we
   must view it, not in the ore, but when it is refined. If we would learn
   what true religion is, we must go where there is true religion, and
   nothing but true religion, and in its highest perfection, without any
   defect or mixture. All who are truly religious are not of this world,
   they are strangers here, and belong to heaven; they are born from
   above, heaven is their native country, and the nature which they
   receive by this heavenly birth, is a heavenly nature, they receive an
   anointing from above; that principle of true religion which is in them,
   is a communication of the religion of heaven; their grace is the dawn
   of glory; and God fits them for that world by conforming them to it.

   9. This appears from the nature and design of the ordinances and
   duties, which God hath appointed, as means and expressions of true
   religion.

   To instance in the duty of prayer: it is manifest, we are not
   appointed, in this duty, to declare God's perfections, his majesty,
   holiness, goodness, and all-sufficiency; our own meanness, emptiness,
   dependence, and unworthiness, our wants and desires, in order to inform
   God of these things, or to incline his heart, and prevail with him to
   be willing to show us mercy; but rather suitably to affect our own
   hearts with the things we express, and so to prepare us to receive the
   blessings we ask. And such gestures and manner of external behaviour in
   the worship of God, which custom has made to be significations of
   humility and reverence, can be of no further use, than as they have
   some tendency to affect our own hearts, or the hearts of others.

   And the duty of singing praises to God, seems to be appointed wholly to
   excite and express religious affections. No other reason can be
   assigned, why we should express ourselves to God in verse, rather than
   in prose, and do it with music, but only, that such is our nature and
   frame, that these things have a tendency to move our affections.

   The same thing appears in the nature and design of the sacraments,
   which God hath appointed. God, considering our frame, hath not only
   appointed that we should be told of the great things of the gospel and
   the redemption of Christ, and be instructed in them by his word; but
   also that they should be, as it were, exhibited to our view in sensible
   representations, the more to affect us with them.

   And the impressing of divine things on the hearts and affections of
   men, is evidently one great end for which God has ordained, that his
   word delivered in the Holy Scriptures, should be opened, applied, and
   set home upon men, in preaching. And therefore it does not answer the
   aim which God had in this institution, merely for men to have good
   commentaries and expositions on the Scripture, and other good books of
   divinity; because, although these may tend, as well as preaching, to
   give a good doctrinal or speculative understanding of the word of God,
   yet they have not an equal tendency to impress them on men's hearts and
   affections. God hath appointed a particular and lively application of
   his word, in the preaching of it, as a fit means to affect sinners with
   the importance of religion, their own misery, the necessity of a
   remedy, and the glory and sufficiency of a remedy provided; to stir up
   the pure minds of the saints, quicken their affections by often
   bringing the great things of religion to their remembrance, and setting
   them in their proper colours, though they know them, and have been
   fully instructed in them already, 2 Pet. i. 12, 13. And particularly,
   to promote those two affections in them, which are spoken of in the
   text, love and joy: "Christ gave some, apostles; and some, prophets;
   and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; that the body of
   Christ might be edified in love,". Eph. iv. 11, 12, 16. The apostle, in
   instructing and counselling Timothy, concerning the work of the
   ministry, informs him, that the great end of that word which a minister
   is to preach, is love or charity, 1 Tim. i. 3-5. And God has appointed
   preaching as a means to promote in the saints joy: therefore ministers
   are called helpers of their joy, 2 Cor. i. 24.

   10. It is an evidence that true religion lies very much in the
   affections, that the Scriptures place the sin of the heart very much in
   hardness of heart. It was hardness of heart which excited grief and
   displeasure in Christ towards the Jews, Mark iii. 5. "He looked round
   about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their
   hearts." It is from men's having such a heart as this, that they
   treasure up wrath for themselves; Rom. ii. 5. "After thy hardness and
   impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of
   wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God." The reason
   given why the house of Israel would not obey God, was, that they were
   hard-hearted; Ezek. iii. 7. "But the house of Israel will not hearken
   unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me; for all the house of
   Israel are impudent and hardhearted." The wickedness of that perverse
   rebellious generation in the wilderness, is ascribed to the hardness of
   their hearts; Psal. xcv. 7-10. "To-day if ye will hear my voice, harden
   not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation
   in the wilderness; when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my
   work: forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It
   is a people that do err in their heart," &c.--This is spoken of as what
   prevented Zedekiah's turning to the Lord, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 13. "He
   stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning to the Lord God
   of Israel." This principle is that from whence men are without the fear
   of God, and depart from his ways: Isa. lxiii. 17. "O Lord, why hast
   thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our heart from thy
   fear?" And men rejecting Christ, and opposing Christianity, are charged
   with this principle; Acts xix. 9. "But divers were hardened, and
   believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude."--God's
   leaving men to the power of the sin and corruption of the heart, is
   often expressed by his hardening their hearts; Rom. ix. 18. "Therefore
   hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
   hardeneth." John xii. 40. "He hath blinded their minds, and hardened
   their hearts." And the apostle seems to speak of an evil heart, that
   departs from the living God, and a hard heart, as the same thing, Heb.
   iii. 8. "Harden not your heart, as in the provocation," &c. verse 12,
   13. "Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
   unbelief, in departing from the living God: but exhort one another
   daily while it is called to-day; lest any of you be hardened through
   the deceitfulness of sin." And that great work of God in conversion,
   which consists in delivering a person from the power of sin, and
   mortifying corruption, is expressed, once and again, by God's "taking
   away the heart of stone, and giving a heart of flesh, (Ezek. xi. 19.
   xxxvi. 26. )

   Now, by a hard heart is plainly meant an unaffected heart, or a heart
   not easy to be moved with virtuous affections, like a stone,
   insensible, stupid, unmoved, and hard to be impressed. Hence the hard
   heart is called a stony heart, and is opposed to a heart of flesh, that
   has feeling, and is sensibly touched and moved. We read in Scripture of
   a hard heart, and a tender heart: and doubtless we are to understand
   these, as contrary the one to the other. But what is a tender heart,
   but a heart which is easily impressed with what ought to affect it? God
   commends Josiah, because his heart was tender: and it is evident by
   those things which are mentioned as expressions and evidences of this
   tenderness of heart, that by it is meant, his heart being easily moved
   with religious and pious affections: 2 Kings xxii. 19. "Because thine
   heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord, when
   thou heardst what I spake against this place, and against the
   inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse,
   and hast rent thy clothes, and went before me, I also have heard thee,
   saith the Lord." And this is one thing, wherein it is necessary we
   should become as little children, in order to our entering into the
   kingdom of God, even that we should have our hearts tender, and easily
   affected and moved in spiritual and divine things, as little children
   have in other things.

   It is very plain in some places, that by hardness of heart is meant a
   heart void of affection. So, to signify the ostrich's being without
   natural affection to her young, it is said, Job xxxix. 16.. "She
   hardeneth her heart against her young ones, as though they were not
   hers." So a person having a heart unaffected in time of danger, is
   expressed by his hardening his heart, Prov. xxviii. 14. "Happy is the
   man that feareth alway; but he that hardeneth his heart, shall fall
   into mischief."

   Now, therefore, since it is so plain, that by a hard heart in
   Scripture, is meant a heart destitute of pious affections; and since
   also the Scriptures so frequently place the sin and corruption of the
   heart in its hardness; it is evident, that the grace and holiness of
   the heart, on the contrary, must in a great measure consist in its
   having pious affections, and being easily susceptive of such
   affections. Divines are generally agreed, that sin radically and
   fundamentally consists in what is negative, or privative, having its
   root and foundation in a privation or want of holiness. And therefore
   undoubtedly, if sin very much consist in hardness of heart, and so in
   the want of pious affections, holiness does consist very much in those
   pious affections.

   I am far from supposing that all affections manifest a tender heart;
   hatred, anger, vain-glory, and other selfish and self-exalting
   affections, may greatly prevail in the hardest heart. But yet it is
   evident, that hardness of heart, and tenderness of heart, are
   expressions that relate to the affections of the heart, and denote its
   being susceptible of, or shut up against, certain affections; of which
   I shall have occasion to speak more afterwards.

   Upon the whole, I think it clearly and abundantly evident, that true
   religion lies very much in the affections. Not that I think these
   arguments prove, that religion in the hearts of the truly godly, is
   ever in exact proportion to the degree of affection and present emotion
   of the mind: for, undoubtedly, there is much affection in the true
   saints which is not spiritual; their religious affections are often
   mixed; all is not from grace, but much from nature. And though the
   affections have not their seat in the body, yet the constitution of the
   body may very much contribute to the present emotion of the mind. The
   degree of religion is to be estimated by the fixedness and strength of
   habit exercised in affection, whereby holy affection is habitual,
   rather than by the degree of the present exercise: and the strength of
   that habit is not always in proportion to outward effects and
   manifestations, or indeed inward ones, in the hurry, vehemence, and
   sudden changes of the course of the thoughts. But yet it is evident,
   that religion consists so much in the affections, as that without holy
   affection there is no true religion. No light in the understanding is
   good, which does not produce holy affection in the heart; no habit or
   principle in the heart is good, which has no such exercise; and no
   external fruit is good, which does not proceed from such exercises.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [416] So Psal. lxxiii. 25. cxliii. 6, 7. cxxx. 6. Cant. iii. 1, 2. vi.
   8.

   [417] This is evident by many scriptures, as Prov. iv. 18. John iv. 14.
   vi.40, 47, 50, 51, 54, 58. iii. 15. 1 Cor. xiii. 8-12.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Some inferences deduced from the doctrine.

   1. We may hence learn how great their error is, who are for discarding
   all religious affections, as having nothing solid or substantial in
   them. There seems to be too much of a disposition this way prevailing
   at this time. Because many who, in the late extraordinary season,
   appeared to have great religious affections, did not manifest a right
   temper of mind, and run into many errors, in the heat of their zeal;
   and because the high affections of many seem to he so soon come to
   nothing, and some who seemed to be mightily raised and swallowed with
   joy and zeal for a while, seem to have returned like the dog to his
   vomit: hence religious affections in general are grown out of credit
   with great numbers, as though true religion did not at all consist in
   them. Thus we easily and naturally run from one extreme to another. A
   little while ago we were in the other extreme; there was a prevalent
   disposition to look upon all high religious affections as eminent
   exercises of true grace, without much inquiry into the nature and
   source of those affections, and the manner in which they arose. If
   persons did but appear to be indeed very much moved and raised, so as
   to be full of religious talk, and express themselves with great warmth
   and earnestness, and to be filled, or to be very full, as the phrases
   were; it was too much the manner, without further examination, to
   conclude such persons were full of the Spirit of God, and had eminent
   experience of his gracious influences. This was the extreme which was
   prevailing three or four years ago. But of late, instead of esteeming
   and admiring all religious affections, without distinction, it is much
   more prevalent to reject and discard all without distinction. Herein
   appears the subtilty of Satan. While he saw that affections were much
   in vogue, knowing the greater part were not versed in such things, and
   had not had much experience of great religious affections, enabling
   them to judge well, and to distinguish between true and false; then he
   knew he could best play his game, by sowing tares amongst the wheat,
   and mingling false affections with the works of God's Spirit. He knew
   this to be a likely way to delude and eternally ruin many souls, and
   greatly to wound religion in the saints, and entangle them in a
   dreadful wilderness, and by and by to bring all religion into
   disrepute.

   But now, when the ill consequences of these false affections appear,
   and it is become very apparent, that some of those emotions which made
   a glaring show, and were by many greatly admired, were in reality
   nothing; the devil sees it to be for his interest to go another way to
   work, and to endeavour to his utmost to propagate and establish a
   persuasion, that all affections and sensible emotions of the mind in
   religion, are nothing at all to be regarded, but are rather to be
   avoided, and carefully guarded against, as things of a pernicious
   tendency. This he knows is the way to bring all religion to a mere
   lifeless formality, and effectually to shut out the power of godliness
   and every thing spiritual. For although to true religion there must
   indeed be something else besides affection; yet true religion consists
   so much in the affections, that there can be no true religion without
   them. He who has no religious affection, is in a state of spiritual
   death, and is wholly destitute of the powerful, quickening, saving
   influences of the Spirit of God upon his heart. As there is no true
   religion where there is nothing else but affection, so there is no true
   religion where there is no religious affection. As on the one hand,
   there must be light in the understanding, as well as an affected
   fervent heart; or where there is heat without light, there can be
   nothing divine or heavenly in that heart: so, on the other hand, where
   there is a kind of light without heat, a head stored with notions and
   speculations with a cold and unaffected heart, there can be nothing
   divine in that light, that knowledge is no true spiritual knowledge of
   divine things. If the great things of religion are rightly understood,
   they will affect the heart. The reason why men are not affected by such
   infinitely great, important, glorious, and wonderful things, as they
   often hear and read of in the word of God, is, undoubtedly, because
   they are blind; if they were not so, it would be impossible, and
   utterly inconsistent with human nature, that their hearts should be
   otherwise than strongly impressed, and greatly moved by such things.

   This manner of slighting all religious affections, is the way
   exceedingly to harden the hearts of men, to encourage them in their
   stupidity and senselessness, to keep them in a state of spiritual death
   as long as they live, and bring them at last to death eternal. The
   prevailing prejudice against religious affections at this day, is
   apparently of awful effect to harden the hearts of sinners, to damp the
   graces of the saints, to preclude the effect of ordinances, and hold us
   down in a slate of dulness and apathy; and this undoubtedly causes many
   persons greatly to offend God, in entertaining mean and low thoughts of
   the extraordinary work he has lately wrought in this land. For persons
   to despise and cry down all religious affections, is the way to shut
   all religion put of their own hearts, and to make thorough work in
   ruining their souls.

   They who condemn high affections in others, are certainly not likely to
   have high affections themselves. And let it be considered, that they
   who have but little religious affection, have certainly but little
   religion. And they who condemn others for their religious affections,
   and have none themselves, have no religion. There are false affections,
   and there are true. A man's having much affection, does not prove that
   he has any true religion: but if he has no affection, it proves that he
   has no true religion. The right way, is not to reject all affections,
   nor to approve all: but to distinguish between them, approving some and
   rejecting others; separating between the wheat and the chaff, the gold
   and the dross, the precious and the vile.

   2. If true religion lies much in the affections, we may infer, that
   such means are to be desired, as have much tendency to move the
   affections. Such books, and such a way of preaching the word and the
   administration of ordinances, and such a way of worshipping God in
   prayer and praises, as has a tendency deeply to affect the hearts of
   those who attend these means, is much to be desired.

   Such kind of means would formerly have been highly approved, and
   applauded by the generality of people, as the most excellent and
   profitable, and having the greatest tendency to promote the ends of the
   means of grace. But the prevailing taste seems of late strangely to be
   altered: that pathetic manner of praying and preaching which would
   formerly have been admired and extolled, and for this reason, because
   it had such a tendency to move the affections, now, in great
   multitudes, immediately excites disgust, and moves no other affections,
   than those of displeasure and contempt.

   Perhaps, formerly, the generality (at least of the common people) were
   in the extreme of looking too much to an affectionate address in public
   performances: but now, a very great part of the people seem to have
   gone far into a contrary extreme. Indeed there may be such means, as
   have a great tendency to stir up the passions of weak and ignorant
   persons, and yet have none to benefit their souls: for though they may
   have a tendency to excite affections, they have little or none to
   excite gracious affections. But, undoubtedly, if the things of religion
   in the means used, are treated according to their nature, and exhibited
   truly, so as tends to convey just apprehensions and a right judgment of
   them; the more they have a tendency to move the affections, the better.

   3. If true religion lies much in the affections, hence we may learn,
   what great cause we have to be ashamed and confounded before God, that
   we are no more affected with the great things of religion. It appears
   from what has been said, that this arises from our having so little
   true religion.

   God has given to mankind affections, for the same purpose as that for
   which he has given all the faculties and principles of the human soul,
   viz. that they might be subservient to man's chief end, and the great
   business for which God has created him, that is, the business of
   religion. And yet how common is it among mankind, that their affections
   are much more exercised and engaged in other matters, than in religion!
   In matters which concern men's worldly interest, their outward
   delights, their honour and reputation, and their natural relations,
   they have their desires eager, their appetites vehement, their love
   warm and affectionate, their zeal ardent; in these things their hearts
   are tender and sensible, easily moved, deeply impressed, much
   concerned, very sensibly affected, and greatly engaged; much depressed
   with grief at worldly losses, and highly raised with joy at worldly
   successes and prosperity. But how insensible and unmoved are most men,
   about the great things of another world! how dull are their affections!
   how heavy and hard their hearts in these matters! here their love is
   cold, their desires languid, their zeal low, and their gratitude small.
   How they can sit and hear of the infinite height, and depth, and
   length, and breadth of the love of God in Christ Jesus; of his giving
   his infinitely dear Son to be offered up a sacrifice for the sins of
   men, and of the unparalleled love of the innocent, holy Lamb of God
   manifested in his dying agonies, his bloody sweat, his loud and bitter
   cries and bleeding heart; and all this for enemies, to redeem them from
   deserved, eternal burnings, and to bring to unspeakable and everlasting
   joy and glory; and yet be cold, heavy, insensible, and regardless!
   Where are the exercises of our affections proper, if not here? what is
   it that more requires them? and what can be a fit occasion of their
   lively and vigorous exercise, if not such as this? Can any thing be set
   in our view, greater and more important? any thing more wonderful and
   surprising? or that more nearly concerns our interest? Can we suppose
   that the wise Creator implanted such principles in our nature as the
   affections, to lie still on such an occasion as this? Can any
   Christian, who believes the truth of these things, entertain such
   thoughts?

   If we ought ever to exercise our affections at all, and if the Creator
   has not unwisely constituted the human nature in making these
   principles a part of it, then they ought to be exercised about those
   objects which are most worthy of them. But is there any thing in heaven
   or earth, so worthy to be the objects of our admiration and love, our
   earnest and longing desires, hope, rejoicing, and fervent zeal, as
   those things which are held forth to us in the gospel of Jesus Christ?
   There not only are things declared most worthy to affect us, but they
   are exhibited in the most affecting manner. The glory and beauty of the
   blessed JEHOVAH, which is most worthy in itself to be the object of our
   admiration and love, is there exhibited in the most affecting manner
   that can be conceived of; as it appears shining in all its lustre, in
   the face of an incarnate, infinitely loving, meek, compassionate, dying
   Redeemer. All the virtues of the Lamb of God, his humility, patience,
   meekness, submission, obedience, love, and compassion, are exhibited to
   our view, in a manner the most tending to move our affections of any
   that can be imagined; for they all had their greatest trial, their
   highest exercise, and brightest manifestation, when he was in the most
   affecting circumstances; even when he was under his last sufferings,
   those unutterable and unparalleled sufferings which he endured from his
   tender love and pity to us. There, also, the hateful nature of our sins
   is manifested in the most affecting manner possible; as we see the
   dreadful effects of them, in what our Redeemer who undertook to answer
   for us, suffered for them. And there we have the most affecting
   manifestations of God's hatred of sin, and his wrath and justice in
   punishing it; as we see his justice in the strictness and
   inflexibleness of it, and his wrath in its terribleness, in so
   dreadfully punishing our sins, in one who was infinitely dear to him,
   and loving to us. So has God disposed things in the affair of our
   redemption, and in his glorious dispensations revealed to us in the
   gospel, as though every thing were purposely contrived in such a
   manner, as to have the greatest possible tendency to reach our hearts
   in the most tender part, and move our affections most sensibly and
   strongly. How great cause have we therefore to be humbled to the dust,
   that we are no more affected!
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II.

   showing what are no certain signs that religious affections are truly
   gracious, or that they are not.

   If any one, on reading what has been just now said, is ready to acquit
   himself, and say, "I am not one of those who have no religious
   affections; I am often greatly moved with the consideration of the
   great things of religion"; let him not content himself with this: for,
   as we ought not to reject and condemn all affections, as though true
   religion did not at all consist in them; so, on the other hand, we
   ought not to approve of all, as though every one that was religiously
   affected had true grace, and was therein the subject of the saving
   influences of the Spirit of God. Therefore, the right way is to
   distinguish, among religious affections, between one sort and another.
   Let us now endeavour to do this, by noticing, in the first place, some
   things, which are no signs that affections are gracious, or that they
   are not.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   It is no sign, one way or other, that religious affections are very
   great, or raised very high.

   Some are ready to condemn all high affection: if persons appear to have
   their religious affections raised to an extraordinary pitch, they are
   prejudiced against them, and determine that they are delusions, without
   further inquiry. But if, as before proved, true religion lies very much
   in religious affections, then it follows, that if there be a great deal
   of true religion, there will be great religious affections; if true
   religion in the hearts of men be raised to a great height, divine and
   holy affections will be raised to a great height.

   Love is an affection; but will any Christian say, men ought not to love
   God and Jesus Christ in a high degree? and will any say, we ought not
   to have a very great hatred of sin, and a very deep sorrow for it? or
   that we ought not to exercise a high degree of gratitude to God, for
   the mercies we receive of him, and the great things he has done for the
   salvation of fallen men? or that we should not have very great and
   strong desires after God and holiness? Is there any who will profess,
   that his affections in religion are great enough; and will say, "I have
   no cause to be humbled, that I am no more affected with the things of
   religion than I am; I have no reason to be ashamed, that I have no
   greater exercises of love to God, and sorrow for sin, and gratitude for
   the mercies which I have received?" Who is there that will go and bless
   God, that he is affected enough with what he has read and heard of the
   wonderful love of God to worms and rebels in giving his only-begotten
   Son to die for them, and of the dying love of Christ; and will pray
   that he may not be affected with them in any higher degree, because
   high affections are improper, and very unlovely in Christians, being
   enthusiastical, and ruinous to true religion!

   Our text plainly speaks of great and high affections, when it speaks of
   rejoicing with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Here the most
   superlative expressions are used, which language will afford. The
   Scriptures often require us to exercise very high affections: thus in
   the first and great commandment of the law, there is an accumulation of
   expressions, as though words were wanting to express the degree in
   which we ought to love God; [418] "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
   with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all
   thy strength." So the saints are called upon to exercise high degrees
   of joy: Rejoice, says Christ to his disciples, and be exceeding glad,
   Matt. v. 12. So, Psal. lxviii. 3. "Let the righteous be glad: let them
   rejoice before God; yea, let them exceedingly rejoice." In the book of
   Psalms, the saints are often called upon to shout for joy; and in Luke
   vi. 23. to leap for joy. So they are abundantly called upon to exercise
   high degrees of gratitude for mercies, to praise God with all their
   hearts, with hearts lifted up in the ways of the Lord, their souls
   magnifying the Lord, singing his praises, talking of his wondrous
   works, declaring his doings, &c.

   We find the most eminent saints in Scripture often professing high
   affections. Thus the psalmist mentions his love as if it were
   unspeakable; Psal. cxix. 97. "Oh how love I thy law!" So he expresses a
   great degree of hatred of sin; Psal. cxxxix. 21, 22. "Do not I hate
   them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with them that rise
   up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred." He also expresses a
   high degree of sorrow for sin: he speaks of his sins going over his
   head, as a heavy burden, that was too heavy for him; of his roaring all
   the day, his moisture being turned into the drought of summer, and his
   bones being as it were broken with sorrow. So he often expresses great
   degrees of spiritual desires, in a multitude of the strongest
   expressions which can be conceived of; such as his longing, his soul
   thirsting as a dry and thirsty land where no water is, his panting, his
   flesh and heart crying out, his soul breaking for the longing it hath,
   &c. He expresses the exercises of great and extreme grief for the sins
   of others, Psal. cxix. 136. "Rivers of water run down mine eyes,
   because they keep not thy law." And verse 53. "Horror hath taken hold
   upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law." He expresses high
   exercises of joy, Psal. xxi. 1. "The king shall joy in thy strength,
   and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!" Psal. lxxi. 23. "My
   lips shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee." Psal. lxiii. 3-7.
   "Because thy loving-kindness is better than life: my lips shall praise
   thee. Thus will I bless thee, while I live: I will lift up my hands in
   thy name. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my
   mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: when I remember thee upon my
   bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. Because thou hast been
   my help; therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice."

   The apostle Paul expresses high exercises of affection. Thus he
   expresses the exercises of pity and concern for others' good, even to
   anguish of heart; a great, fervent, and abundant love, earnest and
   longing desires, and exceeding joy. He speaks of the exultation and
   triumphs of his soul, his earnest expectation and hope, his abundant
   tears, and the travails at his soul, in pity, grief, earnest desires,
   godly jealousy, and fervent zeal, in many places that have been cited
   already, and which therefore I need not repeat. John the Baptist
   expressed great joy, John iii. 39. Those blessed women who anointed the
   body of Jesus, are represented as in a very high exercise of religious
   affection, at the resurrection of Christ. Matt. xxviii. 8. "And they
   departed from the sepulchre, with fear and great joy."

   It is often foretold of the church of God, in her future happy seasons
   on earth, that they shall exceedingly rejoice: Psal. lxxxix. 15, 16.
   "They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. In thy name
   shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be
   exalted." Zech. ix. 9."Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O
   daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh," &c. The same is
   represented in other places innumerable. And because high degrees of
   joy are the proper and genuine fruits of the gospel of Christ,
   therefore the angel calls this gospel, good tidings of great joy, that
   should be to all people.

   The saints and angels in heaven, who have religion in its highest
   perfection, are exceedingly affected with what they behold and
   contemplate of God's perfections and works. They are all as a pure
   heavenly flame of fire, in their love, and in the greatness and
   strength of their joy and gratitude. Their praises are represented, as
   the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder. Now the
   only reason why their affections are so much higher than the holy
   affections of saints on earth, is, they see things more according to
   their truth, and have their affections more conformed to the nature of
   things. And therefore, if religious affections in men here below, are
   but of the same nature and kind with theirs, the higher they are, and
   the nearer they are to theirs in degree, the better; because therein
   they will be so much the more conformed to truth, as theirs are.

   From these things it certainly appears, that the existence of religious
   affections, in a very high degree, is no evidence that they are not
   such as have the nature of true religion. Therefore, they greatly err,
   who condemn persons as enthusiasts, merely because their affections are
   very high.

   On the other hand, it is no evidence that religious affections are of a
   spiritual and gracious nature, because they are great. It is very
   manifest by the Holy Scripture, our sure and infallible rule in things
   of this nature, that there are very high religious affections which are
   not spiritual and saving. The apostle Paul speaks of affections in the
   Galatians which had been exceedingly elevated, but yet he feared that
   they were vain, and had come to nothing, [419] "Where is the
   blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record, that if it had been
   possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them
   to me." And in the 11th. verse he tells them, he was afraid of them,
   lest he had bestowed upon them labour in vain. So the children of
   Israel were greatly affected with God's mercy to them, when they had
   seen how wonderfully he wrought for them at the Red sea, where they
   sang God's praise; though they soon forgat his works. They were greatly
   affected again at mount Sinai, when they saw the marvellous
   manifestations God made of himself there; and seemed mightily engaged
   in their minds, and with great forwardness made answer, when God
   proposed his holy covenant to them, saying. All that the Lord hath
   spoken will we do, and be obedient. But how soon was there an end to
   all this mighty forwardness and engagedness of affection! How quickly
   were they turned aside after other gods, rejoicing and shouting around
   their golden calf! Great multitudes who were affected with the miracle
   of raising Lazarus from the dead, were elevated to a high degree, and
   made a mighty stir when Jesus very soon after entered into Jerusalem,
   exceedingly magnifying Christ, as though the ground were not good
   enough for the ass he rode to tread upon; and therefore cut down
   branches of palm trees, and strewed them in the way; yea, they pulled
   off their garments, and spread them; and cried with loud voices,
   Hosanna to the son of David, blessed is he that cometh in the name of
   the Lord, hosanna in the highest; [420] so as to make the whole city
   ring again, and put all into an uproar. We learn by the evangelist
   John, that the reason why the people made this ado, was because they
   were affected with the miracle of raising Lazarus, John xii. 18. This
   vast multitude crying Hosanna, gave occasion to the Pharisees to say.
   Behold, the world is gone after him, John xii. 19.--but Christ had at
   that time but few true disciples. And how quickly was this fervour at
   an end! All is extinct when this Jesus stands bound, with a mock robe
   and a crown of thorns, to be derided, spit upon, scourged, condemned,
   and executed. Indeed there was a great and loud outcry concerning him,
   among the multitude then, as well as before; but of a very different
   kind: it is not then Hosanna, hosanna, but, Crucify, crucify.--In a
   word, it is the concurring voice of all orthodox divines, that there
   may be religious affections raised to a very high degree, and yet
   nothing of true religion. [421]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [418] Mark xii. 30.

   [419] Gal. iv. 15.

   [420] Matt. xxi. 9.

   [421] Mr. Stoddard observes. "That common affections are sometimes
   stronger than saving." Guide to Christ, p. 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   It is no sign that affections have the nature of true religion, or that
   they have not, that they have great effects on the body.

   all affections whatsoever have in some respect or degree, an effect on
   the body. As was observed before, such is our nature, and such are the
   laws of union of soul and body, that the mind can have no lively or
   vigorous exercise, without some effect upon the body. So subject is the
   body to the mind, and so much do its fluids, especially the animal
   spirits, attend the motions and exercises of the mind, that there
   cannot be so much as an intense thought, without an effect upon them.
   Yea it is questionable, whether an embodied soul ever so much as thinks
   one thought, or has any exercise at all, but that there is some
   corresponding motion or alteration of the fluids, in some part of the
   body. But universal experience shows, that the exercise of the
   affections have, in a special manner, a tendency to some sensible
   effect upon the body. And if all affections have some effect on the
   body, we may then well suppose, the greater those affections, and the
   more vigorous their exercises are, (other circumstances being equal,)
   the greater will be the effect on the body. Hence it is not to be
   wondered at, that very great and strong exercises of the affections
   should have great effects on the body. And therefore, seeing there are
   very great affections, both common and spiritual; hence it is not to be
   wondered at, that great efforts on the body should arise from both
   these kinds of affections. And consequently these effects are no signs,
   that the affections they arise from are of one kind or the other.

   Great effects on the body certainly are no sure evidences that
   affections are spiritual; for we see them oftentimes arise from great
   affections about temporal things, and when religion is no way concerned
   in them. And if great affections about things purely natural may have
   these effects, I know not by what rule we should determine, that high
   affections about religious things, which arise in like manner from
   nature, cannot have the like effect.

   Nor, on the other hand, do I know of any rule to determine, that
   gracious affections, when raised as high as any natural affections,
   with equally strong and vigorous exercises, cannot have a great effect
   on the body. No such rule can be drawn from reason: I know of no
   reason, why a being affected with a view of God's glory should not
   cause the body to faint, as well as being affected with a view of
   Solomon's glory. And no such rule has as yet been produced from the
   Scripture: none has ever been found in all the late controversies about
   things of this nature. There is a great power in spiritual affections;
   we read of the power which worketh in Christians, [422] and of the
   Spirit of God being in them as the Spirit of power, [423] and of the
   effectual working of his power in them, [424] yea, of the working of
   God's mighty power in them. [425] But man's nature is weak: flesh and
   blood are represented in Scripture as exceeding weak; and particularly
   with respect to its unfitness for great, spiritual, and heavenly
   operations and exercises. (Matt. xxvi. 41. 1 Cor. xv. 43. and 50.) The
   text prefixed to this discourse speaks of joy unspeakable, and full of
   glory. And who that considers what man's nature is, and what the nature
   of the affections are, can reasonably doubt, but that such unutterable
   and glorious joys, may be too great and mighty for weak dust and ashes,
   so as to be considerably overbearing to it? It is evident by the
   Scripture, that discoveries of God's glory, when given in a great
   degree, have a tendency, by affecting the mind, to overbear the body.
   The Scripture teaches us, that if these views should be given to such a
   degree, as they are given in heaven, the weak frame of the body could
   not subsist under it, and that no man can, in that manner, see God and
   live. The knowledge which the saints have of God's beauty and glory in
   this world, and those holy affections that arise from it, are of the
   same nature and kind with what the saints are the subjects of in
   heaven, differing only in degree and circumstances. What God gives them
   here, is a foretaste of heavenly happiness, and an earnest of their
   future inheritance. And who shall limit God in his giving this earnest,
   or say he shall give so much of the inheritance, such a part of the
   future reward, as an earnest of the whole, and no more? And seeing God
   has taught us in his word, that the whole reward is such, that it would
   at once destroy the body, is it not too bold a thing for us to set
   bounds to the sovereign God; or to say, that in giving the earnest of
   this reward, he shall never give so much of it, as in the least to
   diminish the strength of the body, when God has no where thus limited
   himself?

   The psalmist speaking of his vehement religious affections, and of an
   effect in his flesh or body, besides what was in his soul, expressly
   distinguishes one from the other, Psal. lxxxiv. 2. "My soul longeth,
   yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh
   crieth out for the living God." Here is a plain distinction between the
   heart and the flesh, as being each affected. So Psal. lxiii. 1. "My
   soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty
   land, where no water is." Here also is an evident, designed distinction
   between the soul and the flesh.

   The prophet Habakkuk speaks of his body being overborne by a sense of
   the majesty of God, Hab. iii. 16. "When I heard my belly trembled: my
   lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I
   trembled in myself." So the psalmist, Psal. cxix.120. "My flesh
   trembleth for fear of thee."

   That such ideas of God's glory as are given sometimes even in this
   world, have a tendency to overbear the body, is evident, because the
   Scripture gives us an account, that this has actually been the effect
   of those external manifestations which God made of himself to some of
   the saints, in order to give them an idea of his majesty and glory.
   Daniel giving an account of an external representation of the glory of
   Christ, says, Dan. x. 8. "And there remained no strength in me; for my
   comeliness was turned into corruption, and I retained no strength." And
   the apostle John, giving an account of a similar manifestation made to
   him, says, Rev. i. 17. "And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as
   dead." It is in vain to say here, that these were only external
   manifestations of the glory of Christ; for though this be true, yet the
   use of these representations, was to give an idea of the thing
   represented, the true divine glory and majesty of Christ. They were
   made use of only as significations of this spiritual glory, and thus
   undoubtedly they received and improved them, and were affected by them.
   According to the end for which God intended these outward signs, they
   received by them a great and lively apprehension of the real glory and
   majesty of God's nature, of which they were signs; and thus were
   greatly affected, their souls swallowed up, and their bodies overborne.
   And, I think, they are very bold and daring, who will say that God
   cannot, or shall not, give the like affecting apprehensions of the same
   real glory of his nature to none of his saints, without the
   intervention of such external shadows.

   Before I leave this head, I would further observe, that it is plain the
   Scripture often makes use of bodily effects to express the strength of
   holy and spiritual affections; such as trembling, [426] groaning, [427]
   being sick, [428] crying out, [429] panting, [430] and fainting. [431]
   Now if it be supposed, that these are only figurative expressions to
   represent the degree of affection; yet I hope all will allow, that they
   are suitable figures to represent the high degree of those spiritual
   affections; which I see not how they would be, if those spiritual
   affections are the proper effects and sad tokens of false affections,
   and the delusion of the devil. I cannot think, God would commonly make
   use of things which are very alien from spiritual affections, and are
   shrewd marks of the hand of Satan, and smell strong of the bottomless
   pit, as beautiful figures, to represent the high degree of holy and
   heavenly affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [422] Eph. ii. 7.

   [423] 2 Tim. i. 7.

   [424] Eph. iii. 7, 20.

   [425] Eph. i. 19.

   [426] Psal. cxix. 120. Ezra ix. 4. Isa. lxvi. 2, 5. Hab. iii. 16.

   [427] Rom. viii. 26.

   [428] Cant. ii. 5. and v. 8

   [429] Psal. lxxxiv. 2.

   [430] Psal. xxxviii. 10. and xliii. 1. and cxix 131.

   [431] Psal lxxxiv. 2. and cxix 8l.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   It is no sign that affections are truly gracious, or that they are not,
   that they cause those who have them, to be fluent, fervent, and
   abundant in talking of religious things.

   There are many persons, who, if they see this in others, are greatly
   prejudiced against them. Their being so full of talk, is with them a
   sufficient ground to condemn them as Pharisees, and ostentatious
   hypocrites. On the other hand, there are many who, if they see this
   effect in any, are very ignorantly and imprudently forward, at once to
   determine that they are the true children of God, under the saving
   influences of his Spirit, and speak of it as a great evidence of a new
   creature. Such an one's mouth, say they, is now opened: he used to be
   slow to speak; but now he is full and free: he is free now to open his
   heart, and tell his experiences, and declare the praises of God; it
   comes from him, as free as water from a fountain; and the like. And
   especially are they captivated into a confident persuasion that they
   are savingly wrought upon, if they are not only free and abundant, but
   very affectionate and earnest in their talk.

   But this is the fruit of little judgment, and short experience; as
   events abundantly show: and is a mistake into which persons often run,
   through their trusting their own wisdom, and making their own notions
   their rule, instead of the Holy Scripture. Though the Scripture be full
   of rules, both how we should judge of our own state, and also how we
   should be conducted in our own opinion of others; yet we have no where
   any rule, by which to judge ourselves or others to be in a good estate,
   from any such effect: for this is but the religion of the tongue, and
   what is in the Scripture represented by the leaves of a tree,
   which--though the tree ought not to be without them, yet--are no where
   given as an evidence of the goodness of the tree.

   That persons are disposed to be abundant in talking of religious
   things, may be from a good cause, and it may be from a bad one. It may
   be because their hearts are very full of holy affections; for out of
   the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh: and it may be because
   persons' hearts are very full of affection which is not holy; for still
   out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. It is very much
   the nature of the affections, of whatever kind, and whatever objects
   they are exercised about, if they are strong, to dispose persons to he
   very much in speaking of that with which they are affected; and not
   only to speak much, but to speak very earnestly and fervently. And
   therefore persons talking abundantly and very fervently about the
   things of religion, can be an evidence of no more than this, that they
   are very much affected with the things of religion; but this may be (as
   has been already shown) without any grace. That which men are greatly
   affected with, while the high affection lasts, they will be earnestly
   engaged about, and will be likely to show that earnestness in their
   talk and behaviour; as the greater part of the Jews, in all Judah and
   Galilee, did for a while, about John the Baptist's preaching and
   baptism, when they were willing for a season to rejoice in his light: a
   mighty stir was made all over the land, and among all sorts of persons,
   about this great prophet and his ministry. And so the multitude, in
   like manner, often manifested a great earnestness, a mighty engagedness
   of spirit, in every thing that was external, about Christ, his
   preaching and miracles, being astonished at his doctrine, anon with joy
   receiving the word. They followed him sometimes night and day, leaving
   meat, drink, and sleep to hear him; once they followed him into the
   wilderness, fasting three days going to hear him; sometimes extolling
   him to the clouds, saying, Never man spake like this man! being fervent
   and earnest in what they said. But what did these things come to, in
   the greater part of them?

   A person may be over full of talk of his own experiences; falling upon
   it every where, and in all companies; and when so, it is rather a dark
   sign than a good one. A tree that is over full of leaves, seldom bears
   much fruit. And a cloud, though to appearance very pregnant and full of
   water, if it brings with it over much wind, seldom affords much rain to
   the dry and thirsty earth: which very thing the Holy Spirit is pleased
   several times to make use of, to represent a great show of religion
   with the mouth, without answerable fruit in the life, Prov. xxv. 14.
   "Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift, is like clouds and wind
   without rain." And the apostle Jude, speaking of some in the primitive
   times, that crept in unawares among the saints, and having a great show
   of religion, were for a while not suspected, These are clouds (says he)
   without water, carried about of winds, Jude ver. 4. and 12. And the
   apostle Peter, speaking of the same, says, 2 Pet. ii. 17. "These are
   clouds without water, carried with a tempest." False affections, if
   they are equally strong, are much more forward to declare themselves,
   than true: because it is the nature of false religion to affect show
   and observation; as it was with the Pharisees. [432]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [432] That famous experimental divine Mr. Shephard, says, "A Pharisee's
   trumpet shall he heard to the town's end; when simplicity walks through
   the town unseen. Hence a man will sometimes covertly commend himself,
   (and myself ever comes in.) and tells you a long story of conversion;
   and an hundred to one if some lie or other slip not out with it Why,
   the secret meaning is, I pray admire me. Hence complain of wants and
   weaknesses: pray think what a broken-hearted Christian I am."--Parab.
   of the Ten Virgins. Part I. page 179, 180. And holy Mr. Flavel says
   this. "O reader, if thy heart were right with God, and thou didst not
   cheat thyself with a vain profession, thou wouldst have frequent
   business with God, which thou wouldst be loth thy dearest friend, or
   the wife of thy bosom, should be privy to. Non est religio, ubi omnia
   patent Religion doth not lie open to all, to the eyes of men. Observed
   duties maintain our credit, but secret duties maintain our life. It was
   the saying of a heathen, about his secret correspondency with his
   friend What need the world to be acquainted with it? Thou and I are
   theatre enough to each other. There are inclosed pleasures in religion,
   which none but renewed spiritual souls do feelingly understand."
   Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity, chap. II. sect. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   It is no sign that affections are gracious, or that they are otherwise,
   that persons did not excite them by their own endeavours.

   There are many in these days, who condemn all affections which are
   excited in a way that seems not to be the natural consequence of the
   faculties and principles of human nature, in such circumstances, and
   under such means; but to be from the influence of some extrinsic and
   supernatural power upon their minds. How greatly has the doctrine of
   the inward experience or sensible perceiving of the immediate power and
   operation of the Spirit of God, been reproached and ridiculed by many
   of late! They say, the manner of the Spirit of God, is to co-operate in
   a silent, secret, and undiscernible way with the use of means, and our
   own endeavours; so that there is no distinguishing by sense, between
   the influences of the Spirit of God, and the natural operations of the
   faculties of our own minds.

   And it is true, that for any to expect to receive the saving influences
   of the Spirit of God, while they neglect a diligent improvement of the
   appointed means of grace, is unreasonable presumption. And to expect
   that the Spirit of God will savingly operate upon their minds, without
   the use of means, as subservient to the effect, is enthusiastical. It
   is also undoubtedly true, that the Spirit of God is very various in the
   manner and circumstances of his operations, and that sometimes he
   operates in a way more secret and gradual, and from smaller beginnings,
   than at others.

   But if there be indeed a power, entirely different from and beyond our
   power--or the power of all means and instruments, and above the power
   of nature--which is requisite in order to the production of saving
   grace in the heart, according to the general profession of the country;
   then certainly, it is in no wise unreasonable to suppose, that this
   effect should very frequently be produced after such a manner, as to
   make it very manifest and sensible, that it is so. If grace be indeed
   owing to the powerful and efficacious operation of an extrinsic agent,
   or divine efficient out of ourselves, why is it unreasonable to
   suppose, it should seem to be so, to them who are the subjects of it?
   Is it a strange thing, that it should seem to be as it is? When grace
   in the heart indeed is not produced by our strength, nor is the effect
   of the natural power of our own faculties, or any means or instruments,
   but is properly the workmanship and production of the Spirit of the
   Almighty, is it a strange thing, that it should seem to them who are
   subjects of it, agreeable to truth, and not contrary to truth? If
   persons tell of effects that seem to them riot to be from the natural
   power or operation of their minds, but from the supernatural power of
   some other agent, should it at once be looked upon as a sure evidence
   of their being under a delusion, because things seem to them to be as
   they are? For this is the objection which is made: it is looked upon as
   a clear evidence, that the apprehensions and affections that many
   persons have, are not really from such a cause, because they seem to
   them to be from that cause. They declare that what they are conscious
   of, seems to them evidently not to be from themselves, but from the
   mighty power of the Spirit of God; and others from hence condemn them,
   and determine that what they experience is not from the Spirit of God,
   but from themselves, or from the devil. Thus unreasonably are
   multitudes treated at this day, by their neighbours.

   If it be indeed so, as the Scripture abundantly teaches, that grace in
   the soul is so the effect of God's power, that it is fitly compared to
   those effects, which are farthest from being owing to any strength in
   the subject, such as generation, or a being begotten, and resurrection,
   or a being raised from the dead, and creation, or a being brought out
   of nothing into being, and that is an effect wherein the mighty power
   of God is greatly glorified, and the exceeding greatness of his power
   manifested; [433] then what account can be given of it, that the
   Almighty, in so great a work of his power, should so carefully hide his
   power, that the subjects of it should be able to discern nothing of it?
   or what reason or revelation have any to determine that he does so? If
   we may judge by the Scripture, this is not agreeable to God's manner,
   in his operations and dispensations; but on the contrary, it is God's
   manner, in the great works of his power and mercy, to make his hand
   visible, and his power conspicuous, and men's dependence on him most
   evident, that no flesh should glory in his presence, [434] that God
   alone might be exalted, [435] and that the excellency of the power
   might be of God and not of man, [436] and that Christ's power might be
   manifested in our weakness [437] and none might say, mine own hand hath
   saved me. [438] So it was in most of those temporal salvations which
   God wrought for Israel of old, which were types of the salvation of his
   people from their spiritual enemies. So, in the redemption of Israel
   from their Egyptian bondage; he redeemed them with a strong hand, and
   an outstretched arm; and that his power might be the more conspicuous,
   he suffered Israel first to be brought into the most helpless and
   forlorn circumstances. So, in the great redemption by Gideon; God would
   have his army diminished to a handful, and they without any other arms,
   than trumpets, and lamps, and earthen pitchers. So in the deliverance
   of Israel from Goliath, by a stripling, with a sling and a stone. So it
   was in that great work of God, his calling the Gentiles, after that the
   world by wisdom knew not God, and all the endeavours of philosophers to
   reform the world had failed, and it was become abundantly evident that
   the world had no effectual help but the mighty power of God. And so it
   was in most of the conversions of particular persons recorded in the
   history of the New Testament: they were not affected in that silent,
   secret, gradual, and insensible manner, which is now insisted on; but
   with those manifest evidences of a supernatural power, wonderfully and
   suddenly causing a great change, which in these days are looked upon as
   certain signs of delusion and enthusiasm.

   The apostle in Eph. i. 18, 19. speaks of God enlightening the minds of
   Christians, and so bringing them to believe in Christ, to the end that
   they might know the exceeding greatness of his power to them who
   believe. The words are, "The eyes of your understanding being
   enlightened: that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
   the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what is
   the exceeding greatness of his power to us-wardtoward us who believe,
   according to the working of his mighty power," &c. Now when the apostle
   speaks of their being thus the subjects of his power, in their
   enlightening and effectual calling, to the end that they might know
   what his mighty power was to them who believe, he can mean nothing
   else, than that they might know by experience. But if the saints know
   this power by experience, then they feel it, discern it, and are
   conscious of it; as sensibly distinguishable from the natural
   operations of their own minds. But this is not agreeable to a notion of
   God operating so secretly, and undiscernibly, that it cannot be known
   they are the subjects of any extrinsic influence at all, otherwise than
   as they may argue it from scripture assertions; which is a different
   thing from knowing it by experience. So that it is very unreasonable
   and unscriptural, to determine that affections are not from the
   gracious operations of God's Spirit, because they are sensibly not from
   the persons themselves who are the subjects of them.

   On the other hand, it is no evidence that affections are gracious, that
   they are not purposely produced by those who are the subjects of them,
   or that they arise in their minds in a manner which they cannot account
   for.

   There are some who make this an argument in their own favour, when
   speaking of what they have experienced: "I am sure I did not make it
   myself: it was a fruit of no contrivance or endeavour of mine; it came
   when I thought nothing of it; if I might have the world for it, I
   cannot make it again when I please." And hence they determine, that
   what they have experienced, must be from the mighty influence of the
   Spirit of God, and is of a saving nature; but very ignorantly, and
   without grounds. What they have experienced may indeed not be from
   themselves directly, but may be from the operation of an invisible
   agent, some spirit besides their own: but it does not thence follow,
   that it was from the Spirit of God. There are other spirits who have
   influence on the minds of men, besides the Holy Ghost. We are directed
   not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of
   God. There are many false spirits, exceeding busy with men, who often
   transform themselves into angels of light, and in many wonderful ways,
   with great subtlety and power, mimic the operations of the Spirit of
   God. And there are many of Satan's operations, which are very
   distinguishable from the voluntary exercises of men's own minds. They
   are so, in those dreadful and horrid suggestions, and blasphemous
   injections, with which he follows many persons; also in vain and
   fruitless frights and terrors, of which he is the author. And the power
   of Satan may be as immediate and as evident in false comforts and joys,
   as in terrors and horrid suggestions; and oftentimes is so in fact. It
   is not in men's power to put themselves into such raptures as those of
   the Anabaptists in Germany, and many other raving enthusiasts like
   them.

   Besides, it is to be considered, that persons may have impressions on
   their minds, which may not be of their own producing, nor from an evil
   spirit, but from a common influence of the Spirit of God: and the
   subjects of such impressions, may be of the number of those we read of,
   Heb. vi. 4, 5. "that are once enlightened, and taste of the heavenly
   gift, and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and taste the good word
   of God, and the powers of the world to come;" and yet may be wholly
   unacquainted with those "better things that accompany salvation." And
   where neither a good nor evil spirit have any immediate hand, persons,
   especially such as are of a weak and vapoury habit of body, and the
   brain easily susceptive of impressions, may have strange apprehensions
   and imaginations, and strong affections attending them, unaccountably
   arising, which are not voluntarily produced by themselves. We see that
   such persons are liable to such impressions, about temporal things; and
   there is equal reason, why they should about spiritual things. As a
   person asleep has dreams, of which he is not the voluntary author; so
   may such persons, in like manner, be the subjects of involuntary
   impressions, when they are awake.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [433] Eph. i. 17-20.

   [434] 1 Cor. i. 27, 28, 29.

   [435] Isa. i. 11-17.

   [436] 2 Cor. iv. 7.

   [437] 2 Cor. xii. 9.

   [438] Judg. vii. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   It is no sign that religious affections are truly holy and spiritual,
   or that they are not, that they come to the mind in a remarkable manner
   with texts of Scripture.

   It is no sign that affections are not gracious, that they are
   occasioned by scriptures so coming to mind; provided it be the
   Scripture itself--or the truth which the Scripture so brought contains
   and teaches--that is the foundation of the affection, and not merely or
   mainly the sudden and unusual manner of its coming to the mind.

   But on the other hand, neither is it any sign that affections are
   gracious, that they arise on occasion of scriptures brought suddenly
   and wonderfully to the mind; whether those affections be fear or hope,
   joy or sorrow, or any other. Some seem to look upon this as a good
   evidence that their affections are saving, especially if the affections
   excited are hope or joy, or any other which are pleasing and
   delightful. They will mention it as an evidence that all is right, that
   their experience came with the word, and will say, "There were such and
   such sweet promises brought to my mind: they came suddenly, as if they
   were spoke to me: I had no hand in bringing such a text to my own mind;
   I was not thinking of any thing leading to it; it came all at once, so
   that I was surprised. I had not thought of it a long time before; I did
   not know at first that it was Scripture; I did not remember that ever I
   had read it." And it may be they will add, "One scripture came flowing
   in after another, and so texts all over the Bible, the most sweet and
   pleasant, and the most apt and suitable, which could be devised; and
   filled me full as I could hold: I could not but stand and admire: the
   tears flowed; I was full of joy, and could not doubt any longer." And
   thus they think they have undoubted evidence, that their affections
   must be from God, and of the right kind, and their state good: but
   without any good grounds. How come they by any such rule, as that if
   any affections or experiences arise with promises, and comfortable
   texts of Scripture, unaccountably brought to mind, without their
   recollection, or if a great number of sweet texts follow one another in
   a chain, that this is a certain evidence their experiences are saving?
   Where is any such rule to be found in the Bible, the great and only
   sure directory in things of this nature?

   What deceives many of the less knowing and considerate sort of people,
   in this matter, seems to be this; that the Scripture is the word of
   God, and has nothing in it which is wrong, but is pure and perfect: and
   therefore, those experiences which come from the Scripture must be
   right But then it should be considered, affections may arise on
   occasion of the Scripture, and not properly come from. as the genuine
   fruit of the Scripture; but from an abuse of it. All that can be argued
   from the purity and perfection of the word of God, with respect to
   experiences, is this, that those experiences which are agreeable to the
   word of God, are right, and cannot be otherwise: and not that those
   affections must be right, which arise on occasion of the word of God
   coming to the mind.

   What evidence is there that the devil cannot bring texts of Scripture
   to the mind, and misapply them, to deceive persons? There seems to be
   nothing in this which exceeds the power of Satan. It is no work of such
   mighty power, to bring sounds or letters to persons' minds. If Satan
   has power to bring any words or sounds at all to persons' minds, he may
   have power to bring words contained in the Bible. There is no higher
   sort of power required in men, to make the sounds which express the
   words of a text of Scripture, than to make the sounds which express the
   words of an idle story or song. And so the same power in Satan which is
   sufficient to renew one of those in the mind, is sufficient to renew
   the other: the different signification, which depends wholly on custom,
   alters not the case, as to ability to make or revive the sounds or
   letters. Or will any suppose, that texts of Scripture are such sacred
   things, that the devil durst not abuse them, nor touch them? In this
   also they are mistaken. He who was bold enough to lay hold on Christ
   himself, and carry him hither and thither, into the wilderness, into a
   high mountain, and to a pinnacle of the temple, is not afraid to touch
   the Scripture, and abuse that for his own purposes. For, at the same
   time that he was so bold with Christ, he brought one scripture and
   another to deceive and tempt him. And if Satan did presume, and was
   permitted to put Christ himself in mind of texts of Scripture to tempt
   him, what reason have we to determine, that he dare not, or will not be
   permitted, to put wicked men in mind of texts of Scripture, to tempt
   and deceive them? And if Satan may thus abuse one text of Scripture, so
   he may another. Its being a very excellent place of Scripture, a
   comfortable and precious promise, alters not the case, as to his
   courage or ability. And if he can bring one comfortable text to the
   mind, so he may a thousand; and may choose out such scriptures as tend
   most to serve his purpose. He may heap up scripture promise tending,
   according to the perverse application he makes of them, wonderfully to
   remove the rising doubts, and to confirm the false joy and confidence,
   of a poor deluded sinner.

   We know the devil's instruments, corrupt and heretical teachers, can
   and do pervert the Scripture, to their own and other's damnation, 2
   Pet. iii. 16. We see they have the free use of Scripture, in every part
   of it; there is no text so precious and sacred, but they are permitted
   to abuse it, to the eternal ruin of souls; and there are no weapons
   they use, with which they do more execution. There is no manner of
   reason to determine, that the devil is not permitted thus to abuse the
   Scripture, as well as his instruments. For when the latter do it, they
   do it as his instruments, through his instigation and influence: and
   doubtless the devil's servants do but follow their master, and do the
   same work that he does himself.

   And as the devil can abuse the Scripture, to deceive and destroy men,
   so may men's own folly and corruptions. Men's own hearts are deceitful
   like the devil, and use the same means to deceive. So that it is
   evident, that persons may have high affections of hope and joy, arising
   on occasion of texts of Scripture, yea precious promises coming
   suddenly and remarkably to their minds, as though they were spoken to
   them, yea a great multitude of such texts following one another in a
   wonderful manner; and yet all this be no argument that these affections
   are divine, or that they are any other than the effects, of Satan's
   delusions.

   I would further observe, that persons may have raised and joyful
   affections, which may come with the word of God, and not only so, but
   from the word, and those affections not be from Satan, nor yet properly
   from the corruptions of their own hearts, but from some influence of
   the Spirit of God with the word, and yet have nothing of the nature of
   true and saving religion in them. Thus the stony-ground hearers had
   great joy from the word, yea, arising from the word, as growth from a
   seed; and their affections had, in their appearance, a very great and
   exact resemblance with those represented by the growth on the good
   ground--the difference not appearing, until it was discovered by the
   consequences in a time of trial--and yet there was no saving religion
   in these affections. [439]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [439] Mr Stoddard, in his Guide to Christ, speaks of it as a common
   thing, for persons while in a natural condition, and before they have
   ever truly accepted of Christ, to have scripture promises come to them,
   with a great deal of refreshing, which they take as tokens of God' s
   love, and hope that God has accepted them; and so are confident of
   their good estate, page 8, 9. Impression anno 1735.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   It is no evidence that religious affections are saving, or that they
   are otherwise, that there is an appearance of love in them,

   There are no professing Christians who pretend, that this is an
   argument against the truth and saving nature of religious affections.
   But on the other hand, there are some who suppose, it is a good
   evidence that affections are from the sanctifying and saving influences
   of the Holy Ghost. Their argument is, that Satan cannot love; this
   affection being directly contrary to the devil, whose very nature is
   enmity and malice. And it is true, that nothing is more excellent,
   heavenly, and divine, than a spirit of true christian love to God and
   men: it is more excellent than knowledge, or prophecy, or miracles, or
   speaking with the tongue of men and angels It is the chief of the
   graces of God's Spirit, and the life, essence, and sum of all true
   religion; and that by which we are most conformed to heaven, and most
   contrary to hell and the devil. But yet it is ill arguing from hence,
   that there are no counterfeits of it. It may be observed, that the more
   excellent any thing is, the more will be the counterfeits of it. Thus
   there are many more counterfeits of silver and gold, than of iron and
   copper: there are many false diamonds and rubies, but who goes about to
   counterfeit common stones? Though the more excellent things are, the
   more difficult it is to make any thing like them, in their essential
   nature and internal virtue; yet the more manifold will the counterfeits
   be, and the more will art and subtlety be exercised and displayed, in
   an exact imitation of the outward appearance Thus there is the greatest
   danger of being cheated in buying medicines that are most excellent and
   sovereign, though it be most difficult to imitate them, with any thing
   of the like value and virtue, and their counterfeits are good for
   nothing when we have them. So it is with christian virtues and graces;
   the subtlety of Satan, and men's deceitful hearts, are wont chiefly to
   be exercised in counterfeiting those that are in highest repute. So
   there are perhaps no graces that have more counterfeits than love and
   humility; these being virtues wherein the beauty of a true Christian
   especially appears.

   But with respect to love, it is plain by the Scripture, that persons
   may have a kind of religious love, and yet have no saving grace Christ
   speaks of many professing Christians whose love will not continue, and
   so shall fail of salvation, Matt. xxiv. 12, 13. "And because iniquity
   shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure
   unto the end, the same shall be saved." Which latter words plainly
   show, that those spoken of before, whose love shall not endure to the
   end, but wax cold, should not be saved. Persons may seem to have love
   to God and Christ, yea, to have very strong and violent affections of
   this nature, and yet have no grace. This was evidently the case with
   many graceless Jews, such as cried Jesus up so high, following him day
   and night, without meat, drink, or sleep; such as said, Lord, I will
   follow thee whithersoever thou goest, and cried, Hosanna to the son of
   David. [440] --The apostle seems to intimate, that there were many in
   his days, who had a counterfeit love to Christ, in Eph. vi. 24. "Grace
   be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity." The
   last word, in the original, signifies in incorruption; which shows,
   that the apostle was sensible there were many who had a kind of love to
   Christ, which was not pure and spiritual.

   So also christian love to the people of God may be counterfeited. It is
   evident by the Scripture, that there may be strong affections of this
   kind, without saving grace; as there were in the Galatians towards the
   apostle Paul, when they were ready to pluck out their eyes and give
   them to him; although the apostle expresses his fear that their
   affections were come to nothing, and that he had bestowed upon them
   labour in vain. Gal. iv. 11, 15.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [440] Agreeable to this Mr Stoddard observes, in his Guide to Christ
   that some sinners have pangs of affection, and give an account that
   they find a spirit of love to God, and of their aiming at the glory of
   God, having that which as a great resemblance of saving grace and that
   sometimes their common affections are stronger than saving. And
   supposes that sometimes natural men may have such violent pangs of
   false affection to God, that they may think themselves willing to be
   damned. Page 21, and 65.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Persons having religious affections of many kinds, accompanying one
   another, is not sufficient to determine whether they have any gracious
   affections or no.

   Though false religion is wont to be maimed and monstrous, and not to
   have that entireness and symmetry of parts, which is to be seen in true
   religion; yet there may be a great variety of false affections
   together, that may resemble gracious affections.

   It is evident that there are counterfeits of all kinds of gracious
   affections; as of love to God, and love to the brethren, as just now
   observed; so of godly sorrow for sin, as in Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and
   the children of Israel in the wilderness; [441] and of the fear of God,
   as in the Samaritans, who feared the Lord, and served their own gods at
   the same time, (2 Kings xvii. 32, 33. ) and those enemies of God we
   read of, Psal. lxvi. 3. who through the greatness of God's power,
   submit themselves to him, or, as it is in the Hebrew, lie unto him, i.
   e. yield a counterfeit reverence and submission: so of gracious
   gratitude, as in the children of Israel, who sang God's praise at the
   Red sea, (Psal. cvi. 12.) and Naaman, the Syrian, after his miraculous
   cure of his leprosy, (2 Kings v. 15,. &c.)

   So of spiritual joy, as in the stony-ground hearers, (Matt. xiii. 20.)
   and particularly many of John the Baptist's hearers, (John v. 35.) So
   of zeal, as in Jehu, (2 Kings x. 6.) and in Paul before his conversion,
   (Gal. i. 14. Phil. iii. 6.) and the unbelieving Jews, (Acts xxii. 3.
   Rom. x. 2.) So graceless persons may have earnest religious desires,
   which may be like Balaam's desires, which he expresses under an
   extraordinary view of the happy state of God's people, as distinguished
   from all the rest of the world, (Num. xxiii. 9, 10.) They may also have
   a strong hope of eternal life, as the Pharisees had.

   And as men, while in a state of nature, are capable of a resemblance of
   all kinds of religious affection, so nothing hinders but that they may
   have many of them together. And what appears in fact, abundantly
   evinces that it is thus very often. Commonly, when false affections are
   raised high, many of them attend each other. The multitude that
   attended Christ into Jerusalem, after that great miracle of raising
   Lazarus, seem to be moved with many religious affections at once, and
   all in a high degree. They seem to be filled with admiration; and there
   was a show of high affection of love; also a great degree of reverence,
   in their laying their garments on the ground for Christ to tread upon.
   They express great gratitude to him, for the great and good works he
   had wrought, praising him with loud voices for his salvation; and
   earnest desires of the coming of God's kingdom, which they supposed
   Jesus was now about to set up; and they showed great hopes and raised
   expectations of it, expecting it would immediately appear. Hence they
   were filled with joy, by which they were so animated in their
   acclamations, as to make the whole city ring again with the noise of
   them; and they appeared great in their zeal and forwardness to attend
   Jesus, and assist him without further delay, now in the time of the
   great feast of the passover, to set up his kingdom.

   It is easy from the nature of the affections, to give an account why,
   when one affection is raised very high, that it should excite others;
   especially if the affection which is raised high, be that of
   counterfeit love, as it was in the multitude who cried Hosanna. This
   will naturally draw many other affections after it. For, as was
   observed before, love is the chief of the affections, and as it were,
   the fountain of them. Let us suppose a person, who has been for some
   time in great exercise and terror through fear of hell; his heart
   weakened with distress and dreadful apprehensions, upon the brink of
   despair; and who is all at once delivered, by being firmly made to
   believe, through some delusion of Satan, that God has pardoned him, and
   accepts him as the object of his dear love, and promises him eternal
   life. Suppose also, that this is done through some vision, or strong
   imagination suddenly excited in him, of a person with a beautiful
   countenance smiling on him--with arms open, and with blood dropping
   down--which the person conceives to be Christ, without any other
   enlightening of the understanding to give a view of the spiritual,
   divine excellency of Christ and his fulness, and of the way of
   salvation revealed in the gospel. Or, suppose some voice or words
   coming as if they were spoken to him, such as these, "Son, be of good
   cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee;" or, "Fear not, it is the Father's
   good pleasure to give you the kingdom," which he takes to be
   immediately spoken by God to him, though there was no preceding
   acceptance of Christ, or closing of the heart with him: I say, if we
   should suppose such a case, what various passions would naturally crowd
   at once, or one after another, into such a person's mind! It is easy to
   be accounted for, from the mere principles of nature, that a person's
   heart, on such an occasion, should be raised up to the skies with
   transports of joy, and be filled with fervent affection to that
   imaginary God or Redeemer, who, he supposes, has thus rescued him from
   the jaws of such dreadful destruction, and received him with such
   endearment, as a peculiar favourite. Is it any wonder that now he
   should be filled with admiration and gratitude, his mouth should be
   opened, and be full of talk about what he has experienced? That, for a
   while, he should think and speak of scarce any thing else, should seem
   to magnify that God who has done so much for him, call upon others to
   rejoice with him, appear with a cheerful countenance, and talk with a
   loud voice? That however, before his deliverance, he was full of
   quarrellings against the justice of God, now it should be easy for him
   to submit to God, own his unworthiness, cry out against himself, appear
   to be very humble before God, and he at his feet as tame as a lamb; now
   confessing his unworthiness, and crying out, Why me? why me? Thus Saul,
   who, when Samuel told him that God had appointed him to be king, makes
   answer, "Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel,
   and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin?
   wherefore then speakest thou so to me?" [442] Much in the language of
   David, the true saint, 2 Sam. vii. 18. "Who am I, and what is my
   father's house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?" Is it to be
   wondered at, that now he should delight to be with them who acknowledge
   and applaud his happy circumstances, and that he should love all such
   as esteem and admire him and what he has experienced? That he should
   have violent zeal against all who make nothing of such things, be
   disposed openly to separate, and as it were to proclaim war with all
   who are not of his party? That he should now glory in his sufferings,
   and be very much for condemning and censuring all who seem to doubt, or
   make any difficulty of these things? And, while the warmth of his
   affections last, that he should be mighty forward to take pains, and to
   deny himself, and to promote the interest of a party favouring such
   things? Or that he should seem earnestly desirous to increase the
   number of them, as the Pharisees compassed sea and land to make one
   proselyte? [443] I might mention many other things, which will
   naturally arise in such circumstances. He must have but slightly
   considered human nature, who thinks that such things as these cannot
   arise in this manner, without any supernatural interposition of divine
   power.

   As from true divine love flow all Christian affections, so from
   counterfeit love naturally flow other false affections. In both cases,
   love is the fountain, and the other affections are the streams. The
   various faculties, principles, and affections of the human nature, are
   as it were many channels from one fountain. If there be sweet water in
   the fountain, sweet water will flow out into those various channels;
   but if the water in the fountain be poisonous, then poisonous streams
   will also flow into all those channels. So that the channels and
   streams will be alike, corresponding one with another; but the great
   difference will he in the nature of the water. Or man's nature may be
   compared to a tree with many branches, coming from one root: if the sap
   in the root be good, there will also be good sap distributed throughout
   the branches, and the fruit brought forth will be good and wholesome;
   but if the sap in the root and stock be poisonous, so it will be in
   many branches, and the fruit will be deadly. The tree in both cases may
   be alike; there may be an exact resemblance in shape; but the
   difference is found only in eating the fruit. It is thus, in some
   measure at least, oftentimes between saints and hypocrites. There is
   sometimes a very great similitude between true and false experiences in
   their appearance, and in what is expressed by the subjects of them; the
   difference between them is much like the difference between the dreams
   of Pharaoh's chief butler and baker. They seemed to be much alike,
   insomuch that when Joseph interpreted the chief butler's dream, that he
   should be delivered from his imprisonment, and restored to the king's
   favour, and his honourable office in the palace, the chief baker had
   raised hopes and expectations, and told his dream also. But he was
   wofully disappointed; for though his dream was so much like the happy
   and well-boding dream of his companion, yet it was quite contrary in
   its issue.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [441] Exod. ix. 27. 1 Sam. xxiv. 16, 17. and xxvi. 21. 1 Kings xxi. 27.
   Num. xiv. 39, 40.

   [442] 1 Sam. ix. 21.

   [443] "Associating with godly men does not prove that a man has grace:
   Ahithopbel was David's companion. Sorrows for the afflictions of the
   church, and desires for the conversion of souls, do not prove it. These
   things may be found in carnal men. and so can be no evidences of
   grace." Stoddard's Nature of Saving Conversion, p. 82.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   Nothing can certainly be determined concerning the nature of the
   affections, that comforts and joys seem to follow in a certain order.

   Many persons seem to be prejudiced against affections and experiences
   that come in such a method as has been much insisted on by many
   divines; first, such awakenings, fears, and awful apprehensions,
   followed with such legal humblings, in a sense of total sinfulness and
   helplessness, and then, such and such light and comfort. They look upon
   all such schemes, laying down such methods and steps, to be of men's
   devising: and particularly if high affections of joy follow great
   distress and terror, it is made by many an argument against those
   affections. But such prejudices and objections are without reason or
   Scripture. Surely it cannot be unreasonable to suppose, that before God
   delivers persons from a state of sin and exposedness to eternal
   destruction, he should give them some considerable sense of the evil
   from which he delivers; that they may be delivered sensibly, and
   understand their own salvation, and know something of what God does for
   them. As men that are saved are in two exceeding different states,
   first a state of condemnation, and then in a state of justification and
   blessedness; and as God, in the work of salvation, deals with them
   suitably to their intelligent nature; so it seems reasonable, and
   agreeable to God's wisdom, that men who are saved, should be in these
   two states sensibly; that they should be first sensible of their
   absolute extreme necessity, and afterwards of Christ's sufficiency and
   God's mercy through him.

   And that it is God's manner of dealing with men, to lead them into a
   wilderness, before he speaks comfortably to them, and so to order it,
   that they shall be brought into distress, and made to see their own
   helplessness, and absolute dependence on his power and grace, before he
   appears to work any great deliverance for them, is abundantly manifest
   by the Scripture. Then is God wont to repent himself for his professing
   people, when their strength is gone, and there is none shut up or left:
   and when they are brought to see that their false gods cannot help
   them, and that the rock in whom they trusted is vain, Deut. xxxii. 36,
   37. Before God delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt, they were
   prepared for it, by being made to see that they were in an evil case,
   and to cry unto God, because, of their hard bondage, Exod. ii. 23. and
   v. 19. And before God wrought that great deliverance for them at the
   Red sea, they were brought into great distress, the wilderness had shut
   them in, they could not turn to the right hand nor the left. The Red
   sea was before them, the great Egyptian host behind, and they were
   brought to see that they could do nothing to help themselves, and that
   if God did not help them, they should be immediately swallowed up. Then
   God appeared, and turned their cries into songs. So before they were
   brought to their rest, and to enjoy the milk and honey of Canaan, God
   "led them through a great and terrible wilderness, that he might humble
   them, and teach them what was in their heart, and so do them good in
   their latter end,". Deut. viii. 2, 16. The woman that had the issue of
   blood twelve years, was not delivered, until she had first spent all
   her living on earthly physicians, and could not be healed of any, and
   so was left helpless, having no more money to spend. Then she came to
   the great Physician, without money or price, and was healed by him,
   Luke viii. 43, 44. Before Christ would answer the request of the woman
   of Canaan, he first seemed utterly to deny her, and humbled her, and
   brought her to own herself worthy to be called a dog; and then he
   showed her mercy, and received her as a dear child, Matt. xv. 22,. &c.
   The apostle Paul, before a remarkable deliverance, was "pressed out of
   measure above strength, insomuch that he despaired even of life; but
   had the sentence of death in himself, that he might not trust in
   himself, but in God that raiseth the dead,". 2 Cor. i. 8, 9, 10. There
   was first a great tempest, and the ship was covered with the waves, and
   just ready to sink, and the disciples were brought to cry to Jesus,
   Lord, save us, we perish; then the winds and seas were rebuked, and
   there was a great calm, Matt. viii. 24-26. The leper, before he was
   cleansed, must have his mouth stopped, by a covering on his upper lip,
   and was to acknowledge his great misery and utter uncleanness, by
   rending his clothes, and crying, Unclean, unclean, Lev. xiii. 45. And
   backsliding Israel, before God heals them, are brought to "acknowledge
   that they have sinned, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord; to
   see that they lie down in their shame, and that confusion covers them;
   that in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the
   multitude of mountains," and that God only can save them, .Jer. iii.
   23, 24, 25. Joseph, who was sold by his brethren, and therein was a
   type of Christ, brings his brethren into great perplexity and distress,
   to reflect on their sin, and to say, we are verily guilty, and at last
   to resign up themselves entirely into his hands for bondmen. Then he
   reveals himself to them, as their brother and their saviour.

   If we consider those extraordinary manifestations which God made of
   himself to saints of old, we shall find that he commonly first
   manifested himself in a way which was terrible, and then by those
   things that were comfortable. So it was with Abraham; first, a horror
   of great darkness fell upon him, and then God revealed himself to him
   in sweet promises, Gen. xv. 12, 13. So it was with Moses at mount
   Sinai; first, God appeared to him in all the terrors of his dreadful
   majesty, so that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake; and then he
   made all his goodness to pass before him, and proclaimed his name, The
   Lord God gracious and merciful, &c. So it was with Elijah; first, there
   is a stormy wind, and earthquake, and devouring fire, and then a still,
   small, sweet voice, 1 Kings xix. So it was with Daniel; he first saw
   Christ's countenance as lightning, that terrified him, and caused him
   to feint away; and then he is strengthened and refreshed with such
   comfortable words as these, "O Daniel, a man greatly beloved," Dan. x.
   So it was with the apostle John, Rev. i. There is an analogy observable
   in God's dispensations and deliverances which he works for his people,
   and the manifestation which he makes of himself to them, both ordinary
   and extraordinary.

   But there are many things in Scripture which more directly show, that
   this is God's ordinary manner in working salvation for the souls of
   men; and in the manifestations he makes of himself and of his mercy in
   Christ, in the ordinary works of his grace on the hearts of sinners.
   The servant that owed his prince ten thousand talents, is first held to
   his debt. The king pronounces sentence of condemnation upon him, and
   commands him to be sold, and his wife and children, that payment be
   made. Thus he humbles him, and brings him to own the whole debt to be
   just; and then forgives him all. The prodigal son spends all he has, is
   brought to see himself in extreme circumstances, to humble himself, and
   own his unworthiness, before he is relieved and feasted by his father,
   Luke xv. Old inveterate wounds must be searched to the bottom, in order
   to healing: and to this the Scripture compares sin, the wound of the
   soul, and speaks of healing this wound without thus searching it, as
   vain and deceitful, Jer. viii. 11. Christ, in the work of his grace on
   the hearts of men, is compared to rain on the mown grass, grass that is
   cut down with a scythe, Psal. lxxii. 6. representing his refreshing,
   comforting influences on the wounded spirit. Our first parents, after
   they had sinned, were first terrified with God's majesty and justice,
   and had their sin, with its aggravations, set before them by their
   Judge, before they were relieved by the promise of the seed of the
   woman. Christians are spoken of as those "that have fled for refuge, to
   lay hold on the hope set before them,". Heb. vi. 18. which
   representation implies great fear, and sense of danger preceding. To
   the like purpose, Christ is called "a hiding-place from the wind, and a
   covert from the tempest, and as rivers of water in a dry place, and as
   the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, Isa. xxxii. And it seems to
   be the natural import of the word gospel, glad tidings, that it is news
   of deliverance and salvation, after great fear and distress. There is
   all reason to suppose, that God deals with particular believers, as he
   dealt with his church, which he first made to hear his voice in the
   law, with terrible thunders and lightnings, and kept her under that
   schoolmaster, to prepare her for Christ; and then comforted her with
   the joyful sound of the gospel from mount Sion. So likewise John the
   Baptist came to prepare the way for Christ, and prepare men's hearts
   for his reception, by showing them their sins, and by bringing the
   self-righteous Jews off from their own righteousness, telling them that
   they were a generation of vipers, and showing them their danger of the
   wrath to come, telling them that the axe was laid at the root of the
   trees, &c.

   If it be indeed God's manner, (and I think the foregoing considerations
   show that it undoubtedly is,) before he gives men the comfort of a
   deliverance from their sin and misery, to give them a considerable
   sense of the greatness and dreadfulness of those evils, and their
   extreme wretchedness by reason of them; surely it is not unreasonable
   to suppose, that persons, at least oftentimes, while under these views,
   should have great distresses and terrible apprehensions of mind. For
   let it be considered what these evils are, of which they have a view;
   viz. great and manifold sins, against the infinite majesty of the great
   jehovah, and the suffering of the fierceness of his wrath to all
   eternity. And we have many plain instances in Scripture, of persons
   that have actually been brought into extreme distress by such
   convictions, before they have received saving consolations: as the
   multitude at Jerusalem, who were Acts ii. 37. "pricked in their heart,
   and said unto Peter, and the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren,
   what shall we do?" The apostle Paul trembled, and was astonished,
   before he was comforted; and the jailor "called for a light, sprang in,
   and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and said,
   Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" [444]

   From these things it appears to be very unreasonable in professing
   Christians, to make this an objection against the truth and spiritual
   nature of their comfortable and joyful affections, viz. that they
   follow such awful apprehensions and distresses as have been mentioned.

   On the other hand, it is no evidence that comforts and joys are right,
   because they succeed great terrors, and amazing fears of hell. [445]
   This seems to be what some persons lay great weight upon; esteeming
   great terrors an evidence of a great work of the law wrought on the
   heart, well preparing the way for solid comfort: not considering that
   terror, and a conviction of conscience, are different things. For
   though convictions of conscience often cause terror; yet they do not
   consist in it; and terrors often arise from other causes. Convictions
   of conscience, through the influences of God's Spirit, consist in
   conviction of sinfulness in heart and practice, and of the dreadfulness
   of sin, as committed against a God of terrible majesty, infinite
   holiness and hatred of sin, and strict justice in punishing of it. But
   some persons have frightful apprehensions of hell--a dreadful pit ready
   to swallow them up, flames just ready to lay hold of them, and devils
   all around ready to seize them--who at the same time seem to have very
   little proper light of conscience, really convincing them of their
   sinfulness of heart and life. The devil, if permitted, can terrify men
   as well as the Spirit of God. It is a work natural to him, and he has
   many ways of doing it in a manner tending to no good. He may
   exceedingly affright persons by impressing on them many external images
   and doleful ideas; as of a countenance frowning, a sword drawn, black
   clouds of vengeance, words of an awful doom pronounced, [446] hell
   gaping, devils coming, and the like--not in order to convince persons
   of things that are true, and revealed in the word of God, but--to lead
   them to vain and groundless determinations; as that their day is past,
   that they are reprobated, that God is implacable, that he has come to a
   resolution immediately to cut them off, &c.

   And the terrors of some persons are very much owing to their particular
   constitution and temper. Nothing is more manifest, than that some
   persons are of such a temper and frame, that their imaginations are
   strongly impressed with every thing they are affected with; and the
   impression on the imagination re-acts on the affection, and raises that
   still higher. Affection and imagination act reciprocally one on
   another, till their affection is raised to a vast height; so the person
   is swallowed up, and loses all possession of himself. [447]

   Some speak of a great sight they have of their wickedness, who really,
   when the matter comes to be well examined, are found to have little or
   no convictions of conscience. They speak of a dreadful hard heart, and
   how it lies like a stone; when truly they have none of those things in
   their minds or thoughts, wherein the hardness of their heart really
   consists. They speak of a dreadful load and sink of sin, a heap of
   black and loathsome filthiness within them; when, if the matter be
   carefully inquired into, they have not in view any thing wherein the
   corruption of nature does truly consist. Nor have they any thought of
   particular things wherein their hearts are sinfully defective, or fall
   short of what ought to be in them. And many think they have great
   convictions of their actual sins, who truly have none. They tell you
   that their sins are set in order before them, they see them stand
   encompassing them round, with a frightful appearance; when really they
   are not affected with the aggravations of any one of their sins.

   And if persons have had great terrors which really have been from the
   awakening and convincing influences of the Spirit of God, it doth not
   thence follow that their terrors must needs issue in true comfort. The
   unmodified corruption of the heart may quench the Spirit of God, (after
   he has been striving,) by leading men to presumptuous and self-exalting
   hopes and joys, as well as otherwise. It is not every woman who is
   really in travail, that brings forth a real child; but it may be a
   monstrous production, without the form or properties of human nature.
   Pharaoh's chief baker, after he had lain in the dungeon with Joseph,
   had a vision that raised his hopes, and he was lifted up out of the
   dungeon, as well as the chief butler; but it was to be hanged.

   But if comforts and joys not only come after great terrors and
   awakenings, but with an appearance of such preparatory convictions and
   humiliations, and brought about very distinctly, by such steps, and in
   such a method, as has frequently been observable in true converts; this
   is no certain sign that the light and comforts which follow are true
   and saving; for these following reasons:

   First, As the devil can counterfeit all the saving operations and
   graces of the Spirit of God, so he can counterfeit those operations
   that are preparatory to grace. If Satan can counterfeit those effects
   of God's Spirit which are special, divine, and sanctifying; so that
   there shall be a very great resemblance, in all that can be observed by
   others; much more easily may he imitate those works of God's Spirit
   which are common, and of which men, while they are yet his own
   children, are the subjects. These works are in no wise so much above
   him as the other. There are no works of God that are so high and
   divine, above the powers of nature, and out of the reach of the power
   of all creatures, as those works of his Spirit whereby he forms the
   creature in his own image, and makes it to be a partaker of the divine
   nature. But if the devil can be the author of such resemblances of
   these as have been spoken of, without doubt he may of those that are of
   an infinitely inferior kind. And it is abundantly evident in fact, that
   there are false humiliations, and false submissions, as well as false
   comforts. [448] How far was Saul brought, though a very wicked man, and
   of a haughty spirit, when he (though a great king) was brought, in
   conviction of his sin, all in tears, weeping aloud, before David his
   own subject--one whom he had for a long time mortally hated, and openly
   treated as an enemy--crying out, "Thou art more righteous than I: for
   thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil!" [449]
   And at another time, "I have sinned, I have played the fool, I have
   erred exceedingly,". 1 Sam. xxiv. 16, 17. and chap. xxvi. 21. And yet
   Saul seems then to have had very little of the influences of the Spirit
   of God, it being after God's Spirit had departed from him, and an evil
   spirit from the Lord troubled him. And if this proud monarch, in a pang
   of affection, was brought to humble himself so low, before a subject
   that he hated; there doubtless may be appearances of great conviction
   and humiliation in men, before God, while they yet remain enemies to
   him, and though they finally continue so. There is oftentimes in men,
   who are terrified through fears of hell, a great appearance of their
   being brought off from their own righteousness, when they are not
   brought off from it in all ways. They have only exchanged some ways of
   trusting in their own righteousness, for others that are more secret
   and subtle. Oftentimes a great degree of discouragement, as to many
   things they used to depend upon, is taken for humiliation: and that is
   called a submission to God, which is no absolute submission, but has
   some secret bargain in it, that it is hard to discover.

   Secondly, If the operations and effects of the Spirit of God, in the
   convictions and comforts of true converts, may be sophisticated, then
   the order of them may be imitated. If Satan can imitate the things
   themselves, he may easily put them one after another, in such a certain
   order. If the devil can make A, B, and C, it is as easy for him to put
   A first, and B next, and C next, as to range them in a contrary order.
   The nature of divine things is harder for the devil to imitate, than
   their order. He cannot exactly imitate divine operations in their
   nature, though his counterfeits may be very much like them in external
   appearance; but he can exactly imitate their order. When counterfeits
   are made, there is no divine power needful in order to the placing one
   of them first, and another last. And therefore no order or method of
   operations and experiences, is any certain sign of their divinity. That
   only is to be trusted to, as a certain evidence of grace, which Satan
   cannot do, and which it is impossible should be brought to pass by any
   power short of divine.

   Thirdly, We have no certain rule to determine how far God's own Spirit
   may go in those operations and convictions which in themselves are not
   spiritual and saving. There is no necessary connexion, in the nature of
   things, between any thing that a natural man may experience, while in a
   state of nature, and the saving grace of God's Spirit. And if there be
   no connexion in the nature of things, then there can be no known and
   certain connexion at all, unless it be by divine revelation. But there
   is no revealed certain connexion between a state of salvation, and any
   thing that a natural man can be the subject of, before he believes in
   Christ. God has revealed no certain connexion between salvation and any
   qualifications in men, but only grace and its fruits. And therefore we
   do not find any legal convictions, or comforts following these legal
   convictions, in any certain method or order, ever once mentioned in the
   Scripture, as certain signs of grace, or things peculiar to the saints;
   although we do find gracious operations and effects themselves so
   mentioned thousands of times. Which should be enough with Christians,
   who are willing to have the word of God, rather than their own
   philosophy, and experiences, and conjectures, as their sufficient and
   sure guide in things of this nature.

   Fourthly, Experience confirms that persons seeming to have convictions
   and comforts following one another in such a method and order, as is
   frequently observable in true converts, is no certain sign of grace.
   [450] I appeal to all those ministers in this land, who have had much
   occasion of dealing with souls, in the late extraordinary season,
   whether there have not been many who do not prove well, that have given
   a fair account of their experiences, and have seemed to be converted
   according to rule, i. e. with convictions and affections, succeeding
   distinctly and exactly, in that order and method, which has been
   ordinarily insisted on, as the order of the operations of the Spirit of
   God in conversion.

   But as this distinctness, as to method, is no certain sign that a
   person is converted; so, being without it is no evidence that a person
   is not converted. For, though it might be made evident to a
   demonstration, on scripture principles, that a sinner cannot be brought
   heartily to receive Christ as his Saviour, who is not convinced of his
   sin and misery, his own emptiness and helplessness, and his just desert
   of eternal condemnation--and therefore such convictions must be some
   way implied in what is wrought in his soul--yet nothing proves it to be
   necessary, that all those things which are implied or presupposed in an
   act of faith in Christ, must be plainly and distinctly wrought in the
   soul, in so many successive and separate works of the Spirit, that
   shall be each one manifest, in all who are truly converted. On the
   contrary, (as Mr. Shepard observes,) sometimes the change made in a
   saint, at first work, is like a confused chaos; so that the saints know
   not what to make of it. The manner of the Spirit's proceeding in them
   that are born of the Spirit, is very often exceeding mysterious and
   unsearchable: we, as it were, hear the sound of it, the effect is
   discernible; but no man can tell whence it came, or whither it went.
   And it is oftentimes as difficult to know the way of the Spirit in the
   new birth, as in the first birth: Eccl. xi. 5. "Thou knowest not what
   is the way of the Spirit, or how the bones do grow in the womb of her
   that is with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God, that
   worketh all." The ingenerating of a principle of grace in the soul,
   seems in Scripture to be compared to the conceiving of Christ in the
   womb, Gal. iv. 19. And therefore the church is called Christ's mother,
   Cant. iii. 11. And so is every particular believer, Matt. xii. 49, 50.
   And the conception of Christ in the womb of the blessed virgin, by the
   power of the Holy Ghost, seems to be a designed resemblance of the
   conception of Christ in the soul of a believer, by the power of the
   same Holy Ghost. And we know not what is the way of the Spirit, in the
   heart that conceives this holy child. The new creature may use that
   language in Psal. cxxxix. 14, 15. "I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
   marvellous are thy works, and that my soul knoweth right well. My
   substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret." Concerning
   the generation of Christ, both in his person, and also in the hearts of
   his people it may be said, as in Isa. liii. 8. "Who can declare his
   generation?" We know not the works of God, that worketh all. It is the
   glory of God to conceal a thing, (Prov. xxv. 2.) and to have his path
   as it were in the mighty waters, that his footsteps may not be known:
   and especially in the works of his Spirit on the hearts of men, which
   are the highest and chief of his works. And therefore it is said, Isa.
   xl. 13. "Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his
   counsellor hath taught him?" It is to be feared that some have gone too
   far towards directing the Spirit of the Lord, and marking out his
   footsteps for him, and limiting him to certain steps and methods.
   Experience plainly shows that God's Spirit is unsearchable and
   untraceable, in some of the best of Christians, as to the method of his
   operations in their conversion. Nor does the Spirit of God proceed
   discernibly in the steps of a particular established scheme, one half
   so often as is imagined. A scheme of what is necessary, and according
   to a rule already received and established by common opinion, has a
   vast, though to many a very insensible, influence in forming men's
   notions of the steps and method of their own experiences. I know very
   well what their way is; for I have had much opportunity to observe it.
   Very often, at first, their experiences appear like a confused chaos,
   as Mr. Shepard expresses it: but then, those passages of their
   experience are picked out, that have most of the appearance of such
   particular steps that are insisted on; and these are dwelt upon in the
   thoughts, and from time to time, in the relation they give. These parts
   grow and brighten in their view; and others, being neglected, grow more
   and more obscure. What they have experienced is insensibly strained to
   bring all to an exact conformity to the scheme established. And it
   becomes natural for ministers, who have to deal with and direct them
   while insisting upon distinctness and clearness of method, to do so
   too. But yet there has been so much to be seen of the operations of the
   Spirit of God, of late, that they who have had much to do with souls,
   and are not blinded with a sevenfold vail of prejudice, must know that
   the Spirit is so exceeding various in his manner of operating; that in
   many cases it is impossible to trace him, or find out his way.

   What we have principally to do with, in our inquiries into our own
   state, or the directions we give to others, is the nature of that
   effect which God has brought to pass in the soul. As to the steps which
   the Spirit took to bring that effect to pass, we may leave them to him.
   We are often in Scripture expressly directed to try ourselves by the
   nature of the fruits; but no where by the Spirit's method of producing
   them. [451] Many greatly err in their notions of a clear work of
   conversion; calling that a clear work, where the successive steps of
   influence and method of experience is clear: whereas that indeed is the
   clearest work, (not where the order of doing is clearest, but,) where
   the spiritual and divine nature of the work done, and effect wrought,
   is most clear.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [444] Acts xvi. 29.

   [445] Mr. Shepard speaks of "men's being cast down as low as hell by
   sorrow, and lying under chains, quaking in apprehension of terror to
   come, and then raised up to heaven in joy, not able to live; and yet
   not rent from lust; and such are objects of pity now, and are like to
   be the objects of terror at the great day."-- Parable of the Ten
   Virgins P. i. p. 125.

   [446] "The way of the Spirit's working, when it does convince men, is
   by enlightening natural conscience. The Spirit does not work by giving
   a testimony, but by assisting natural conscience to do its work.
   Natural conscience is the instrument in the hand of God, to accuse,
   condemn, terrify. and to urge to duty. The Spirit of God leads men into
   the consideration of their danger, and makes them to be affected
   therewith, Prov. xx. 27.' The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord,
   searching all the inward parts of the belly.'" Stoddard's Guide to
   Christ, p. 44.

   [447] The famous Mr. Perkins distinguishes between "those sorrows that
   come through convictions of conscience, and melancholic passions
   arising only from mere imaginations, strongly conceived in the brain;
   which he says, usually come on a sudden, like lightning into a house."
   Vol. i. of his works, p. 385.

   [448] The venerable Stoddard observes, "A man may say, that now he can
   justify God however he deals with him, and not be brought off from his
   own righteousness; and that some men do justify God, from a partial
   conviction of the righteousness of their condemnation; conscience takes
   notice of their sinfulness, and tells them that they may be righteously
   damned; as Pharaoh, who justified God, Exod. ix. 27. And they give some
   kind of consent to it, but many times it does not continue, they have
   only a pang upon them, that usually dies away after a little time."
   --Guide to Christ, p. II.

   [449] 1 Sam. xxiv. 17.

   [450] Mr. Stoddard, who had much experience of things of this nature,
   long ago observed, that converted and unconverted men cannot be
   certainly distinguished by the account they give of their experience;
   the same relation of experiences being common to both. And that many
   persons have given a fair account of a work of conversion, that have
   carried well in the eye of the world for several years, but have not
   proved well at last. Appeal to the Learned, p. 75, 76.

   [451] Mr. Shepard, speaking of the soul's closing with Christ, says,
   "As a child cannot tell how his soul comes into it, nor it may be when;
   but afterwards it sees and feels that life; so that he were as bad as a
   beast, that should deny an immortal soul; so here." Parable of the Ten
   Virgins, Part II. p. 171. "If the man do not know the time of his
   conversion, or first closing with Christ; the minister may not draw any
   peremptory conclusion from thence, that he is not godly." Stoddard's
   Guide to Christ, p. 83. " Do not think there is no compunction, or
   sense of sin, wrought in the soul because you cannot so clearly discern
   and feel it; nor the time of the working, and first beginning of it. I
   have known many that have come with their complaints, that they were
   never humbled, they never felt it so; yet there it hath been, and many
   times they have seen it, by the other spectacles, and blessed God for
   it" Shepard's Sound Believer, page 38. The late impression in Boston.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   It is no certain sign that affections have in them the nature of true
   religion, or that they have not, that they dispose persons to spend
   much time in religion, and to be zealously engaged in the external
   duties of worship.

   This has, very unreasonably, of late been looked upon as an argument
   against the religious affections of some, that they spend so much time
   in reading, praying, singing, hearing sermons, and the like. It is
   plain from the Scripture, that it is the tendency of true grace to
   cause persons very much to delight in such religious exercises. True
   grace had this effect on Anna the prophetess; Luke ii. 37. "She
   departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers
   night and day." And grace had this effect upon the primitive Christians
   in Jerusalem; Acts ii. 46, 47. "And they continuing daily with one
   accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat
   their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God." Grace
   made Daniel delight in the duty of prayer, and solemnly to attend it
   three times a day: as it also did David, Psal. lv. 17. "Evening,
   morning, and at noon, will I pray." Grace makes the saints delight in
   singing praises to God: Psal. cxxxv. 3. "Sing praises unto his name,
   for it is pleasant." And cxlvii. 1. "Praise ye the Lord: for it is good
   to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is
   comely." It also causes them to delight to hear the word of God
   preached: it makes the gospel a joyful sound to them, Psal. lxxxix. 15.
   and makes the feet of those who publish these good tidings, to be
   beautiful;Isa. lii. 7. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet
   of him that bringeth good tidings!" &c. It makes them love God's public
   worship; Psal. xxvi. 8. "Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy
   house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth." And Psal. xxvii. 4..
   "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I
   may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
   the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." Psal. lxxxiv. 1,
   2. &c. "How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! my soul
   longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord.--Yea, the
   sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where
   she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and
   my God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still
   praising thee. Blessed is the man in whose heart are the ways of them,
   who passing through the valley of Baca,--go from strength to strength,
   every one of them in Zion appeareth before God. --Ver. 10. "A day in
   thy courts is better than a thousand."

   This is the nature of true grace. But yet, on the other hand, persons
   being disposed to abound and to be zealously engaged in the external
   exercises of religion, and to spend much time in them, is no sure
   evidence of grace; because such a disposition is found in many who have
   no grace. So it was with the Israelites of old, whose services were
   abominable to God; they attended the new moons, and sabbaths, and
   calling of assemblies; and spread forth their hands, and made many
   prayers, Isa. i. 12-15. So it was with the Pharisees; they made long
   prayers, and fasted twice a week. False religion may cause persons to
   be loud and earnest in prayer: Isa. lviii. 4. "Ye shall not fast as ye
   do this day, to cause your voice to be heard on high." That religion
   which is not spiritual and saving, may cause men to delight in
   religious duties and ordinances: Isa. lviii. 2. "Yet they seek me
   daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness,
   and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the
   ordinances of justice: they take delight in approaching to God." It may
   cause them to take delight in hearing the word of God preached; as it
   was with Ezekiel's hearers, Ezek. xxxiii. 31, 32. "And they come unto
   thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and
   they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth
   they show much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness.
   And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a
   pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy
   words, but they do them not." Herod heard John the Baptist gladly, Mark
   vi. 20. and others of his hearers, for a season, rejoiced in his light,
   John v. 35. So the stony-ground hearers heard the word with joy.

   Experience shows, that persons, from false religion, may be abundant in
   the external exercises of religion; yea, to give themselves up to them,
   and devote almost their whole time to them. Formerly, a sort of people
   were very numerous in the Romish church, called recluses, who forsook
   the world, and utterly abandoned the society of mankind. They shut
   themselves up close in a narrow cell, with a vow never to stir out of
   it, nor to see the face of any, (unless that they might be visited in
   case of sickness,) but to spend all their days in the exercises of
   devotion and converse with God. There were also in old time, great
   multitudes called Hermites and Anchorites, who left the world in order
   to spend all their days in lonesome deserts, and to give themselves up
   to religious contemplations and exercises of devotion. Some sorts of
   them had no dwellings, but the caves and vaults of the mountains, and
   no food, but the spontaneous productions of the earth.--I once lived,
   for many months, next door to a Jew, (the houses adjoining one to
   another,) and had much opportunity daily to observe him; who appeared
   to me the devoutest person that ever I saw in my life; great part of
   his time being spent in acts of devotion, at his eastern window, which
   opened next to mine, seeming to be most earnestly engaged, not only in
   the day-time, but sometimes whole nights.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. X.

   Nothing can be certainly known of the nature of religious affections,
   that they much dispose persons with their mouths to praise and glorify
   God.

   This indeed is implied in what has been just now observed, of abounding
   and spending much time in the external exercises of religion, and was
   also hinted before; but because many seem to look upon it as a bright
   evidence of gracious affection, when persons appear greatly disposed to
   praise and magnify God, to have their mouths full of his praises, and
   affectionately to be calling on others to praise and extol him, I
   thought it deserved a more particular consideration.

   No Christian will make it an argument against a person that he seems to
   have such a disposition. Nor can it reasonably be looked upon as an
   evidence for a person, if those things which have been already observed
   and proved be duly considered: viz. that persons, without grace, may
   have high affections towards God and Christ, and that there may be
   counterfeits of all kinds of gracious affection. But it will appear
   more evidently and directly, that this is no certain sign of grace, if
   we consider what instances the Scripture gives us of it in those that
   were graceless. We often have an account of this, in the multitude that
   were present when Christ preached and wrought miracles; Mark ii. 12.
   "And immediately he arose, took up his bed, and went forth before them
   all, insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We
   never saw it on this fashion." So Matt. ix. 8. and Luke v. 26. Also
   Matt. xv. 31. "Insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the
   dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind
   to see: and they glorified the God of Israel." So we are told, that on
   occasion of Christ raising the son of the widow of Nain, Luke vii. 16.
   "There came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying, That a great
   prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people."
   So we read of their glorifying Christ, or speaking exceeding highly of
   him, Luke iv. 15. "And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified
   of all." And how did they praise him with loud voices, crying, "Hosanna
   to the Son of David, Hosanna in the highest; blessed is he that cometh
   in the name of the Lord," a little before he was crucified! And after
   Christ's ascension, when the apostles had healed the impotent man, we
   are told, that all man glorified God for that which was done, Acts iv.
   21. When the Gentiles in Antioch of Pisidia, heard from Paul and
   Barnabas, that God would reject the Jews, and take the Gentiles to be
   his people in their room, they were affected with this goodness of God
   to the Gentiles, and glorified the word of the Lord. Yet, all that did
   so were not true believers; but only a certain elect number of them; as
   is intimated, Acts xiii. 48. "And when the Gentiles heard this, they
   were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were
   ordained to eternal life, believed." Israel, at the Red sea, sang God's
   praise; but soon forgat his works. And the Jews in Ezekiel's time, with
   their mouth showed much love, while their heart went after their
   covetousness. And it is foretold of false professors, and real enemies
   of religion, that they should show a forwardness to glorify God; Isa.
   lxvi. 5. "Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your
   brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said,
   Let the Lord be glorified."

   It is no certain sign that a person is graciously affected, if in the
   midst of hopes and comforts he is greatly affected with God's unmerited
   mercy to him that is so unworthy, and seems greatly to extol and
   magnify free grace. Those that yet remain with unmortified pride and
   enmity against God, may--when they imagine that they have received
   extraordinary kindness from God--deplore their unworthiness, and
   magnify God's undeserved goodness to them. Yet this may arise from no
   other conviction of their ill-deservings, and from no higher principle,
   than Saul had, who--while he remained with unsubdued pride and enmity
   against David--was brought, though a king, to acknowledge his
   unworthiness, and cry out, I have played the fool, I have erred
   exceedingly. And with what great affection and admiration does he
   magnify and extol David's unmerited and unexampled kindness to him, 1
   Sam. xxv. 16-19. and xxvi. 21. Nebuchadnezzar is affected with God's
   dispensations, and praises, extols, and honours the King of heaven; and
   both he, and Darius, in their high affections, call upon all nations to
   praise God, Dan. iii. 28-30. and iv. 1-3. 34, 35, 37. and vi. 25-27.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XI.

   It is no sign that affections are right, or that they are wrong, that
   they make persons exceeding confident.

   It is an argument with some, that persons are deluded if they pretend
   to be assured of their good estate, and to be carried beyond all
   doubting of the favour of God, supposing that there is no such thing to
   be expected, as a full and absolute assurance of hope; unless it be in
   some very extraordinary circumstances; as in the case of martyrdom. But
   this is contrary to the doctrine of protestants, which has been
   maintained by their most celebrated writers against the papists; and
   contrary to the plainest scripture evidence. It is manifest, that it
   was a common thing for the saints of whom we have a particular account
   in Scripture, to be assured. God, in the plainest and most positive
   manner, revealed and testified his special favour to Noah, Abraham,
   Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Daniel, and others. Job often speaks of his
   sincerity and uprightness with the greatest imaginable confidence and
   assurance, often calling God to witness it; and says plainly, "I know
   that my Redeemer liveth, and that I shall see him for myself, and not
   another,". Job xix. 25,. &c. David throughout the book of Psalms,
   speaks without hesitancy, and in the most positive manner, of God as
   his God; glorying in him as his portion and heritage, his rock and
   confidence, his shield, salvation, high tower, and the like. Hezekiah
   appeals to God, as one that knew he had walked before him in truth, and
   with a perfect heart, 2 Kings xx. 3. Jesus Christ, in his dying
   discourse with his eleven disciples, John xiv-xvi. (which was as it
   were Christ's last will and testament to his disciples and to his whole
   church,) often declares his special and everlasting love to them, in
   the plainest and most positive terms; and promises them a future
   participation with him in his glory, in the most absolute manner. And
   he tells them, at the same time, that he does so to this end, that
   their joy might be full; John xv. 11. "These things have I spoken unto
   you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full."
   See also at the conclusion of his whole discourse, chap. xvi. 33.
   "These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace.
   In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have
   overcome the world." Christ was not afraid of speaking too plainly and
   positively to them; he did not desire to hold them in the least
   suspense. And he concluded that last discourse, with a prayer in their
   presence; wherein he speaks positively to his Father of those eleven
   disciples, as having savingly known him, believed in him, and received
   and kept his word. He declares, that they were not of the world; that
   for their sakes he sanctified himself; and that his will was, that they
   should be with him in his glory. And tells his Father, that he spake
   these things in his prayer, to the end, that his joy might be fulfilled
   in them, ver. 13. By these things it is evident, that it is agreeable
   to Christ's designs, that there should be sufficient provision made,
   for his saints to have full assurance of their future glory.

   The apostle Paul, through all his epistles, speaks in an assured
   strain; ever asserting his special relation to Christ, his Lord,
   Master, and Redeemer, with his interest in, and expectation of, the
   future reward. It would be endless to take notice of all places that
   might be enumerated; I shall mention but three or four: Gal. ii. 20.
   "Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
   live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
   me." Phil. i. 21. "For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." 2
   Tim. i. 12. "I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
   able to keep that which 1 have committed unto him against that day." 2
   Tim. iv. 7, 8. "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
   I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
   righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me at
   that day."

   The nature of the covenant of grace, and God's declared ends in the
   appointment and constitution of things in that covenant, plainly show
   it to be God's design to make ample provision for the saints having an
   assured hope of eternal life, while living here upon earth. For so are
   all things ordered in that covenant, that every thing might be made
   sure on God's part. The covenant is ordered in all things and sure: the
   promises are most full, very often repeated, and various ways
   exhibited; there are many witnesses, and many seals; and God has
   confirmed his promises with an oath. God's declared design in all this
   is, that the heirs of the promises might have an undoubting hope, and
   full joy, in an assurance of their future glory. Heb. vi. 17, 18.
   "Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
   the immutability of His counsel, confirmed it by an oath: that by two
   immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
   have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon
   the hope set before us." But all this would be in vain, for any such
   purpose as the saints' strong consolation, and their hope of obtaining
   future glory, if their interest in those sure promises in ordinary
   cases were not attainable. For God's promises and oaths, let them be as
   sure as they will, cannot give strong hope and comfort to any
   particular person, any further than he can know that those promises are
   made to him. And in vain is provision made in Jesus Christ, that
   believers might be perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, Heb. ix.
   9. if assurance of freedom from the guilt of sin is not attainable.

   It further appears, that assurance is attainable in ordinary cases, in
   that all Christians are directed to give all diligence to make their
   calling and election sure, and are told now they may do it, 2 Pet. i.
   5-8. And it is spoken of as a thing very unbecoming Christians, and an
   argument of something very blamable in them, not to know whether Christ
   be in them or no, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. "Know ye not your ownselves, how that
   Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?" And it is implied,
   that it is a very blamable negligence in Christians, if they practise
   Christianity after such a manner as to remain uncertain of the reward,
   1 Cor. ix. 26. "I therefore so run, as not uncertainly." And, to add no
   more, it is manifest, that Christians knowing their interest in the
   saving benefits of Christianity, is a thing ordinarily attainable,
   because the apostles tell us by what means Christians (and not only
   apostles and martyrs) were wont to know this; 1 Cor. ii. 12. "Now we
   have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of
   God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God."
   And 1 John ii. 3. "And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep
   his commandments." And ver. 5. "Hereby know we that we are in him."
   Chap. iii. 14. "We know that we have passed from death unto life,
   because we love the brethren." Verse 19. "Hereby we know that we are of
   the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him." Verse 24. "Hereby
   we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us."
   (So chap. iv. 13. and chap. v. 2, 19.)

   Therefore it must needs be very unreasonable to determine, that persons
   are hypocrites, and their affections wrong, because they seem to be out
   of doubt respecting their own salvation, and their affections seem to
   banish all fears of hell.

   On the other hand, it is no sufficient reason to determine that men are
   saints, and their affections gracious, because they are attended with
   confidence that their state is good, and their affections divine. [452]
   Nothing can be certainly argued from their confidence, how great and
   strong soever it be. A man may boldly call God his Father, and commonly
   speak in the most bold, familiar, and appropriating language in prayer,
   My Father, my dear Redeemer, my sweet Saviour, my beloved, and the
   like. He may use the most confident expressions before men, about the
   goodness of his state; such as, "I know certainly that God is my
   Father: I know so surely as there is a God in heaven, that he is my
   God; I know I shall go to heaven, as well as if I were there; I know
   that God is now manifesting himself to my soul, and is now smiling upon
   me." He may seem to have done for ever with any inquiry or examination
   into his state, as a thing sufficiently known, and out of doubt, and to
   contemn all that so much as intimate that there is reason to doubt
   whether all is right. Yet such things are no signs at all that it is
   indeed what he is confident it is. [453] --Such an over-bearing,
   high-handed, and violent sort of confidence as this, affecting to
   declare itself with a most glaring show in the sight of men, has not
   the countenance of a true christian assurance. It savours more of the
   spirit of the Pharisees, who never doubted but that they were saints,
   the most eminent of saints, and were bold to thank God for the great
   distinction he had made between them and other men. And when Christ
   intimated that they were blind and graceless, they despised the
   suggestion; John ix. 40. "And some of the Pharisees which were with
   him, heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also?" If they
   had more of the spirit of the publican--who, in a sense of his
   exceeding unworthiness, stood afar off, and durst not so much as lift
   up his eyes to heaven, but smote on his breast, condemning himself as a
   sinner--their confidence would have more resembled one who humbly
   trusts and hopes in Christ, and has no confidence in himself.

   If we do but consider what the hearts of natural men are, what
   principles they are under, what blindness and deceit, what
   self-flattery, self-exaltation, and self-confidence reigns there, we
   need not at all wonder that their high opinion of themselves, and
   confidence of their happy circumstances, are as high and strong as
   mountains, and as violent as a tempest. For what should hinder, when
   once conscience is blinded, convictions are killed, false affections
   high, and those forementioned principles let loose? When, moreover,
   these principles are prompted by false joys and comforts, excited by
   some pleasing imaginations impressed by Satan, transforming himself
   into an angel of light?

   When once a hypocrite is thus established in a false hope, he has not
   those things to cause him to call his hope in question, that oftentimes
   are the occasion of doubting to true saints; as, first, he has not that
   cautious spirit, that great sense of the vast importance of a sure
   foundation, and that dread of being deceived. The comforts of the true
   saints increase awakening and caution, and a lively sense how great a
   thing it is to appear before an infinitely holy, just, and omniscient
   Judge. But false comforts put an end to these things, and dreadfully
   stupify the mind. Secondly, The hypocrite has not the knowledge of his
   own blindness, and the deceitfulness of his own heart, and that mean
   opinion of his own understanding, that the true saint has. Those that
   are deluded with false discoveries and affections, are evermore highly
   conceited of their light and understanding. Thirdly, The devil does not
   assault the hope of the hypocrite, as he does the hope of a true saint.
   The devil is a great enemy to a true Christian's hope, not only because
   it tends greatly to his comfort, but also because it is of a holy,
   heavenly nature, greatly tending to promote and cherish grace in the
   heart, and a great incentive to strictness and diligence in the
   Christian life. But he is no enemy to the hope of a hypocrite, which
   above all things establishes his interest in him. A hypocrite may
   retain his hope without opposition, as long as he lives, the devil
   never attempting to disturb it. But there is perhaps no true Christian
   but what has his hope assaulted by him. Satan assaulted Christ himself,
   upon this, whether he were the Son of God or no: and the servant is not
   above his Master, nor the disciple above his Lord. It is enough for the
   disciple, who is most privileged in this world, to be as his Master.
   Fourthly, He who has a false hope, has not that sight of his own
   corruptions which the saint has. A true Christian has ten times so much
   to do with his heart and its corruptions, as a hypocrite. The sins of
   his heart and practice appear to him in their awful blackness; they
   look dreadful: and it often appears a very mysterious thing, that any
   grace can be consistent with such corruption, or should be in such a
   heart. But a false hope hides corruption, covers it all over, and the
   hypocrite looks clean and bright in his own eyes.

   There are two sorts of hypocrites: one such as are deceived with their
   outward morality and external religion; many of whom are professed
   Arminians, in the doctrine of justification: and the other, such as are
   deceived with false discoveries and elevations. These last often cry
   down works and men's own righteousness, and talk much of free grace;
   but at the same time make a righteousness of their discoveries and
   humiliation, and exalt themselves to heaven with them. These two kinds
   of hypocrites Mr. Shepard, in his exposition of the Parable of the Ten
   Virgins, distinguishes by the names of legal and evangelical
   hypocrites; and often speaks of the latter as the worst. And it is
   evident, that the latter are commonly by far the most confident in
   their hope, and are with the most difficulty brought off from it. I
   have scarcely known an instance of such an one that has been
   undeceived. The chief grounds of the confidence of many of them, are
   impulses and supposed revelations, (sometimes with texts of Scripture,
   and sometimes without,) like what many of late have had concerning
   future events. These impulses about their good estate they call the
   witness of the Spirit; entirely misunderstanding the nature of the
   witness of the Spirit, as I shall show hereafter. Those who have had
   visions and impulses about other things, have generally had such things
   as they are desirous and fond of, revealed to them: and no wonder that
   persons who give heed to such things, have the same sort of visions or
   impressions about their own eternal salvation. Why may they not suppose
   a revelation made to them, that their sins are forgiven them, that
   their names are written in the book of life, that they are in high
   favour with God, &c. and especially when they earnestly seek, expect,
   and wait for evidence of their election and salvation this way, as the
   surest and most glorious evidence of it? Neither is it any wonder, that
   when they have such a supposed revelation of their good estate, it
   raises in them the highest degree of confidence of it. It is found by
   abundant experience, that those who are led away by impulses and
   imagined revelations, are extremely confident. They suppose, that the
   great JEHOVAH has declared these and those things to them; and having
   his immediate testimony, a strong confidence is the highest virtue.
   Hence they are bold to say, I know this or that; --I know certainly;--I
   am as sure as that I have a being, and the like: and they despise all
   argument and inquiry into the case. And it is easy to be accounted for,
   that impressions and impulses about that which is so pleasing, so
   suiting their self-love and pride, as their being the dear children of
   God, should make them strongly confident: especially when, with their
   impulses and revelations, they have high affections, which they take to
   be the most eminent exercises of grace. I have known several persons,
   who have had a fond desire of something of a temporal nature, through a
   violent passion that has possessed them; they have earnestly wished it
   should come to pass, and have met with many discouragements in it; but
   at last have had an impression, or supposed revelation, that they
   should obtain what they sought. They have looked upon this as a sure
   promise from the Most High, which has made them most ridiculously
   confident, against all manner of reason to convince them to the
   contrary, and all events working against them. And nothing hinders, but
   that persons who are seeking their salvation may be deceived by the
   like delusive impressions, and be made confident the same way.

   The confidence of many of this sort, whom that Mr. Shepard calls
   evangelical hypocrites, is like the confidence of some mad men, who
   think they are kings: they will maintain it against all manner of
   reason and evidence. And in one sense, it is much more immovable than a
   truly gracious assurance; a true assurance is not upheld, but by the
   soul being kept in a holy frame, and grace maintained in lively
   exercise. If the actings of grace do much decay in the Christian, and
   he falls into a lifeless frame, he loses his assurance: but this
   confidence of hypocrites will not be shaken by sin; they (at least some
   of them) will maintain their boldness in their hope, in the most
   corrupt frames and wicked ways; which is a sure evidence of their
   delusion. [454]

   And here I cannot but observe, that there are certain doctrines often
   preached to the people, which need to be delivered with more caution
   and explanation than they frequently are; for as they are by many
   understood, they tend greatly to establish this delusion and false
   confidence of hypocrites. The doctrines I speak of are those of
   Christians living by faith, not by sight: their giving glory to God, by
   trusting him in the dark; living upon Christ, and not upon experiences;
   not making their good frames the foundation of their faith. These are
   excellent and important doctrines indeed, rightly understood, but
   corrupt and destructive, as many understand them. The Scripture speaks
   of our living or walking by faith, and not by sight, in no other way
   than these, viz. When we are governed by a respect to eternal things,
   which are the objects of faith, and are not seen, and not by a respect
   to temporal things, which are seen; when we believe things revealed,
   that we never saw with bodily eyes; and also exercise faith in the
   promise of future things, without yet seeing or enjoying the things
   promised, or knowing the way how they can be fulfilled. This will be
   easily evident to any one that looks over the Scriptures, which speak
   of faith in opposition to sight. [455] But this doctrine, as it is
   understood by many, is, that Christians ought firmly to believe and
   trust in Christ, without spiritual light; even although they are in a
   dark, dead frame, and for the present, have no spiritual experiences or
   discoveries. It is truly the duty of those who are thus in darkness to
   come out of darkness into light, and to believe. But that they should
   confidently believe and trust, while they yet remain without spiritual
   light or sight, is an antiscriptural and absurd doctrine.

   The Scripture is ignorant of any such faith in Christ of the operation
   of God, that is not founded in a spiritual sight of Christ. That
   believing on Christ, which accompanies a title to everlasting life, is
   a seeing the Son, and believing on him, John vi. 40. True faith in
   Christ is never exercised, any further than persons behold as in a
   glass the glory of the Lord, and have the knowledge of the glory of God
   in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. iii. 18. and iv. 6. They into whose
   minds the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of
   God, does not shine, they believe not, 2 Cor. iv. 4. That faith, which
   is without spiritual light, is not the faith of the children of the
   light and of the day; but the presumption of the children of darkness.
   And therefore to press and urge them to believe, without any spiritual
   light or sight, tends greatly to help forward the delusions of the
   prince of darkness. Men not only cannot exercise faith without some
   spiritual light, but they can exercise faith only just in such
   proportion as they have spiritual light. Men will trust in God no
   further than they know him: and they cannot be in the exercise of faith
   in him, further than they have a sight of his fulness and faithfulness
   in exercise. Nor can they have the exercise of trust in God, any
   further than they are in a gracious frame. They that are in a dead
   carnal frame, doubtless ought to trust in God; because that would be
   the same thing as coming out of their bad frame, and turning to God:
   but to exhort men confidently to trust in God, and so hold up their
   hope and peace, though they are not in a gracious frame, and continue
   still to be so, is the same thing, in effect, as to exhort them
   confidently to trust in God, but not with a gracious trust: and what is
   that but a wicked presumption? It is just as impossible for men to have
   a strong or lively trust in God, when they have no lively exercises of
   grace, or sensible christian experiences, as it is for them to be in
   the lively exercises of grace, without the exercises of grace!

   It is true, that it is the duty of God's people to trust in him when in
   darkness, even though they remain still in darkness, in one sense, viz.
   when the aspects of his providence are dark, and look as though God had
   forsaken them, and did not hear their prayers. Many clouds gather, many
   enemies surround them with a formidable aspect, threatening to swallow
   them up, and all events of providence seem to be against them. All
   circumstances seem to render the promise of God difficult to be
   fulfilled, but he must be trusted out of sight, i. e. when we cannot
   see which way it is possible for him to fulfil his word. Every thing
   but God's mere word makes it look unlikely, so that if persons believe,
   they must hope against hope. Thus the ancient patriarchs, and thus the
   psalmist, Jeremiah, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, and the
   apostle Paul, gave glory to God by trusting him in darkness. We have
   many instances of such a glorious, victorious faith in the eleventh of
   the Hebrews. But how different a thing is this, from trusting in God,
   without spiritual sight, and being at the same time in a dead and
   carnal frame!

   Spiritual light may be let into the soul in one way, when it is not in
   another; and so there is such a thing as the saints trusting in God,
   and also knowing their good estate, when they are destitute of some
   kinds of experience. For instance, they may have clear views of God's
   all-sufficiency and faithfulness, and so may confidently trust in him,
   and know that they are his children; and" yet not have those clear and
   swept ideas of his love, as at other times. Thus it was with Christ
   himself in his last passion. They may also have views of God's
   sovereignty, holiness, and all-sufficiency, enabling them quietly to
   submit to him, and to exercise a sweet and most encouraging hope in his
   fulness, when they are not satisfied of their own good estate. But how
   different things are these, from confidently trusting in God, without
   spiritual light or experience!

   Those who thus insist on persons' living by faith, when they have no
   experience, and are in very bad frames, are also very absurd in their
   notions of faith. What they mean by faith is, believing that they are
   in a good estate. Hence they count it a dreadful sin for them to doubt
   of their state, whatever frames they are in, and whatever wicked things
   they do, because it is the great and heinous sin of unbelief; and he is
   the best man, and puts most honour upon God, that maintains his hope of
   his good estate the most confidently and immovably, when he has the
   least light or experience; that is to say, when he is in the worst
   frame and way; because forsooth, that it is a sign that he is strong in
   faith, giving glory to God, and against hope believes in hope. But from
   what Bible do they learn this notion of faith, that it is a man's
   confidently believing that he is in a good estate? [456] If this be
   faith, the Pharisees had faith in an eminent degree; some of whom
   Christ teaches, committed the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost.
   The Scripture represents faith, as that by which men are brought into a
   good estate; and therefore it cannot be the same thing, as believing
   that they are already in a good estate. To suppose that faith consists
   in persons' believing that they are in a good estate, is in effect the
   same thing, as to suppose that faith consists in a person's believing
   that he has faith, or in believing that he believes!

   Indeed persons' doubting of their good estate, may in several respects
   arise from unbelief. It may be from unbelief, or because they have so
   little faith, that they have so little evidence of their good estate.
   If they had more experience of the actings of faith, and so more
   experience of the exercise of grace, they would have clearer evidence
   that their state was good; and so their doubts would be removed. And
   their doubting of their state may be from unbelief thus, when though
   there be many things that are good evidences of a work of grace in
   them, yet they doubt very much whether they are really in a state of
   favour with God, because it is they, those that are so unworthy, and
   have done so much to provoke God to anger against them. Their doubts in
   such a case arise from unbelief, as they arise from want of a
   sufficient sense of, and reliance on, the infinite riches of God's
   grace, and the sufficiency of Christ for the chief of sinners. They may
   also be from unbelief, when they doubt of their state, because of the
   mystery of God's dealings with them. They are not able to reconcile
   such dispensations with God's favour to them. Some doubt whether they
   have any interest in the promises, because from the aspect of
   providence, they appear so unlikely to be fulfilled; the difficulties
   in the way are so many and great. Such doubting arises from want of
   dependence upon God's almighty power, and his knowledge and wisdom, as
   infinitely above theirs. But yet, in such persons their unbelief, and
   their doubting of their state, are not the same thing; though one
   arises from the other.

   Persons may be greatly to blame for doubting of their state, on such
   grounds as these; and they may be to blame, that they have no more
   grace, and no more of its present exercises, to be an evidence to them
   of the goodness of their state. Men are doubtless to blame for being in
   a dead, carnal frame; but when they are in such a frame, and have no
   sensible experience of the exercises of grace, but on the contrary, are
   very much under the prevalence of their lusts, and an unchristian
   spirit, they are not to blame for doubting of their state. It is as
   impossible, in the nature of things, that a holy and christian hope
   should be kept alive in its clearness and strength, in such
   circumstances, as it is to keep the light in the room, when the candle
   that gives it is put out; or to maintain the bright sunshine in the
   air, when the sun is gone down. Distant experiences, when darkened by
   present prevailing lust and corruption, will never keep alive a
   gracious confidence and assurance. If the one prevail, the other
   sickens and decays upon it. Does any one attempt to nourish and
   strengthen a little child by repeated blows on the head with a hammer?
   Nor is it at all to be lamented, that persons doubt of their state in
   such circumstances; but on the contrary, it is desirable and every way
   best that they should. It is agreeable to that wise and merciful
   constitution of things which God hath established. For so hath God
   constituted things, in his dispensations towards his own people, that
   when their lore decays, and the exercises of it become weak, fear
   should arise. They need fear then to restrain them from sin, to excite
   them to care for the good of their souls, and so to stir them up to
   watchfulness and diligence in religion. But God hath so ordered, that
   when love rises, and is in vigorous exercise, then fear should vanish,
   and be driven away; for then they need it not, having a higher and more
   excellent principle in exercise, to restrain them from sin, and stir
   them up to duty. No other principles will ever make men conscientious,
   but one of these two, fear or love: and therefore, if one of these
   should not prevail as the other decayed, God's people when fallen into
   dead and carnal frames, when love is asleep, would be lamentably
   exposed indeed. Hence, God has wisely ordained, that these two opposite
   principles of love and fear, should rise and fall, like the two
   opposite scales of a balance; when one rises the other sinks. Light and
   darkness unavoidably succeed each other; if light prevail so much does
   darkness cease, and no more; and if light decay, so much does darkness
   prevail. So it is in the heart of a child of God; if divine love decay
   and fall asleep, and lust prevail, the light and joy of hope goes out,
   and dark fear arises; and if, on the contrary, divine love prevail, and
   come into lively exercise, this brings in the brightness of hope, and
   drives away black lust and fear with it Love is the spirit of adoption,
   or the childlike principle, if that slumbers, men fell under fear,
   which is the spirit of bondage, or the servile principle and so on the
   contrary And if love, or the spirit of adoption, be earned to a great
   height, it quite drives away all fear, and gives full assurance, 1 John
   iv. 18. "There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear."
   These two opposite principles of lust and holy love, bring fear or hope
   into the hearts of God's children, just in proportion as they prevail,
   that is, when left to their own natural influence, without something
   adventitious or accidental intervening, as the distemper of melancholy,
   doctrinal ignorance, prejudices of education, wrong instruction, false
   principles, peculiar temptations, &c

   Fear is cast out by the Spirit of God, no other way than by the
   prevailing of love nor is it ever maintained by his Sprint, but when
   love is asleep. At such a time, in vain is all the saint's
   self-examinations, and poring on past experience, in order to establish
   his peace, and get assurance for it is contrary to the nature of
   things, as God hath constituted them, that he should have assurance at
   such a time

   They therefore directly thwart God's wise and gracious constitution of
   things, who exhort others to be confident in their hope, when in dead
   frames, under a notion of living by faith, and not by light, and
   hunting God in the dark, and living upon Christ, and not upon
   experiences, and who warn them not to doubt of their good estate lest
   they should be guilty of the dreadful sin of unbelief. It has a direct
   tendency to establish the most presumptuous hypocrites, and to prevent
   their ever calling their state in question, how much soever wickedness
   rages--reigns in their hearts, and prevails in their lives--under a
   notion of honouring God, by hoping against hope, and confidently
   trusting in God, when things look very dark And, doubtless, vast has
   been the mischief that has been done this way.

   Persons cannot be said to forsake Christ, and live on their
   experiences, merely because they use them as evidences of grace, for
   there are no other evidences that they can take. But then may persons
   be said to live upon their experiences, when they make a righteousness
   of them, and when, instead of keeping their eye on God's glory, and
   Christ's excellency, they turn it on themselves. They entertain their
   minds by viewing their own attainments, their high experiences, and the
   great things they have met with, which are bright and beautiful in
   their own eyes They are rich and increased with goods in their own
   apprehensions, and think that God has as admiring an esteem of them, on
   the same account, as they have of themselves. This is living on
   experiences, and not on Christ, and is more abominable in the sight of
   God, than the gross immoralities of those who make no pretences to
   religion. But this is a far different thing from improving experiences
   as evidences of an interest in a glorious Redeemer.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [452] "O professor, look carefully to your foundation: be not
   high-minded, but fear. You have, it may be, done and suffered many
   things in and for religion; you have excellent gifts and sweet
   comforts; a warm zeal for God, and high confidence of your integrity:
   all this may be right, for ought that I, or (it may be) you know: but
   yet, it is possible it may be false also. You have sometimes judged
   yourselves, and pronounced yourselves upright; but remember your final
   sentence is not yet pronounced by your Judge. And what if God weigh you
   over again, in his more equal balance, and should say, Mene, Tekel,
   Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting? What a
   confounded man wilt thou be, under such a sentence! Quae resplendent in
   conspectu hominis, sordent in conspectu Judicis; Things that are highly
   esteemed of men, are an abomination in the sight of God: he seeth not
   as men seeth. Thy heart may be false, and thou not know it: yea, it may
   be false, and thou strongly confident of its integrity."--Flavel's
   Touchstone of Sincerity, chap. ii. sect. 5. "Some hypocrites are a
   great deal more confident than many saints."-- Stoddard's Discourse on
   the way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy. p. 128.

   [453] "Doth the work of faith in some believers, bear upon its
   top-branches, the full ripe fruits of a blessed assurance? Lo, what
   strong confidence, and high-built persuasions of an interest in God,
   have sometimes been found in unsanctified ones! Yea, so strong may this
   false assurance be, that they dare boldly venture to go to the
   judgment-seat of God, and there defend it Doth the Spirit of God fill
   the heart of the assured believer with joy unshakable, and full of
   glory, giving them, through faith, a prelibation or foretaste of heaven
   itself, in those first-fruits of it? How near to this comes what the
   apostle supposes may be found in apostates!" Flavel's Husbandry
   Spiritualized, chap. xii.

   [454] * Mr. Shepard speaks of it. "as a presumptuous peace, that is not
   interrupted and broke by evil works." And says, that "the spirit will
   sigh, and not sing, in that bosom, whence corrupt dispositions and
   passions break out." And that, "though men in such frames may seem to
   maintain the consolation of the Spirit, and not suspect their
   hypocrisy, under pretence of trusting the Lord's mercy; yet they cannot
   avoid the ' condemnation of the world.'" Parable of the Ten Virgins,
   Part I. p. 139. Dr. Ames speaks of it as a thing, by which the peace of
   a wicked man may be distinguished from the peace of a godly man, "that
   the peace of a wicked man continues, whether be performs the duties of
   piety and righteousness or no; provided those crimes are avoided that
   appear horrid to nature itself." Cases of Conscience, lib. 111. chap.
   vii.

   [455] As 2 Cor. iv. 18. and v. 7. Heb. xi. 1, 8, 13, 17, 27, 29. Rom.
   viii. 24. John xx. 29.

   [456] "Men do not know that they are godly, by believing that they are
   godly. We know many things by faith, Heb. xi. 3. By faith we understand
   that the worlds were made by the word of God. Faith is the evidence of
   things not seen. Heb. xi. 1. Thus men know the Trinity of persons of
   the Godhead; that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that he that believes
   in him will have eternal life: the resurrection of the dead. And if God
   should tell a saint that he has grace, he might know it by believing
   the word of God. But it is not this way, that godly men do know that
   they have grace. It is not revealed in the word, and the Spirit of God
   doth not testify it to particular persons." Stoddards Nature of Saving
   Conversions. p. 83, 84.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT XII.

   Nothing can be certainly concluded concerning the nature of religious
   affections, that the relations persons give of them, are very
   affecting.

   The true saints have not such a spirit of discerning, that they can
   certainly determine who are godly, and who are not. For though they
   know experimentally what true religion is, in the internal exercises of
   it, yet these are what they can neither feel nor see, in the heart of
   another. [457] There is nothing in others, that comes within their
   view, but outward manifestations and appearances, but the Scripture
   plainly intimates, that this way of judging what is in men by outward
   appearances is at best uncertain, and liable to deceit 1 Sam xvi. 7.
   "The Lord seeth not as man seeth, for man looketh on the outward
   appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." Isa xi. 3. "He shall
   not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the
   hearing of his ears." [458] They commonly are but poor judges and
   dangerous counselors in soul cases, who are quick and peremptory in
   determining persons' states, vaunting themselves in their extraordinary
   faculty of discerning and distinguishing, in these great affairs, as
   though all was open and clear to them. They betray one of these three
   things, either that they have had but little experience, or are persons
   of a weak judgment, or that they have a great degree of pride and
   self-confidence, and so ignorance of themselves. Wise and experienced
   men will proceed with great caution in such an affair.

   When there are many probable appearances of piety in others, it is the
   duty of the saints to receive them cordially into their charity, to
   love, and rejoice in them, as their brethren in Christ Jesus. But yet
   the best of men may be deceived, when the appearances seem to them
   exceeding fair and bright, even so as entirely to gain their charity,
   and conquer their hearts. It has been a common thing in the church of
   God, for bright professors, received as eminent among the saints, to
   fall away and come to nothing. [459] And this we need not wonder at, if
   we consider the things already observed, things which may appear in men
   who are altogether graceless. Nothing hinders but that all these things
   may meet together in men, and yet they be without a spark of grace in
   their hearts. They may have religious affections of many kinds
   together, they may have a sort of affection towards God, that bears a
   great resemblance of real love to him. They may have a kind of love to
   the brethren, great appearances of admiration of God's perfections and
   works, sorrow for sin, reverence, submission, self-abasement,
   gratitude, joy, religious longings, and zeal for the interest of
   religion and the good of souls These affections may come after great
   awakenings and convictions of conscience , and there may be great
   appearances of a work of humiliation. Counterfeit love and joy, and
   other affections, may seem to follow one another, just in the same
   order that is commonly observable in the holy affections of true
   converts. And these religious affections may be earned to a great
   height, may cause abundance of tears, yea, may overcome the nature of
   those who are the subjects of them, and may make them affectionate,
   fervent, and fluent in speaking of the things of God, and dispose them
   to be abundant in it. They may have many sweet texts of Scripture, and
   precious promises, brought with great impression on their minds, and
   their affections may dispose them, with their mouths, to praise and
   glorify God in a very ardent manner, and fervently to call upon others
   to praise him, exclaiming against their unworthiness, and extolling
   free grace They may, moreover, dispose them to abound in the external
   duties of religion, such as prayer, hearing the word preached, singing,
   and religious conference, and these things attended with a great
   resemblance of christian assurance in its greatest height, when the
   saints mount on eagles' wings, above all darkness and doubting. I think
   it has been made plain, that there may be all these things, and yet
   nothing more than the common influences of the Sprint of God, joined
   with the delusions of Satan, and a wicked, deceitful heart. To which I
   may add, that all these things may be attended with a sweet natural
   temper, a good doctrinal knowledge of religion, a long acquaintance
   with the saints' way of expressing their affections and experiences,
   and a natural ability and subtlety in accommodating their expressions
   and manner of speaking to the dispositions and notions of the hearers,
   with a taking decency of expression and behaviour, formed by a good
   education. How great therefore may the resemblance be, as to all
   outward expressions and appearances, between a hypocrite and a true
   saint! Doubtless, it is the glorious prerogative of the omniscient God,
   as the great searcher of hearts, to be able well to separate between
   these sheep and goats. And what an indecent self-exaltation and
   arrogance is it, in poor fallible dark mortals, to pretend, that they
   can determine and know, who are really sincere and upright before God,
   and who are not.

   Many seem to lay great weight on that, and to suppose it to be what may
   determine them with respect to others' real piety, when they not only
   tell a plausible story, but when, in giving an account of their
   experiences, they make such a representation, and speak after such a
   manner, that they feel their talk; that is to say, when their talk
   seems to harmonize with their own experience, and their hearts are
   touched, affected, and delighted, by what they hear them say, and drawn
   out by it in dear love to them. But there is not that certainty in such
   things, and that full dependence to be laid upon them which many
   imagine. A true saint greatly delights in holiness; it is a most
   beautiful thing in his eyes; and God's work, in savingly renewing and
   making holy and happy a poor perishing soul, appears to him a most
   glorious work. No wonder, therefore, that his heart is touched, and
   greatly affected, when he hears another give a probable account of this
   work, wrought on his own heart, and when he sees in him probable
   appearances of holiness; whether those pleasing appearances have any
   thing real to answer them, or no. And if he use the same words, which
   are commonly used to express the affections of true saints, and tell of
   many things following one another in an order agreeable to the method
   of another's experience, and also speak freely and boldly, and with an
   air of assurance; no wonder that the other thinks his experiences
   harmonize with his own. And if besides all this, in giving his
   relation, he speak with much affection; and above all, if in speaking
   he show much affection, such affection as the Galatians did to the
   apostle Paul; these things will naturally have a powerful influence to
   affect and draw his hearer's heart, and open wide the doors of his
   charity towards him. David speaks as one who had felt Ahithophel's
   talk, and had once a sweet savour and relish of it. And therefore
   exceeding great was his surprise and disappointment, when he fell; it
   was almost too much for him. Psal. lv. 12-14. "It was not an
   enemy--then I could have borne it;--but it was thou, a man, mine equal,
   my guide, and mine acquaintance: we took sweet counsel together, and
   walked unto the house of God in company."

   It is with professors of religion, especially such as become so in a
   time of an outpouring of the Spirit of God, as it is with the blossoms
   in the spring; [460] there are vast numbers of blossoms upon the trees,
   which all look fair and promising; but yet very many of them never come
   to any thing. Many, in a little time, wither, drop off, and rot under
   the trees. Indeed, for a while, they look as beautiful and gay as
   others; and not only so, but smell sweet, and send forth a pleasant
   odour; so that we cannot certainly distinguish those blossoms which
   have in them that secret virtue which will afterwards appear in the
   fruit. We cannot tell which of them have that inward solidity and
   strength which shall enable them to bear, and cause them to be
   perfected by the hot summer sun that will dry up the others. It is the
   mature fruit, which comes afterwards, and not the beautiful colours and
   smell of the blossom, that we must judge by. So new converts,
   professedly so, in their talk about religious things, may appear fair,
   and be very savoury, and the saints may think they talk feelingly. They
   may relish their talk, and imagine they perceive a divine savour in it;
   and yet all may come to nothing.

   It is strange now hardly men are brought to be contented with the rules
   and directions Christ has given them, but they must needs go by other
   rules of their own inventing that seem to them wiser and better. I know
   of no directions or counsels which Christ ever delivered more plainly,
   than the rules he has given to guide us in our judging of others'
   sincerity; viz. that we should judge of the tree chiefly by the fruit.
   Yet this, it seems, will not do; but other ways are found out, which
   are imagined to be more distinguishing and certain. And woful have been
   the mischievous consequences of this arrogant setting up of men's
   wisdom, above the wisdom of Christ. I believe many saints have gone
   much out of the way of Christ's word, in this respect: and some of them
   have been chastised with whips, and (I had almost said) scorpions, to
   bring them back again. But many things which have lately appeared, and
   do now appear, may convince us, that ordinarily those who have gone
   farthest this way--that have been most highly conceited of their
   faculty of discerning, and have appeared most forward, peremptorily and
   suddenly to determine the state of men's souls--have been hypocrites,
   who have known nothing of true religion. In the parable of the wheat
   and tares, it is said, Matt. xiii. 26 .. "When the blade was sprung up,
   and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also." As though the
   tares were not discerned, nor distinguishable from the wheat, until
   then, as Mr. Flavel observes; [461] who mentions it as an observation
   of Jerome's, that wheat and tares are so much alike, until the blade of
   the wheat comes to bring forth the ear, that it is next to impossible
   to distinguish them. And then, Mr. Flavel adds, "How difficult soever
   it be to discern the difference between wheat and tares; yet doubtless
   the eye of sense can much easier discriminate them, than the most quick
   and piercing eye of man can discern the difference between special and
   common grace. For all saving graces in the saints, have their
   counterfeits in hypocrites; there are similar works in those, which a
   spiritual and very judicious eye may easily mistake for the saving and
   genuine effects of a sanctifying spirit."

   As it is the ear or the fruit which distinguishes the wheat from the
   tares, so this is the true Shibboleth, that he who stands as judge at
   the passages of Jordan, makes use of to distinguish those that shall
   pass over Jordan into the true Canaan, from those that should be slain
   at the passages. For the Hebrew word Shibboleth, signifies an ear of
   corn. And perhaps the more full pronunciation of Jephthah's friends,
   Shibboleth, may represent a full ear with fruit in it, typifying the
   fruits of the friends of Christ, the anti-type of Jephthah; and the
   more lean pronunciation of the Ephraimites, his enemies, may represent
   their empty ears, typifying the show of religion in hypocrites, without
   substance and fruit. This is agreeable to the doctrine we are
   abundantly taught in Scripture, viz. That he who is set to judge those
   that pass through death, whether they have a right to enter into the
   heavenly Canaan or no, or whether they should not be slain, will judge
   every man according to his works.

   We seem to be taught the same things, by the rules given for the
   priest's discerning of the leprosy. In many cases it was impossible for
   the priest to determine whether a man had the leprosy, or whether he
   were clean, by the most narrow inspection of the appearances upon him,
   until he had waited to see what the appearances would come to, and had
   shut up the person who showed himself, one seven days after another;
   and when he judged, he was to determine by the hair, which grew out of
   the spot that was showed him, which was as it were the fruit that it
   brought forth.

   And here, before I finish what I have to say under this head, I would
   say something to a strange notion some have of late been led away with,
   of certainly knowing the good estate that others are in--as though it
   were immediately revealed to them from heaven--by their love flowing
   out to them in an extraordinary manner. They argue thus, that their
   love, being very sensible and great, may be certainly known by them who
   feel it, to be a true christian love: and if it be a true christian
   love, the Spirit of God must be the author of it: and inasmuch as the
   Spirit of God--who knows certainly whether others are the children of
   God or no, and is a Spirit of truth--is pleased, by an uncommon
   influence upon them, to cause their love to flow out, in an
   extraordinary manner, towards such a person, as a child of God; it must
   needs be, that this infallible Spirit, who deceives none, knows that
   that person is a child of God. But such persons might be convinced of
   the falseness of their reasoning, if they would consider whether or no
   it be not their duty, and what God expressly requires of them, to love
   those as the children of God, who they think are the children of God,
   and of whom they have no reason to think otherwise, from all that they
   can see in them, though God, who searches the hearts, knows them not to
   be his children. If it be their duty, then it is good, and the want of
   it sin; and therefore, the Spirit of God may be the author of it.
   Surely, the Spirit of God, without being a spirit of falsehood, may in
   such a case assist a person to do his duty, and keep him from sin. But
   then, they argue from the uncommon degree and special manner, in which
   their love flows out to the person; which they think the Spirit of God
   never would cause, if he did not know the object to be a child of God.
   But then I would ask them, whether or no it is not their duty to love
   all such as they are bound to think are the children of God, from all
   that they can see in them, to a very great degree, though God, from
   other things which he sees, knows them not to be so. It is men's duty
   to love all whom they are bound in charity to look upon as the children
   of God, with a vastly dearer affection than they commonly do. As we
   ought to love Christ to the utmost capacity of our nature, so it is our
   duty to love those who we think are so near and dear to him as his
   members, with an exceeding dear affection, as Christ has loved us; and
   therefore it is sin in us not to love them so. We ought to pray to God
   that he would by his Spirit keep us from sin, and enable us to do our
   duty: and may not his Spirit answer our prayers, and enable us to do
   our duty, in a particular instance, without lying! If he cannot, then
   the Spirit of God is bound not to help his people to do their duty in
   some instances, because he cannot do it without being a spirit of
   falsehood. But surely God is so far a sovereign, that he may enable us
   to do our duty when he pleases, and on what occasion he pleases. When
   persons think others are his children, God may have other ends in
   causing their exceedingly endeared love to flow out to them, besides
   revealing to them whether their opinion of them be right or no. May he
   not have that merciful end in it, to enable them to do their duty, and
   to keep them from that dreadful, infinite evil, sin? And will they say,
   God shall not show them that mercy in such a case? If I am at a
   distance from home, and hear, that in my absence my house is burnt, but
   my family have, in some extraordinary manner, all escaped the flames;
   and every thing in the circumstances of the story, as I hear it, makes
   it appear very credible; would it not be sin in me, in such a case, not
   to feel a very great degree of gratitude to God, though the story in
   fact be not true? And is not God so sovereign, that he may, if he
   please, on that occasion, enable me to do my duty in a much further
   degree than I used to do it, and yet not incur the charge of
   deceitfulness, in confirming a falsehood?

   It is exceeding manifest, that a mistake may be the occasion of a
   gracious exercise, and consequently a gracious influence of the Spirit
   of God, by Rom. xiv. 6. "He that eateth to the Lord, he eateth, and
   giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not to the Lord, he eateth not,
   and giveth God thanks." The apostle is speaking of those who, through
   erroneous and needless scruples, avoided eating legally unclean meats.
   By this it is very evident, that there may be true exercises of grace,
   a true respect to the Lord, and particularly a true thankfulness, which
   may be occasioned by an erroneous judgment and practice. And
   consequently, an error may be the occasion of those truly holy
   exercises that are from the infallible Spirit of God. And if so, it is
   certainly too much for us to determine, to how great a degree the
   Spirit of God may give this holy exercise on such an occasion.

   This notion, of certainly discerning another's state by love flowing
   out, is not only not founded on reason or Scripture, but it is
   anti-scriptural, against the rules of Scripture; which--without saying
   a word of any such way of judging the state of others as this--direct
   us to judge chiefly by the fruits that are seen in them. The doctrines
   of Scripture plainly teach us, that the state of others, towards God,
   cannot be known by us, as in Rev. ii. 17. "To him that overcometh will
   I give to eat of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone,
   and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he
   that receiveth it." And Rom. ii. 29. "He is a Jew, which is one
   inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not
   in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God." By this last
   expression, whose praise is not of men, but of God, the apostle has
   respect to the insufficiency of men to judge concerning him, whether he
   be inwardly a Jew or no. They could easily see by outward marks,
   whether men were outwardly Jews, but it belongs to God alone to give a
   determining voice, respecting their inward state. This is confirmed by
   the same apostle's use of the phrase in 1 Cor. iv. 5. "Therefore judge
   nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
   light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
   counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God."
   The apostle, in the two foregoing verses, says, "But with me it is a
   very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment:
   yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing by myself, yet am I
   not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord." [462] It is
   further confirmed, because the apostle, in this second chapter to the
   Romans, directs his speech especially to those who had a high conceit
   of their own holiness, made their boast of God, were confident of their
   own power of discerning, that they knew God's will, and approved the
   things which were excellent, or tried the things that differ, (as in
   the margin,Rom. v. 18.) "They were confident that they were guides of
   the blind, and a light to them which are in darkness, instructors of
   the foolish, teachers of babes:" and so took upon them to judge others.
   (See ver. 1. and 17-20.)

   And how arrogant must their notion be, who imagine they can certainly
   know others' godliness, when that great apostle Peter pretends not to
   say any more concerning Sylvanus, than that he was a faithful brother,
   as he supposed! 1 Pet. v. 12. Though this Sylvanus appears to have been
   a very eminent minister of Christ, an evangelist, a famous light in
   God's church at that day, and an intimate companion of the apostles.
   (See 2 Cor. i. 19. 1 Thess. i. 1.and 2 Thess. i. 1.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [457] Men may have the knowledge of their own conversion: the knowledge
   that other men have of it is uncertain because no man can look into the
   heart of another and see the workings of grace there Stoddard's Nature
   of Saving Conversion chap. xv. at the beginning.

   [458] Mr Stoddard observes That all viable signs are common to
   converted and unconverted men and a relation of experiences among the
   rest Appeal to the Learned p. 75. "O how hard is it for the eye of man
   to discern betwixt chaff and wheat and how many upright hearts are now
   censured whom God will clear! how many false hearts are now approved
   whom God will condemn! Men ordinarily have no convictive proofs but
   only probable symptoms which at most beget but a conjectural knowledge
   of another's state. And they that shall peremptorily judge either way
   may possibly wrong the generation of the upright or on the other side
   absolve and justify the wicked And truly considering what hath been
   said it is no wonder that dangerous mistakes are so frequently made in
   this matter. Flavel's Husbandry Spiritualized chap. xii.

   [459] ? "Be not offended if you see great cedars fall, stars fall from
   heaven, great professors die and decay: do not think they be all such:
   do not think that the elect shall fall. Truly, some are such that when
   they fall one would think a man truly sanctified might fall away as the
   Arminians think: 1 John ii. 19. They were not of us. I speak this
   because the Lord is shaking: and I look for great apostasies: for God
   is trying all his friends, through all the christian world. In Germany
   what profession was there! who would have thought it? The Lord who
   delights to manifest that openly which was bid secretly sends a sword
   and they fall." Shepard's Parab. Part I. p. 118, 119. "The saints may
   approve thee and God condemns thee; Rev. iii. 1. Thou hast a name that
   thou livest, and art dead. Men may say, There is a true Nathaniel; and
   God may say, There is a self-cozening Pharisee. Reader, thou hast heard
   of Judas and Demas, of Ananias and Sapphira, of Hymeneus and Philetus,
   once renowned and famous professors and thou hast heard how they proved
   at last." Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity chap. ii. sect. 5.

   [460] A time of outpouring of the Spirit of God, reviving religion, and
   producing the pleasant appearances of it, in new converts, is in
   Scripture compared to this very thing, viz, the spring-season, when the
   benign influences of the heavens cause the blossoms to put forth. Cant
   ii. 11, 12.

   [461] Husbandry Spiritualized, chap. xii.

   [462] 1 Cor. iv. 3, 4.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III.

   showing what are distinguishing signs of truly gracious and holy
   affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

      INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

   I come now to take notice of some things, wherein those affections that
   are spiritual and gracious, differ from those that are not so.--But
   before I proceed directly to the distinguishing characters, I would
   previously mention some things which I desire may be observed,
   concerning the marks I shall lay down.

   1. I am far from undertaking to give such signs of gracious affections,
   as shall be sufficient to enable any certainly to distinguish true
   affections from false in others; or to determine positively which of
   their neighbours are true professors, and which are hypocrites. In so
   doing, I should be guilty of that arrogance which I have been
   condemning. It is plain that Christ has given rules to all Christians,
   to enable them to judge of those professors of religion, with whom they
   are concerned, so far as is necessary for their own safety, and to
   prevent their being led into a snare by false teachers, and false
   pretenders to religion. It is also beyond doubt, that the Scriptures
   abound with rules, which may be very serviceable to ministers, in
   counselling and conducting souls committed to their care, in things
   appertaining to their spiritual and eternal state. Yet it is also
   evident, that it was never God's design to give us any rules, by which
   we may certainly know, who of our fellow-professors are his, and to
   make a full and clear separation between sheep and goats. On the
   contrary, it was God's design to reserve this to himself, as his
   prerogative. And therefore no such distinguishing signs as shall enable
   Christians or ministers to do this, are ever to be expected to the
   world's end: for no more is ever to be expected from any signs found in
   the word of God, or gathered from it, than Christ designed them for.

   2. No such signs are to be expected, that shall be sufficient to enable
   those saints certainly to discern their own good estate, who are very
   low in grace, or are such as have much departed from God, and are
   fallen into a dead, carnal, and unchristian frame. It is not agreeable
   to God's design, (as already observed,) that such should know their
   good estate: nor is it desirable that they should; but on the contrary,
   it is every way best that they should not. We have reason to bless God,
   that he has made no provision that such should certainly know the state
   they are in, any other way, than by first coming out of their ill frame
   and way.

   Indeed it is not properly through the defect of the signs given in the
   word of God, that every saint living, whether strong or weak, and those
   who are in a bad frame, as well as others, cannot certainly know their
   good estate by them. For the rules in themselves are certain and
   infallible, and every saint has, or has had, those things in himself,
   which are sure evidences of grace; for every, even the least, act of
   grace is so. But the difficulty comes through his defect to whom the
   signs are given. There is a twofold defect in that saint who is very
   low in grace, or in an ill frame, which makes it impossible for him to
   know certainly that he has true grace, by the best signs and rules
   which can be given him.

   First, A defect in the object, or the qualification to be viewed and
   examined. I do not mean an essential defect; because I suppose the
   person to be a real saint: but a defect in degree: grace being very
   small, cannot be clearly and certainly discerned and distinguished.
   Things that are very small we cannot clearly discern, as to their form,
   or distinguish them one from another; though as they are in themselves,
   their form may be very different. There is doubtless a great difference
   between the body of man, and the bodies of other animals, in the first
   conception in the womb: but yet, if we should view the different
   embryos, it might not be possible for us to discern the difference, by
   reason of the imperfect state of the object: but as it comes to greater
   perfection, the difference becomes very plain. The difference between
   creatures of very contrary qualities, is not so plainly to be seen
   while they are very young, even after they are actually brought forth,
   as in their more perfect state. The difference between doves and
   ravens, or doves and vultures, when they first come out of the egg, is
   not so evident; but as they grow to their perfection, it is exceeding
   great and manifest. The grace of those I am speaking of is mingled with
   so much corruption, which clouds and hides it, as makes it impossible
   to be known with certainty. Though different things before us, may have
   in themselves many marks thoroughly distinguishing them one from
   another; yet if we see them only in a thick smoke, it may nevertheless
   be impossible to distinguish them. A fixed star is easily
   distinguishable from a comet, in a clear sky; but if we view them
   through a cloud, it may be impossible to see the difference. When true
   Christians are in an ill frame, guilt lies on the conscience; which
   will bring fear, and so prevent the peace and joy of an assured hope.

   Secondly, There is in such a case a defect in the eye. As the
   feebleness of grace, and the prevalence of corruption, obscures the
   object; so it enfeebles the sight. Corruption in the soul darkens the
   sight as to all spiritual objects, of which grace is one. Sin is like
   some distempers of the eyes, that make things to appear of different
   colours from those which properly belong to them; or, like other
   distempers that put the mouth out of taste, so as to disable it from
   distinguishing good and wholesome food from bad, but every thing tastes
   bitter. Men in a corrupt and carnal frame, have their spiritual senses
   in but a poor plight for judging and distinguishing spiritual things.

   For these reasons, no signs that can be given will actually satisfy
   persons in such a case. Let the signs given be never so good and
   infallible, and clearly laid down, they will not serve them. It is like
   giving a man rules how to distinguish visible objects in the dark: the
   things themselves may be very different, and their difference may be
   very well and distinctly described to him; yet all is insufficient to
   enable him to distinguish them, because he is in the dark. And
   therefore many persons in such a case spend time in a fruitless labour,
   in poring on past experiences, and examining themselves by signs which
   they hear laid down from the pulpit, or read in books. There is other
   work for them to do, which, while they neglect, all their
   self-examinations are like to be in vain, if they should spend never so
   much time in them. The accursed thing is to be destroyed from their
   camp, and Achan to be slain; and until this be done they will be in
   trouble. It is not God's design that men should obtain assurance in any
   other way, than by mortifying corruption, increasing in grace, and
   obtaining the lively exercises of it. And although self-examination be
   a duty of great use and importance, and by no means to be neglected;
   yet it is not the principal means, by which the saints do get
   satisfaction of their good estate. Assurance is not to be obtained so
   much by self-examination, as by action. The apostle Paul sought
   assurance chiefly this way, even by forgetting the things that were
   behind, and reaching forth, unto those things that were, before,
   pressing towards the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
   Christ Jesus; if by any means he might attain unto the resurrection of
   the dead. And it was by this means chiefly that he obtained assurance,
   1 Cor. ix. 26. "I therefore so run, as not uncertainly." He obtained
   assurance of winning the prize more by running than by considering. The
   swiftness of his pace, did more towards his assurance of a conquest,
   than the strictness of his examination. Giving all diligence to grow in
   grace, by adding to faith, virtue, &c. is the direction that the
   apostle Peter gives us, for making our calling and election sure, and
   having an entrance ministered to us abundantly into Christ's
   everlasting kingdom. Without this, our eyes will be dim, and we shall
   be as men in the dark; we cannot plainly see either the forgiveness of
   our sins past, or our heavenly inheritance that is future, and far off,
   2 Pet. i. 5-11.. [463]

   Therefore, though good rules to distinguish true grace from
   counterfeit, may tend to convince hypocrites, and be of great use to
   the saints, in many respects; and among other benefits, they may be
   very useful to them in order to remove many needless scruples, and
   establish their hope; yet I am far from pretending to lay down any such
   rules as shall be sufficient of themselves, without other means, to
   enable all true saints to see their good estate, or from supposing that
   they should be the principal means of their satisfaction.

   3. Nor is there much encouragement, from the experience of present or
   past times, to lay down rules or marks to distinguish between true and
   false affections, in hopes of convincing any considerable number of
   that sort of hypocrites, who have been deceived with great false
   discoveries and affections, and are once settled in false confidence.
   Such hypocrites are so conceited of their own wisdom, so blinded and
   hardened with self-righteousness, (but very subtle and secret, under
   the disguise of great humility,) and so invincible a fondness of their
   pleasing conceit, their great exaltation, that it usually signifies
   nothing at all to lay before them the most convincing evidences of
   their hypocrisy. Their state is indeed deplorable, and next to those
   that have committed the unpardonable sin. Some of this sort seem to be
   most out of the reach of means of conviction and repentance. But yet
   the laying down of good rules may be a means of convincing other kinds
   of hypocrites; and God is able to convince even this kind, and his
   grace is not to be limited, nor means to be neglected. Besides, such
   rules may be of use to the true saints, in order to detect false
   affections, which they may have mingled with true; and be a means of
   their religion becoming more pure, and like gold tried in the fire.
   Having premised these things, I now proceed directly to take notice of
   those things in which true religious affections are distinguished from
   false.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [463] "The way to know your godliness, is to renew the visible
   exercises of grace."--"The more visible exercises of grace are renewed,
   the more certain you will be. The more frequently these actings are
   renewed, the more abiding and confirmed your assurance will be."--"The
   more men's grace is multiplied the more their peace is multiplied; 2
   Pet. i. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the
   knowledge of God and Jesus Christ our Lord.'" Stoddard's Way to know
   Sincerity and Hypocrisy, p. 139, and 142.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Affections that arc truly spiritual and gracious, arise from those
   influences and operations on the heart, which are spiritual,
   supernatural, and divine.

   I will explain what I mean by these terms, whence will appear their use
   to distinguish between those affections which are spiritual, and those
   which are not so.--We find that true saints, or those persons who are
   sanctified by the Spirit of God, are in the New Testament called
   spiritual persons. And their being spiritual is spoken of as their
   peculiar character, and that wherein they are distinguished from those
   who are not sanctified. This is evident, because those who are
   spiritual are set in opposition to natural men, and carnal men. Thus
   the spiritual man and the natural man are set in opposition one to
   another, 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. "The natural man receiveth not the things
   of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he
   know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is
   spiritual, judgeth all things." The Scripture explains itself to mean
   an ungodly man, or one that has no grace, by a natural man: thus the
   apostle Jude, speaking of certain ungodly men, that had crept in
   unawares among the saints, (ver. 4. of his epistle,) says, ver. 19.
   "There are sensual, having not the Spirit." This the apostle gives as a
   reason why they behaved themselves in such a wicked manner as he had
   described. Here the word NOT ENGLISH translated sensual, is the very
   same, which in 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. is translated natural. In like
   manner, in the continuation of the same discourse, spiritual men are
   opposed to carnal men; which the connexion plainly shows mean the same,
   as spiritual men and natural men, in the foregoing verses; [464] "And
   I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
   carnal;" i. e. as in a great measure unsanctified. [465] Now therefore,
   if by natural and carnal, in these texts, be intended unsanctified,
   then doubtless by spiritual, which is opposed thereto, is meant
   sanctified and gracious. And as the saints are called spiritual in
   Scripture, so we also find that there are certain properties,
   qualities, and principles, that have the same epithet given them. So we
   read of a spiritual mind, Rom. viii. 6, 7. of spiritual wisdom, Col. i.
   9. and of spiritual blessings, Eph. i. 3.

   Now it may be observed, that the epithet spiritual, in these and other
   parallel texts of the New Testament, is not used to signify any
   relation of persons or things to the spirit or soul of man, as the
   spiritual part of man, in opposition to the body, or material part.
   Qualities are not said to be spiritual, because they have their seat in
   the soul, and not in the body: for there are some properties that the
   Scripture calls carnal or fleshly, which have their seat as much in the
   soul, as those properties that are called spiritual, Thus pride and
   self-righteousness, and a man's trusting to its own wisdom, the apostle
   calls fleshly, Col. ii. 18. Nor are things called spiritual, because
   they are conversant about those things that are immaterial, and not
   corporeal. For so was the wisdom of the wise men, and princes of this
   world, conversant about spirits, and immaterial beings; yet the apostle
   speaks of them as natural men, totally ignorant of those things that
   are spiritual, 1 Cor. chap. ii. But it is with relation to the Holy
   Ghost, or Spirit of God, hat persons or things are termed spiritual, in
   the New Testament. Spirit, as the word is used to signify the third
   person in the Trinity, is the substantive, of which is formed the
   adjective spiritual in the Holy Scriptures. Thus christians are called
   spiritual persons, because they are born of the Spirit, and because of
   the indwelling and holy influences of the Spirit of God in them. And
   things are called spiritual as related to the Spirit of God; 1 Cor. ii.
   13, 14. "Which things also we speak, not in the words man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things
   with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the
   Spirit of God." Here the apostle himself expressly signifies, that by
   spiritual things, he means the things of the Spirit of God, and things
   which the Holy Ghost teacheth. The same is yet more abundantly apparent
   by viewing the whole context. Again, Rom. viii. 6. To be carnally
   minded, is death; to be spiritually minded, is life and peace. The
   apostle explains what he means by being carnally and spiritually
   minded, in what follows in the 9th verse, and shows that by being
   spiritually minded he means, having the indwelling and holy influences
   of the Spirit of God in the heart. But ye are not in the flesh, butIN
   the spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
   have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The same is evident
   by all the context. But time would fail to produce all the evidence of
   this in the New Testament.

   And it must be here observed, that although it is with relation to the
   Spirit of God and his influences, that persons and things are called
   spiritual; yet not all those persons who are subject to any kind of
   influence of the Spirit of God, are ordinarily called so in the New
   Testament. They who have only the common influences of God's Spirit,
   are not so called, in the places cited above. It has been already
   proved, that by spiritual men is meant godly men, in opposition to
   natural, carnal, and unsanctified men. And it is most plain, that the
   apostle by spiritually minded, Rom. viii. 6. means graciously minded.
   And though the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which natural men
   might have, are sometimes called spiritual, because they are from the
   Spirit; yet natural men, whatever gifts of the Spirit they had, were
   not, in the usual language of the New Testament, called spiritual
   persons. For it was not by men's having the gifts, but the virtues of
   the Spirit, that they are called spiritual; as is apparent, by Gal. vi.
   l. "Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
   spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness." Meekness is
   one of those virtues which the apostle had just spoken of in the verses
   next preceding, showing what are the fruits of the Spirit. Those
   qualifications, therefore, are said to be spiritual in the language of
   the New Testament, which are truly gracious, and peculiar to the
   saints.

   Thus when we read of spiritual wisdom and understanding--as in Col. i.
   9. "We desire that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in
   all wisdom and spiritual, understanding"--hereby is intended that
   wisdom which is gracious, and from the sanctifying influences of the
   Spirit of God. For, doubtless, by spiritual wisdom, is meant that which
   is opposite to what the Scripture calls natural wisdom; as the
   spiritual man is opposed to the natural man. And therefore spiritual
   wisdom is doubtless the same with that wisdom which is from above,
   James iii. 17. "The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
   peaceable, gentle,". &c. for this the apostle opposes to natural
   wisdom, ver. 15. "This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is
   earthly, sensual"--the last word in the original is the same that is
   translated natural, in 1 Cor. ii. 14.

   So that although natural men may be the subjects of many influences of
   the Spirit of God, as is evident by many scriptures, [466] yet they are
   not in the sense the Scripture spiritual persons; neither are any of
   those effects, common gifts, qualities, or affections, that are from
   the influence of the Spirit of God upon them, called spiritual things.
   The great difference lies in these two things.

   1. The Spirit of God is given to the true saints to dwell in them, as
   his proper lasting abode; and to influence their hearts, as a principle
   of new nature, or as a divine supernatural spring of life and action.
   The Scriptures represent .the Holy Spirit, not only as moving, and
   occasionally influencing, the saints, but as dwelling in them as his
   temple, his proper abode, and everlasting dwelling-place, (1 Cor. iii.
   16. 2 Cor. vi. 16. John xiv. 16,17.) And he is represented as being
   there so united to the faculties of the soul, that he becomes there a
   principle or spring of a new nature and life.

   So the saints are said to live by Christ living in them, Gal. ii. 20.
   Christ by his Spirit not only is in them, but lives in them; they live
   by his life. His Spirit is united to them, as a principle of life in
   them. They not only drink living water, but this living water becomes a
   well or fountain of water, in the soul, springing up into spiritual and
   everlasting life, John iv. 14. and thus becomes a principle of lire in
   them--this living water the evangelist himself explains to intend the
   Spirit of God, ( chap. vii. 38, 39.) The light of the Sun of
   righteousness does not only shine upon them, but is so communicated to
   them that they shine also, and become little images of that sun which
   shines upon them. The sap of the true vine is not only conveyed into
   them, as the sap of a tree may be conveyed into a vessel, but is
   conveyed as sap is from a tree into one of its living branches, where
   it becomes a principle of life. The Spirit of God being thus
   communicated and united to the saints, they are from thence properly
   denominated from it, and are called spiritual.

   On the other hand, though the Spirit of God may many ways influence
   natural men; yet because it is not thus communicated to them, as an
   indwelling principle, they do not derive any denomination or character
   from it; for there being no union, it is not their own. The light may
   shine upon a body that is very dark or black; and though that body be
   the subject of the light, yet, because the light becomes no principle
   of light to it, so as to cause the body to shine, hence that body does
   not properly receive its denomination from it, so as to be called a
   lightsome body. So the Spirit of God acting upon the soul only, without
   communicating itself to be an active principle in it, cannot denominate
   it spiritual. A body that continues black, may be said not to have
   light, though the light shines upon it: so natural men are said not to
   have the Spirit,Jude 19. sensual or natural, as the word is elsewhere
   rendered, having not the Spirit.

   2. Another reason why the saints and their virtues are called
   spiritual, (and which is the principal thing.) is, that the Spirit of
   God, dwelling as a vital principle in the souls, produces there those
   effects wherein he exerts and communicates himself in his own proper
   nature. Holiness is the nature of the Spirit of God, therefore he is
   called in Scripture the Holy Ghost. Holiness, which is as it were the
   beauty and sweetness of the divine nature, is as much the proper nature
   of the Holy Spirit, as heat is the nature of fire, or sweetness was the
   nature of that holy anointing oil, which was the principal type of the
   Holy Ghost in the Mosaic dispensation. Yea, I may rather say, that
   holiness is as much the proper nature of the Holy Ghost, as sweetness
   was the nature of the sweet odour of that ointment. The Spirit of God
   so dwells in the hearts of the saints, that he there, as a seed or
   spring of life, exerts and communicates himself, in this his sweet and
   divine nature. He makes the soul a partaker of God's beauty and
   Christ's joy, so that the saint has truly fellowship with the Father,
   and with his Son Jesus Christ, in thus having the communion or
   participation of the Holy Ghost. The grace which is in the hearts of
   the saints, is of the name nature with the divine holiness, though
   infinitely less in degree; as the brightness in a diamond which the sun
   shines upon, is of the same nature with the brightness of the sun, but
   only that it is as nothing to it in degree. Therefore Christ says, John
   iii. 6. "That which is born of the Spirit, is spirit," i. e. the grace
   that is begotten in the hearts of the saints, is something of the same
   nature with that Spirit, and so is properly called a spiritual nature;
   after the same manner as that which is born of the flesh is flesh, or
   that which is born of corrupt nature is corrupt nature.

   But the Spirit of God never influences the minds of natural men after
   this manner. Though he may influence them many ways, yet he never, in
   any of his influences, communicates himself to them in his own proper
   nature. Indeed he never acts disagreeably to his nature, either on the
   minds of saints or sinners: but the Spirit of God may act upon men
   agreeably to his own nature, and not exert his proper nature in the
   acts and exercises of their minds. The Spirit of God may act so, that
   his actions may be agreeable to his nature, and yet may not at all
   communicate himself in his proper nature, in the effect of that action.
   Thus, for instance, the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
   waters, and there was nothing disagreeable to his nature in that
   action; but yet he did not at all communicate himself in that action,
   there was nothing of the proper nature of the Holy Spirit in that
   motion of the waters. And so he may act upon the minds of men many
   ways, and not communicate himself any more than when he acts on
   inanimate things.

   Thus, not only the manner of the Spirit's relation to the subject of
   his operations, is different; but the influence and operation itself,
   and the effect wrought, exceeding different. So that not only the
   persons are called spiritual, as having the Spirit of God dwelling in
   them; but those qualifications, affections, and experiences that are
   wrought in them by the Spirit, are also spiritual. Therein they differ
   vastly in their nature and kind from all that a natural man can be the
   subject of, while he remains in a natural state; and also from all that
   of which men or devils can be the authors. It is a spiritual work in
   this high sense; and therefore above all other works is peculiar to the
   Spirit of God. There is no work so high and excellent; for there is no
   work wherein God doth so much communicate himself, and wherein the mere
   creature hath, in so high a sense, a participation of God; so that it
   is expressed in Scripture by the saints being made partakers of the
   divine, nature, 2 Pet. i. 4. and having God dwelling in them, and they
   in God, 1 John iv. 12, 15, 16. and chap. iii. 21. and having Christ in
   them, John xvii. 21. Rom. viii. 10. being the temples of the living
   God, 2 Cor. vi. 16. living by Christ's life, Gal. ii. 20. being made
   partakers of God's holiness, Heb. xii. 10. having Christ's love
   dwelling in them, John xvii. 26. having his joy fulfilled in them, John
   xvii. 13. seeing light in God's light, and being made to drink of the
   river of God's pleasures, Ps. xxxvi. 8, 9. having fellowship with God,
   or communicating and partaking with him, (as the word signifies,) 1
   John i. 3. Not that the saints are made partakers of the essence, of
   God--or godded with God, and christed with Christ, according to the
   blasphemous language of some heretics--but, to use the scripture
   phrase, they are made partakers of God's fulness, (Eph. iii. 17-19.
   John i. 16.) that is, of God's spiritual beauty and happiness,
   according to the measure and capacity of a creature. So the word
   fulness signifies in scripture language. Grace in the hearts of the
   saints being therefore the most glorious work of God, wherein he
   communicates of the goodness of his nature, it is doubtless his
   peculiar work, and in an eminent manner above the power of all
   creatures. And this is what I mean by those influences that are divine,
   when I say, that truly gracious affections arise from those influences
   that are spiritual and divine.

   True saints only have that which is spiritual; others not only have not
   these communications of the Spirit in so high a degree as the saints,
   but have nothing of that nature or kind. For the apostle James tells
   us, that natural men have not the Spirit; and Christ teaches the
   necessity of a new birth, or a being born of the Spirit, from this,
   that he that is born of the flesh, has only flesh, and no spirit, John
   iii. 6. They have not the Spirit of God dwelling in them in any degree;
   for the apostle teaches, that all who have the Spirit of God dwelling
   in them are his, Rom. viii. 9-11.. And, having the Spirit of God is
   spoken of as a certain sign, that persons shall have the eternal
   inheritance; for it is the earnest of it, (2 Cor. i. 22. and v. 5. Eph.
   i. 14.) and having any thing of the Spirit is mentioned as a sure sign
   of being in Christ, 1 John iv. 13. "Hereby know we that we dwell in
   him, because he bath given us of his Spirit." Ungodly men not only have
   not so much of the divine nature as the saints, but they are not
   partakers of it; which implies that they have nothing of it; for a
   being partaker of the divine nature is spoken of as the peculiar
   privilege of the true saints, 2 Pet. i. 4. Ungodly men are not partaken
   of God's holiness, Heb. xii. 10. A natural man has no experience of
   those things that are spiritual: he is so far from it, that he knows
   nothing about them, and is a perfect stranger to them. To talk about
   such things is all foolishness to him, he knows not what it means, 1
   Cor. ii. 14. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
   God; for they are foolishness to him: neither can he know them, because
   they are spiritually discerned." And to the like purpose Christ teaches
   us that the world is wholly unacquainted with the Spirit of God, John
   xiv. 17. "Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
   because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him." And it is further
   evident, that natural men have nothing in them of the same nature with
   the true grace of the saints, because the apostle teaches us, that
   those of them who go farthest in religion, have no charity, or true
   christian love, ( chap. xiii.) So Christ elsewhere reproves the
   Pharisees, those high pretenders to religion, that they had not the
   love of God in them, John v. 42. Hence natural men have no communion or
   fellowship with Christ, or participation with him, as these words
   signify, for this is spoken of as the peculiar privilege of the saints,
   (1 John i. 3, 6, 7. and 1 Cor. i. 8, 9.) And the Scripture speaks of
   the actual existence of a gracious principle in the soul, though in its
   first beginning, like a seed planted there, as inconsistent with a
   man's being a sinner, 1 John iii. 9. And natural men are represented in
   Scripture, as having no spiritual light, no spiritual life, and no
   spiritual being; and therefore conversion is often compared to opening
   the eyes of the blind, raising the dead, and a work of creation,
   wherein creatures are made entirely new, and becoming new-born
   children.

   From these things it is evident, that those gracious influences of the
   saints, and the effects of God's Spirit which they experience, are
   entirely above nature, and altogether of a different kind from any
   thing that men find in themselves by the exercise of natural
   principles. No improvement of those principles that are natural, no
   advancing or exalting of them to higher degrees, and no kind of
   composition, will ever bring men to them; because they not only differ
   from what is natural, and from every thing that natural men experience,
   in degree and circumstances, but also in kind; and are of a nature
   vastly more excellent. And this is what I mean by supernatural, when I
   say, that gracious affections are from those influences that are
   supernatural.

   From hence it follows, that in those gracious exercises and affections
   which are wrought in the saints, through the saving influences of the
   Spirit of God, there is a new inward perception or sensation of their
   minds, entirely different in its nature and kind from any thing that
   ever their minds were the subjects of before they were sanctified. For,
   if God by his mighty power produces something that is new, not only in
   degree and circumstances, but in its whole nature--all that which could
   be produced by no exalting, varying, or compounding of what was there
   before, or by adding any thing of the like kind--then, doubtless,
   something entirely new is felt, or perceived. There is what some
   metaphysicians call a new simple idea. If grace be, in the sense above
   described, an entirely new kind of principle; then the exercises of it
   are also new. And if there be in the soul a new sort of conscious
   exercises, which the soul knew nothing of before, and which no
   improvement, composition, or management of what it was before could
   produce; then it follows that the mind has an entirely new kind of
   perception or sensation. Here is, as it were, a new spiritual sense, or
   a principle of new kind of perception or spiritual sensation, which is
   in its whole nature different from any former kinds of sensation of the
   mind, as tasting is diverse from any of the other senses. And something
   is perceived by a true saint, in the exercise of "this new sense of
   mind in spiritual and divine things, as entirely diverse from any thing
   that is perceived in them by natural men, as the sweet taste of honey
   is diverse from the ideas men get of honey by only looking on and
   feeling it. So that the spiritual perceptions which a sanctified and
   spiritual person has, are not only diverse from all that natural men
   have as the perceptions of the same sense may differ one from another,
   but rather as the ideas and sensations of different senses differ.
   Hence the work of the Spirit of God in regeneration is often in
   Scripture compared to the giving of a new sense, eyes to see, ears to
   hear, unstopping the ears of the deaf, opening the eyes of them that
   were born blind, and turning from darkness unto light. And because this
   spiritual sense is immensely the most noble and excellent, and that
   without which all other principles of perception, and all our
   faculties, are useless and vain; therefore the giving of this new
   sense, with the blessed fruits and effects of it in the soul, is
   compared to raising the dead, and to a new creation.

   This new spiritual sense, and the new dispositions that attend it, are
   no new faculties, but new principles of nature: I use the word
   principles, for want of a word of a more determinate signification. By
   a principle of nature in this place, I mean that foundation which is
   laid in nature, either old or new, for any particular manner or kind of
   exercise of the faculties of the soul; or a natural habit, or
   foundation for action, giving a person ability and disposition to exert
   the faculties in exercises of such a certain kind; so, that to exert
   the faculties in that kind of exercises, may be said to be his nature.
   So this new spiritual sense is not anew faculty of understanding, but
   it is a new foundation laid in the nature of the soul, for a new kind
   of exercises of the same faculty of understanding. So that the new holy
   disposition of heart that attends this new sense, is not a new faculty
   of will, but a foundation laid in the nature of the soul, for a new
   kind of exercises of the same faculty of will.

   The Spirit of God, in all his operations upon the minds of natural men,
   only moves, impresses, assists, improves, or some way acts upon natural
   principles; but gives no new spiritual principle. Thus when the Spirit
   of God gives a natural man visions, as he did Balaam, he only impresses
   a natural principle--the sense of seeing, immediately exciting ideas of
   that sense--but gives no new sense; neither is there any thing
   supernatural, spiritual, or divine in it. If the Spirit of God
   impresses on a man's imagination, either in a dream, or when he is
   awake, any outward ideas of any of the senses, either voices or shapes
   and colours, it is only exciting ideas of the same kind that he has by
   natural principles and senses. So if God reveals to a natural man any
   secret fact; for instance, something that he shall hereafter see or
   hear; this is not infusing or exercising any new spiritual principle,
   or giving the ideas of any new spiritual sense; it is only impressing,
   in an extraordinary manner, the ideas that will hereafter be received
   by sight and hearing. So in the more ordinary influences of the Spirit
   of God on the hearts of sinners, he only assists natural principles to
   do the same work to a greater degree, which they do of themselves by
   nature. Thus the Spirit of God by his common influences may assist
   men's natural ingenuity, as he assisted Bezaleel and Aholiab in the
   curious works of the tabernacle. He may assist men's natural abilities
   in political affairs, and improve their courage and other natural
   qualifications; as he is said to have put his Spirit on the seventy
   elders, and on Saul, so as to give him another heart. God may greatly
   assist natural men's reason, in their reasoning about secular things,
   or about the doctrines of religion, and may greatly advance the
   clearness of their apprehensions and notions in many respects, without
   giving any spiritual sense. So in those awakenings and convictions that
   natural men may have, God only assists conscience, which is a natural
   principle, to do that work in a further degree, which it naturally
   does. Conscience naturally gives men an apprehension of right and
   wrong, and suggests the relation there is between them and a
   retribution. The Spirit of God assists men's consciences to do this in
   a greater degree, and against the stupifying influence of worldly
   objects and their lusts. Many other ways might be mentioned, wherein
   the Spirit acts upon, assists, and moves natural principles; but after
   all, it is no more than nature moved, acted, and improved; here is
   nothing supernatural and divine. But the Spirit of God in his spiritual
   influences on the hearts of his saints, operates by infusing or
   exercising new, divine, and supernatural principles; principles which
   are indeed a new and spiritual nature, and principles vastly more noble
   and excellent than all that is in natural men.

   From what has been said it follows, that all spiritual and gracious
   affections are attended with, and arise from. some apprehension, idea,
   or sensation of mind, which is in its whole nature different, yea
   exceeding different, from all that is or can be in the mind of a
   natural man. The natural man discerns nothing of it, (1 Cor. ii. 14.)
   any more than a man without the sense of tasting can conceive of the
   sweet taste of honey; or a man without the sense of hearing can
   conceive of the melody of a tune; or a man born blind can have a notion
   of the beauty of the rainbow.

   But here two things must be observed, in order to the right
   understanding of this.

   1. On the one hand it must be observed, that not every thing which
   appertains to spiritual affections, is new and entirely different from
   what natural men experience; some things are common to gracious
   affections with other affections; many circumstances, appendages, and
   effects are common. Thus a saint's love to God has a great many things
   appertaining to it, which are common with a man's natural love to a
   near relation. Love to God makes a man seek the honour of God, and
   desire to please him; so docs a natural man's love to his friend make
   him desire his honour, and to please him. Love to God causes a man to
   delight in the thoughts of him, in his presence; to desire conformity
   to God, and the enjoyment of him; and so it is with a man's love to his
   friend. Many other things might be mentioned which are common to both.
   But yet, that idea which the saint has of the loveliness of God, and
   the kind of delight he has in that view which is as it were the marrow
   and quintessence of his love, is peculiar, and entirely diverse from
   any thing that a natural man has, or can have any notion of. And even
   in those things that seem to be common, there is something peculiar.
   Both spiritual love and natural, cause desires after the object
   beloved; but they are not the same sort of desires; there is a
   sensation of soul in the spiritual desires of one that loves God, which
   is entirely different from all natural desires. Both spiritual and
   natural love are attended with delight in the object beloved; but the
   sensations of delight are not the same, but entirely and exceedingly
   diverse. Natural men may have conceptions of many things about
   spiritual affections; but there is something in them which is as it
   were the nucleus, or kernel, of which they have no more conceptions,
   than one born blind has of colours.

   It may be clearly illustrated thus: we will suppose two men; one, born
   without the sense of tasting, the other with it. The latter loves
   honey, because he knows the sweet taste of it; the other loves certain
   sounds and colours. The love of each has many things in common; it
   causes both to desire and delight in the object beloved, causes grief
   when it is absent, &c. but yet that sensation which he, who knows the
   taste of honey, has of its excellency and sweetness, as the foundation
   of his love, is entirely different from any thing the other has or can
   have. So both these persons may in some respects love the same object.
   The one may love a delicious kind of fruit, not only because he has
   seen its pleasant colours, but knows its sweet taste; the other,
   perfectly ignorant of the latter, loves it only for its beautiful
   colours. Many things seem, in some respect, to be common to both; both
   love, both desire, and both delight; but the love, desire, and delight
   of the one, is altogether diverse from that of the other. The
   difference between the love of a natural and spiritual man resembles
   this; but only it must be observed, that the kinds of excellency
   perceived in spiritual objects, by these different kinds of persons,
   are in themselves vastly more diverse than the different kinds of
   excellency perceived in delicious fruit by a tasting and a tasteless
   man. In another respect, it may not be so great, viz. as the spiritual
   man may have a sense to perceive that divine and most peculiar
   excellency but in small beginnings, and in a very imperfect degree.

   2. On the other hand, it must be observed, that a natural man may have
   religious apprehensions and affections, which may be, in many respects,
   very new and surprising to him; and yet what he experiences, be nothing
   like the exercises of a new nature. His affections may be very new, in
   a very new degree, with a great many new circumstances, a new
   co-operation of natural affections, and a new composition of ideas.
   This may be from some extraordinary powerful influence of Satan, and
   some great delusion. There is nothing, however, but nature
   extraordinarily acted. As if a poor man who had always dwelt in a
   cottage, and had never looked beyond the obscure village where he was
   born, should, in a jest, be taken to a magnificent city and prince's
   court, and be there arrayed in princely robes, and set in the throne,
   with the crown royal on his head, peers and nobles bowing before
   him--and should be made to believe that he was now a glorious
   monarch--his ideas, and the affections he would experience, would in
   many respects be very new, and such as he had no imagination of before.
   Yet who would suppose, that what was done to him was any thing more
   than extraordinarily raising and exciting natural principles, and newly
   exalting, varying, and compounding such sort of ideas as he had by
   nature? Who would infer, that this was giving him a new sense?

   Upon the whole, I think it is clearly manifest, that all truly gracious
   affections arise from special and peculiar influences of the Spirit,
   working that sensible effect or sensation in the souls of the saints,
   which are entirely different from all that is possible a natural man
   should experience; different, not only in degree and circumstances, but
   in its whole nature. So that a natural man not only cannot experience
   that which is individually the same, but cannot experience any thing
   but what is exceedingly diverse, and immensely below it, in its kind;
   and that which the power of men or devils is not sufficient to produce,
   or any thing of the same nature.

   I have insisted the more largely on this matter, because this view of
   the subject is evidently of great importance and use, in order to
   discover the delusions of Satan, in many kinds of false religious
   affections, by which multitudes are deluded, and probably have been in
   all ages of the christian church; also in order to settle and determine
   many articles of doctrine, concerning the operations of the Spirit of
   God, and the nature of true grace.--Let us now, therefore, apply these
   things to the purpose of this discourse.

   From hence it appears, that impressions which some have on their
   imagination--their imaginary ideas of God, or Christ, or heaven, or any
   thing appertaining to religion--have nothing in them that is spiritual,
   or of the nature of true grace. Though such things may attend what is
   spiritual, and be mixed with it, yet in themselves they are not any
   part of gracious experience.

   Here, for the sake of the less informed, I will explain what is
   intended by impressions on the imagination, and imaginary ideas. The
   imagination is that power of the mind, whereby it can have a
   conception, or idea, of external things, or objects of the outward
   senses, when those things are not present, and therefore not perceived
   by the senses. It is called imagination, from the word image; because
   thereby a person can have an image of some external thing in his mind,
   when that thing is not present in reality, nor any thing like it. What
   we perceive by our five senses, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
   feeling, are external things: and when a person has an image of these
   things in his mind, but does not really see, hear, smell, taste, nor
   feel them; that is to have an imagination of them, and these ideas are
   imaginary ideas. When such ideas are strongly impressed upon the mind,
   and the image is very lively, almost as if one saw, or heard them, &c.
   that is called an impression on the imagination. Thus colours and
   shapes are outward things, objects of the outward sense of seeing:
   therefore, when any person has in his mind a lively idea of any shape,
   or colour, or form of countenance; of light or darkness, such as he
   perceives by the sense of seeing; of any marks made on paper, suppose
   letters and words written in a book: that is to have an imagination, or
   an external and imaginary idea of such things as we sometimes perceive
   by our bodily eyes. And when we have the ideas of sounds, voices, or
   words spoken; this is only to have ideas of outward things, perceived
   by the external sense of hearing, and so that also is imagination. When
   these ideas are impressed with liveliness, almost as if they were
   really heard with the ears, this is to have an impression on the.
   imagination. And so I might instance in the ideas of things
   appertaining to the other three senses of smelling, tasting, and
   feeling.

   Many who have had such things, have ignorantly supposed them to be of
   the nature of spiritual discoveries. They have had lively ideas of some
   external shape, and beautiful form of countenance; and this they call
   spiritually seeing Christ. Some have had impressed upon them ideas of a
   great outward light; and this they call a spiritual discovery of God's
   or Christ's glory. Some have had ideas of Christ hanging on the cross,
   and his blood running from his wounds; and this they call a spiritual
   sight of Christ crucified, and the way of salvation by his blood. Some
   have seen him with his arms open ready to embrace them; and this they
   call a discovery of the sufficiency of Christ's grace and love. Some
   have had lively ideas of heaven, and of Christ on his throne there, and
   shining ranks of saints and angels; and this they call seeing heaven
   opened to them. Some from time to time have had a lively idea of a
   person of a beautiful countenance smiling upon them; and this they call
   a spiritual discovery of the love of Christ to their souls, and tasting
   the love of Christ. And they look upon it a sufficient evidence that
   these things are spiritual discoveries, and that they see them
   spiritually, because they say they do not see these things with their
   bodily eyes, but in their hearts; for they can see them when" their
   eyes are shut. And in like manner, the imaginations of some have been
   impressed with ideas of the sense of hearing; they have had ideas of
   words, as if they were spoken to them, sometimes the words of
   Scripture, and sometimes other words. They have had ideas of Christ
   speaking comfortable words to them. These things they have called
   having the inward call of Christ, hearing the voice of Christ
   spiritually in their hearts, having the witness of the Spirit, the
   inward testimony of the love of Christ, &c.

   The common and less considerate sort of people, are the more easily led
   into apprehensions that these are spiritual things, because, spiritual
   things being invisible, we are forced to use figurative expressions in
   speaking of them, and to borrow names from sensible objects by which to
   signify them. Thus we call a clear apprehension of things spiritual by
   the name of light; and having an apprehension of things, by the name of
   seeing such things. The conviction of the judgment, and the persuasion
   of the will, by the word of Christ in the gospel, we signify by
   spiritually hearing the call of Christ. The Scripture itself abounds
   with such like figurative expressions. Persons hearing these often
   used, and having pressed upon them the necessity of having their eyes
   opened, of having a discovery of spiritual things, seeing Christ in his
   glory, having the inward call, and the like, they ignorantly look and
   wait for some external discoveries, and imaginary views. And when they
   have them, they are confident that now their eyes are opened, now
   Christ has discovered himself to them, and they are his children; and
   hence they are exceedingly affected and elevated with their
   deliverance, and many kinds of affections are at once set in a violent
   motion.

   But it is exceedingly apparent that such ideas have nothing in them
   which is spiritual and divine, in the sense wherein it has been
   demonstrated that all gracious experiences are spiritual and divine.
   These external ideas are in no wise entirely, and in their whole
   nature, diverse from all that men have by nature: so far from this,
   they are of the same sort which we have by the external senses, among
   the inferior powers of human nature. They are merely ideas of external
   objects, of the outward sensitive kind; the same sort of sensations of
   mind (differing not in degree, but only in circumstances) that we have
   by those natural principles which are common to us with the beasts.

   This is a low, miserable notion of spiritual sense, to suppose that it
   is only a conceiving or imagining that sort of ideas which we have by
   our animal senses, which senses the beasts have in as great perfection
   as we. Is this any thing better than, as it were, a turning of Christ,
   or the divine nature in the soul, into a mere animal? Is there any
   thing wanting in the soul, as it is by nature, to render it capable of
   being the subject of all these external ideas, without any new
   principles? A natural man is capable of having an idea, and a lively
   idea, of shapes, and colours, and sounds, when they are absent, even as
   capable as a regenerate man is: so there is nothing supernatural in
   them. And it is known by abundant experience, that it is not the
   advancing or perfecting of human nature, which makes persons more
   capable of having such lively and strong imaginary ideas; but on the
   contrary, the weakness of body and mind, makes persons abundantly more
   susceptive of such, impressions. [467]

   As to a truly spiritual sensation, not only is the manner of its coming
   into the mind extraordinary, but the sensation itself is totally
   diverse from all that men have, or can have, in a state of nature, as
   has been shown. But as to these external ideas, though the way of their
   coming into the mind is sometimes unusual, yet the ideas in themselves
   are not the better for that; they are still of no different sort from
   what men have by their senses; they are of no higher kind, nor a whit
   better. For instance, the external idea a man has now of Christ hanging
   on the cross, and shedding his blood, is no better in itself, than the
   external idea that the Jews his enemies had, who stood round his cross,
   and saw this with their bodily eyes. The imaginary idea which men have
   now of an external brightness and glory of God, is no better than the
   idea the wicked congregation in the wilderness had of the external
   glory of the Lord at mount Sinai, when they saw it with bodily eyes; or
   any better than that idea which millions of cursed reprobates will have
   of the external glory of Christ at the day of judgment, who shall see
   and have a very lively idea of ten thousand times greater external
   glory of Christ, than ever yet was conceived in any man's imagination.
   [468] Is the image of Christ which men conceive in their imaginations,
   in its own nature, of any superior kind to the idea the papists
   conceive of Christ, by the beautiful and affecting images of him which
   they see in their churches? Are the affections they have, if built
   primarily on such imaginations, any better than the affections raised
   in ignorant people, by the sight of those images, which oftentimes are
   very great; especially when these images, through the craft of the
   priests, are made to move, speak, weep, and the like? [469] Merely the
   way of persons receiving these imaginary ideas, does not alter the
   nature of the ideas themselves that are received: let them be received
   in what way they will, they are still but external ideas, or ideas of
   outward appearances, and so are not spiritual. Yea, if men should
   actually receive such external ideas by the immediate power of the most
   high God upon their minds, they would not be spiritual, they should be
   no more than a common work of the Spirit of God; as is evident in fact,
   in the instance of Balaam, who had impressed on his mind, by God
   himself, a clear and lively outward representation or idea of Jesus
   Christ, as the Star rising out of Jacob, when he heard the words of
   God, and knew the knowledge of the Most High, and saw the vision of the
   Almighty, falling, into a trance, Numb. xxiv. 16, 17. But Balaam had no
   spiritual discovery of Christ; that day-star never spiritually rose in
   his heart, he being but a natural man.

   And as these external ideas have nothing divine or spiritual in their
   nature, and nothing but what natural men, without any new principles,
   are capable of; so there is nothing in their nature which requires that
   peculiar inimitable and unparalleled exercise of the glorious power of
   God, in order to their production, which it has been shown there is in
   the production of true grace. There appears to be nothing in their
   nature above the power of the devil. It is certainly not above the
   power of Satan to suggest thoughts to men; because otherwise he could
   not tempt them to sin. And if he can suggest any thoughts or ideas at
   all, doubtless imaginary ones, or ideas of things external, are not
   above his power; [470] for these are the lowest sort of ideas. These
   ideas may be raised only by impressions made on the body, by moving the
   animal spirits, and impressing the brain. Abundant experience certainly
   shows, that alterations in the body will excite imaginary ideas in the
   mind; as in a high fever, melancholy, &c. These external ideas are as
   much below the more intellectual exercises of the soul, as the body is
   a less noble part of man than the soul.

   Again, there is not only nothing in the nature of these imaginations of
   outward appearances, from whence we can inter that they are above the
   power of the devil; but it is certain also that the devil can excite,
   and often hath excited, such ideas. They were external ideas which he
   excited in the dreams and visions of the false prophets of old, who
   were under the influence of lying spirits. [471] And they were external
   ideas that he often excited in the minds of the heathen priests,
   magicians, and sorcerers, in their visions and ecstasies; and they were
   external ideas that he excited in the mind of the man Christ Jesus,
   when he showed him all the kingdoms of the world, with the glory of
   them, when those kingdoms were not really in sight.

   And if Satan, or any created being, has power to impress the mind with
   outward representations, then no particular sort of outward
   representations can be any evidence of a divine power. Is almighty
   power any more requisite to represent the shape of man to the
   imagination, than the shape of any thing else? Is there any higher kind
   of power necessary to form in the brain one bodily shape or colour than
   another? Does it need a power any more glorious to represent the form
   of the body of man, than the form of a chip or block; though it be of a
   very beautiful human body, with a sweet smile in his countenance, or
   arms open, or blood running from hands, feet, and side? May not that
   sort of power which can represent blackness or darkness to the
   imagination, also represent white and shining brightness? May not the
   power and skill which can well and exactly paint a straw, or a stick,
   on a piece of paper or canvass, only perhaps further improved, be
   sufficient to paint the body of a man, with great beauty and in royal
   majesty, or a magnificent city, paved with gold, full of brightness,
   and a glorious throne? So it is no more than the same sort of power,
   that is requisite to paint one as the other of these on the brain. The
   same sort of power that can put ink upon paper, can put on leaf-gold.
   So that it is evident to a demonstration, if we suppose it to be in the
   devil's power to make any sort of external representation at all on the
   fancy--and never any one questioned it who believed there was a devil,
   that had any agency with mankind--that a created power may extend to
   all kinds of external appearances and ideas in the mind.

   From hence it again clearly appears, that no such things have any thing
   in them that is spiritual, supernatural, and divine, in the sense in
   which it has been proved that all truly gracious experiences have. And
   though external ideas, through man's make and frame, ordinarily in some
   degree attend spiritual experiences; yet these ideas are no part of
   their spiritual experience, any more than the motion of the blood, and
   beating of the pulse. And though, undoubtedly, through men's infirmity
   in the present state, and especially through the weak constitution of
   some persons, gracious affections which are very strong, do excite
   lively ideas in the imagination; yet it is also undoubted, that when
   affections are founded on imaginations, which is often the case, those
   affections are merely natural and common, because they are built on a
   foundation that is not spiritual; and so are entirely different from
   gracious affections, which, as has been proved, do evermore arise from
   those operations that are spiritual and divine.

   These imaginations oftentimes raise the carnal affections of men to an
   exceeding great height: [472] and no wonder, when the subjects of them
   have an ignorant but undoubting persuasion, that they are divine
   manifestations, which the great jehovah immediately makes to their
   souls, therein giving them testimonies, in an extraordinary manner, of
   his high and peculiar favour.

   Again, it is evident from what has been observed and proved of the
   manner in which gracious operations and effects in the heart are
   spiritual, supernatural, and divine, that the immediate suggesting of
   the words of Scripture to the mind, has nothing in it which is
   spiritual.--I have had occasion to say something of this already; and
   what has been said may be sufficient to evince it: but if the reader
   bears in mind what has been said concerning the nature of spiritual
   influences and effects, it will be more abundantly manifest that this
   is no spiritual effect. For I suppose there is no person of common
   understanding, who will say, that the bringing of any words to the
   mind, is an effect of that nature, that it requires any new divine
   sense in the soul; or that the bringing of sounds or letters to the
   mind, is an effect of so high, holy, and excellent a nature, that it is
   impossible any created power should be the cause of it.

   As the suggesting of scripture words to the mind, is only exciting in
   the mind ideas of certain sounds or letters; so it is only one way of
   exciting ideas in the imagination; for sounds and letters are external
   things, the objects of the external senses of seeing and hearing;
   therefore, by what has been already said concerning these external
   ideas, it is evident they are nothing spiritual; and if at any time the
   Spirit of God suggests these letters or sounds to the mind, this is a
   common, and not any special or gracious, influence of that Spirit. And
   therefore it follows from what has been already proved, that those
   affections which have this effect for their foundation, are no
   spiritual or gracious affections.--But let it be remembered, that what
   I maintain is briefly this: when the immediate and extraordinary manner
   of words of Scripture coming to the mind, is that which excites the
   affections, and is properly the foundation of them, then these
   affections are not spiritual. Indeed persons may have gracious
   affections going with scriptures which come to their minds, and the
   Spirit of God may make use of those scriptures to excite them; when it
   is a spiritual sense or taste they have of the divine things contained
   in those scriptures, which excites their affections, and not the
   extraordinary and sudden manner of their entrance. They are affected
   with the instruction they receive from the words, and the view of the
   glorious things of God or Christ, which they contain; and not because
   the words came suddenly, as though God did as it were immediately speak
   to them. Persons oftentimes arc exceedingly affected on this
   foundation; the words of some great promises of Scripture come suddenly
   to their minds, as though that moment they proceeded out of the mouth
   of God as spoken to them. Thus they take it as a voice from God,
   immediately revealing to them their happy circumstances, and promising:
   them such and such great things: and this it is that affects and
   elevates them. There is no new or spiritual understanding of the divine
   things contained in the Scripture, or new spiritual sense of the
   glorious things taught in that part of the Bible, going before their
   affection, and as the foundation of it: all the new understanding they
   have, or think they have, as the foundation of their affection, is
   this, that the words are spoken to them, because they come so suddenly
   and in so extraordinary a manner. And so this affection is built wholly
   on the sand; because it is built on a conclusion for which they have no
   foundation. And if it was true that God brought the words to their
   minds, and they certainly knew it, even that would not be spiritual
   knowledge; it may be without any spiritual sense. Balaam might know
   that the words which God suggested to him, were indeed suggested to him
   by God, and yet have no spiritual knowledge. So that affections built
   on that notion, that texts of Scripture are sent immediately from God,
   are built on no spiritual foundation, and are vain and delusive.
   Persons who have their affections thus raised, if they should be asked,
   whether they have any new sense of the excellency of the things
   contained in those scriptures, would probably say, Yes, without
   hesitation: but it is true no otherwise than because they have taken up
   that notion, that the words are spoken immediately to them. That it is
   which makes them appear sweet, excellent, and wonderful. As for
   instance, supposing these were the words brought suddenly to their
   minds, Fear not,--it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
   kingdom. Having confidently taken up a notion that the words were
   immediately spoken from heaven to them, as an immediate revelation,
   that God was their Father, and had given the kingdom to them, they are
   greatly affected by it, and the words seem sweet to them. Oh, say they,
   what excellent things are contained in those words! But the reason why
   the promise seems excellent to them, is only because they think it is
   made to them immediately: all the sense they have of any glory in them,
   is only from self-love, and from their own imagined interest in the
   words. They had not any sense of the holy nature of the kingdom of
   heaven, the spiritual glory of that God who gives it, and of his
   excellent grace to sinful men, in giving them this kingdom of his own
   good pleasure, preceding their imagined interest in these things, and
   their being affected by them. On the contrary, they first imagine they
   are interested in these things, then are highly affected with that
   consideration, and then can own these things to be excellent. So that
   the sudden and extraordinary way of the scripture's coming to their
   mind, is plainly the foundation of the whole; which is a clear evidence
   of the wretched delusion they are under.

   The first comfort of many persons, and what they call their conversion,
   is after this manner: after awakening and terrors, some comfortable
   promise comes suddenly and wonderfully to their minds; and the manner
   of its coming makes them conclude it comes from God to them. This is
   the very foundation of their faith, hope, and comfort: from hence they
   take their first encouragement to trust in God and in Christ, because
   they think that God, by some scripture so brought, has now already
   revealed to them that he loves them, and has already promised them
   eternal life. But this is very absurd; for every one of common
   knowledge of religious principles, knows that it is God's manner to
   reveal his love to men, and their interest in the promises, after they
   have believed, and not before. They must first believe, before they
   have any personal and possessive* interest in the promises to be
   revealed. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of truth, and not of lies: he
   does not bring scriptures to men's minds in order to reveal to them
   that they have a personal and possessive interest in God's promises,
   when they have none, having not yet believed. For this would be the
   case, if God bringing texts of scripture to men's minds, in order to
   show them that their sins were forgiven, or that it was God's pleasure
   to give them the kingdom, or any thing of that nature, went before and
   was the foundation of their first faith. No promise of the covenant of
   grace belongs possessively to any man, until he has first believed in
   Christ; for it is by faith alone that we become thus interested in
   Christ, and the promises of the new covenant made in him. Therefore,
   whatever spirit applies the promises of that covenant to a person who
   has not first believed, as being already his, (in the sense already
   mentioned,) must be a lying spirit; and that faith which is first built
   on such an application of promises, is built upon a lie. God's manner
   is not to bring comfortable texts of scripture to give men assurance of
   his peculiar love, and that they shall be happy, before they have had a
   faith of dependence. [473] And if the scripture which comes to a
   person's mind, be not so properly a promise, as an invitation; yet if
   he makes the sudden or unusual manner of its coming to his mind, the
   ground on which he believes that he is invited, it is not true faith;
   because it is built on that which is not the true ground of faith. True
   faith is built on no precarious foundation. But a determination that
   the words of such a particular text were, by the immediate power of
   God, suggested to the mind, at such a time, as though then spoken and
   directed by God to him, because they came after such a manner, is
   wholly an uncertain and precarious determination; and therefore is a
   false and sandy foundation for faith; and accordingly the faith which
   is built upon it is also false. The only certain foundation which any
   person has to believe that he is invited to partake of the blessings of
   the gospel, is, that the word of God declares that persons so qualified
   as he is, are invited, and God who declares it, is true and cannot lie.
   If a sinner be once convinced of the veracity of God, and that the
   Scriptures are his word, he will need no more to convince and satisfy
   him that he is invited; for the Scriptures are full of invitations to
   sinners, to the chief of sinners, to come and partake of the benefits
   of the gospel. He will not want of God any thing new; what he hath
   spoken already will be enough with him.

   As the first comfort of many persons, and their affections at the time
   of their supposed conversion, are built on such grounds as these
   mentioned; so are their joys, hopes, and other affections afterwards.
   They have often particular words of scriptures, sweet declarations and
   promises, suggested to them, which, by reason of the manner of their
   coming, they think are immediately sent from God to them, fit that
   time. This they look upon as their warrant, the main ground of
   appropriating them to themselves, of their comfort, and the confidence
   they receive from them. Thus they imagine a kind of conversation is
   carried on between God and them; and that God, from time to time, as it
   were, immediately speaks to them, and satisfies their doubts, testifies
   his love to them, promises them supports and supplies, and reveals to
   them clearly their interest in eternal blessings. And thus they are
   often elevated, and have a sudden and tumultuous kind of joys, mingled
   with strong confidence, and a high opinion of themselves; when indeed
   the main ground of these joys, and this confidence, is not any thing
   contained in or taught by these scriptures, but the manner of their
   coming to them; which is a certain evidence of their delusion. There is
   no particular promise in the word of God made to the saint, or spoken
   to him, otherwise than all the promises of the covenant of grace are
   his, and are spoken to him. [474] Some indeed of these promises may be
   more peculiarly adapted to his case than others; and God by his Spirit
   may enable him better to understand some than others, and to have a
   greater sense of the preciousness, glory, and suitableness of the
   blessings contained in them.

   But here, some may be ready to say, What, is there no such thing as any
   particular spiritual application of the promises of Scripture by the
   Spirit of God? I answer, there is doubtless such a thing as a spiritual
   and saving application of the invitations and promises of Scripture to
   the souls of men. But it is also certain, that the nature of it is
   wholly misunderstood by many persons, to the great insnaring of their
   own souls. Hereby Satan acquires a vast advantage against them, against
   the interest of religion, and the church of God. The spiritual
   application of a scripture promise does not consist in its being
   immediately suggested to the thoughts by some extrinsic agent, and
   being borne into the mind with this strong apprehension, that it is
   particularly spoken and directed to them at that time. There is nothing
   of the hand of God evidenced in this effect, as events have proved in
   many notorious instances. It is a mean notion of a spiritual
   application of Scripture; there is nothing in the nature of it at all
   beyond the power of the devil; for there is nothing in the nature of
   the effect implying any vital communication of God. A truly spiritual
   application of the word of God is of a vastly higher nature; as much
   above the devil's power, as it is for him to apply the word of God to a
   dead corpse so as to raise it to life: or to a stone, to turn it into
   an angel. A spiritual application of the word of God consists in
   applying it to the heart; in spiritual, enlightening, sanctifying
   influences. A spiritual application of an invitation, or offer of the
   gospel, consists in giving the soul a spiritual sense, or relish, of
   the holy and divine blessings offered, and also the sweet and wonderful
   grace of the offerer, in making so gracious an overture, and of his
   holy excellency and faithfulness to fulfil what he offers, and his
   glorious sufficiency for it; so leading and drawing forth the heart to
   embrace the offer; and thus giving the man evidence of his title to,
   and personal interest in, the thing offered. And so a spiritual
   application of the promises of Scripture, for the comfort of the
   saints, consists in enlightening their minds to see the holy excellency
   and sweetness of the blessings promised, also the holy excellency of
   the promiser, his faithfulness and sufficiency; thus drawing forth
   their hearts to embrace the promiser, and thing promised; and by this
   means, giving the sensible actings of grace, enabling them to see their
   grace, and so their possessive title to the promise. An application not
   consisting in this divine sense and enlightening of the mind, but
   consisting only in the words being borne into the thoughts, as if
   immediately then spoken, so making persons believe, on no other
   foundation, that the promise is theirs; is a blind application, and
   belongs to the spirit of darkness, and not of light.

   When persons have their affections raised after this manner, those
   affections are really not raised by the word of God; the Scripture is
   not the foundation of them; it is not any thing contained in those
   scriptures which come to their minds, that raise their affections; but
   truly that effect, viz. the strange manner of the word being suggested
   to their minds, and a proposition from thence taken up by them, which
   indeed is not contained in that scripture, nor in any other; as that
   his sins are forgiven him, or that it is the Father's good pleasure to
   give him in particular the kingdom, or the like. There are propositions
   to be found in the Bible, declaring that persons of such and such
   qualifications are forgiven and beloved of God: but there are none
   declaring that such and such particular persons, independent on any
   previous knowledge of qualifications, are forgiven and beloved of God.
   Therefore, when any person is comforted, and affected by any such
   proposition, it is by another word, a word newly coined, and not any
   word of God contained in the Bible. [475] And thus many persons are
   vainly affected and deluded.

   Again, it plainly appears from what has been demonstrated, that no
   revelation of secret facts by immediate suggestion, is any thing
   spiritual and divine, in that sense wherein gracious effects and
   operations are so. By secret facts, I mean things that have been done,
   or are come to pass, or shall hereafter come to pass, which do not
   appear to the senses, nor are known by any argumentation, nor any other
   way, but only by immediate suggestion of ideas to the mind. Thus for
   instance, if it should be revealed to me, that the next year this land
   would be invaded by a fleet from France, or that such and such persons
   would then be converted, or that I myself should then be converted--not
   by enabling me to argue these events from any thing which now appears
   in providence; but--immediately suggesting, in an extraordinary manner,
   that these things would come to pass: or if it should be revealed to
   me, that this day there is a battle fought between the armies of such
   and such powers in Europe, or that such a prince in Europe was this day
   converted, or is now in a converted state, or that one of my neighbours
   is converted, or that I myself am converted; not by having any other
   evidence of these facts, but an immediate extraordinary suggestion or
   excitation of these ideas, and a strong impression of them upon my
   mind: this is a revelation of secret facts by immediate suggestion, as
   much as if the facts were future; for the facts being past, present, or
   future, alters not the case, as long as they are secret, hidden from my
   senses and reason, and not spoken of in Scripture, nor known by me any
   other way than by immediate suggestion. If I have it revealed to me,
   that such a revolution is come to pass this day in the Ottoman empire,
   it is the very same sort of revelation, as if it were revealed to me
   that such a revolution would come to pass there this day come
   twelvemonth; because, though one is present and the other future, yet
   both are equally hidden from me, any other way than by immediate
   revelation. When Samuel told Saul that the asses which he went to seek
   were found, and that his father had left caring for the asses, and
   sorrowed for him; this was by the same kind of revelation, as that by
   which he told Saul, that in the plain of Tabor there should meet him
   three men going up to God to Bethel, (1 Sam. x. 2, 3.) though one of
   these things was future, and the other was not. So when Elisha told the
   king of Israel the words that the king of Syria spake in his
   bed-chamber, it was by the same kind of revelation with that by which
   he foretold many things to come.

   It is evident that this revelation of secret facts by immediate
   suggestion, has nothing of the nature of a spiritual and divine
   operation, in the sense fore-mentioned. There is nothing at all in the
   nature of the ideas themselves, excited in the mind, that is divinely
   excellent, above the ideas of natural men; though the manner of
   exciting the ideas be extraordinary. In those things which are
   spiritual, as has been shown, not only the manner of producing the
   effect, but the effect wrought is divine, and so vastly above all that
   can be in an unsanctified mind. Now simply the having an idea of facts,
   setting aside the manner of producing those ideas, is nothing beyond
   what the minds of wicked men are susceptible of, without any goodness
   in them; and they all either have or will have, the knowledge of the
   greatest and most important facts, that have been, are, or shall be.

   And as to the extraordinary manner of producing the perception of
   facts, even by immediate suggestion, there is nothing in it, but what
   the minds of natural men are capable of; as is manifest in Balaam, and
   others spoken of in the Scripture. And therefore it appears that there
   is nothing appertaining to this immediate suggestion of secret facts
   that is spiritual, in the sense in which it has been proved that
   gracious operations are so. If there be nothing in the ideas
   themselves, which is holy and divine, and so nothing but what may be in
   a mind not sanctified, then God can put them into the mind by immediate
   power, without sanctifying it. As there is nothing in the idea of a
   rainbow of a holy and divine nature; so God, if he pleases, and when he
   pleases, immediately, and in an extraordinary manner, may excite that
   idea in an unsanctified mind. So also, as there is nothing in the idea
   or knowledge that such particular persons are forgiven and accepted of
   God, and entitled to heaven, but what unsanctified minds may have, and
   will have, concerning many at the day of judgment; so God can, if he
   pleases, extraordinarily and immediately suggest this to, and impress
   it upon, an unsanctified mind now. There is no principle wanting in an
   unsanctified mind in order to make it capable of such an impression;
   nor is there any thing in them necessarily to prevent such a
   suggestion.

   And if these suggestions of secret facts be attended with texts of
   Scripture, immediately and extraordinarily brought to mind, about other
   facts that seem in some respects similar; that does not make the
   operation to be of a spiritual and divine nature. For that suggestion
   of words of Scripture is no more divine, than the suggestion of the
   facts themselves; as has been just now demonstrated; and two effects
   together, which are neither of them spiritual, cannot make up one
   complex effect spiritual.

   Hence it follows, from what has been already shown, that those
   affections which are properly founded on such immediate suggestions of
   secret facts, are not gracious affections. Not but that it is possible
   that such suggestions may be the occasion or accidental cause of
   gracious affections; for so may a mistake and delusion; but it is never
   properly the foundation of gracious affections: for gracious
   affections, as has been shown, are all the effects of an influence and
   operation which is spiritual, supernatural, and divine. But there are
   many affections, and nigh affections, which have such revelations for
   their very foundation. They look upon these as spiritual discoveries;
   but they are a gross delusion; and this delusion is truly the spring
   whence their affections flow.

   Here it may be proper to observe, from what has been said, that what
   many persons call the witness of the Spirit, that they are the children
   of God, has nothing in it spiritual and divine; and consequently, that
   the affections built upon it, are vain and delusive. That which many
   call the witness of the Spirit, is no other than an immediate
   suggestion and impression of that fact, otherwise secret, that they are
   made the children of God, and so that their sins are pardoned, and that
   God has given them a title to heaven. This kind of knowledge, viz.
   knowing that a certain person is converted, and delivered from hell,
   and entitled to heaven, is no divine sort of knowledge in itself. This
   sort of fact requires no more divine suggestion, in order to impress it
   on the mind, than what Balaam had impressed on his mind. It requires no
   higher sort of idea for a man to have the apprehension of his own
   conversion impressed upon him, than to have the apprehension of his
   neighbour's conversion, in like manner. God, if he pleased, might
   impress the knowledge of this fact, that he had forgiven his
   neighbour's sins, and given him a title to heaven, as well as any other
   fact, without any communication of his holiness. The excellency and
   importance of the fact, does not at all hinder a natural man's mind
   being susceptible of an immediate suggestion and impression of it.
   Balaam had as important facts as this immediately impressed on his
   mind, without any gracious influence; particularly, the coming of
   Christ, his setting up his glorious kingdom, the blessedness of the
   spiritual Israel in his peculiar favour, and their happiness living and
   dying. Yea, Abimelech king of the Philistines had God's special favour
   to Abraham revealed to him, Gen. xx. 6, 7. He revealed to Laban his
   special favour to Jacob, sec Gen. xxxi. 24. and Psal. cv. 15. And if a
   truly good man should have an immediate revelation from God, in like
   manner, concerning his favour to his neighbour, or himself; would it be
   any higher kind of influence? Would it be any more than a common
   influence of God's Spirit, as the gift of prophecy, and all revelation
   by immediate suggestion is? See 1 Cor. xiii. 2. And though it be true,
   that a natural man cannot have an individual suggestion from the Spirit
   of God, that he is converted, because it is not true; yet that does not
   arise from the nature of the influence, as too high for him. The
   influence which immediately suggests this fact, when it is true, is of
   no different kind from that which immediately suggests other true
   facts: and so the kind and nature of the influence is not above what is
   common to natural men.

   But this is a mean ignoble notion of the witness of the Spirit of God
   given to his dear children, to suppose that there is nothing in the
   nature of that influence, but what is common to natural men, altogether
   unsanctified, and the children of hell; and that therefore the gift
   itself has nothing of the holy nature or vital communication of that
   Spirit. This notion greatly debases that most exalted kind of operation
   which there is in the true witness of the Spirit. [476] That which is
   called the witness of the Spirit, Rom. viii. is elsewhere in the New
   Testament called the seal of the Spirit, 2 Cor. i. 22. Eph. i. 13. and
   iv. 13. alluding to the seal of princes, annexed to the instrument, by
   which they advanced any of their subjects to some high honour and
   dignity, as a token of their special favour. Which is an evidence that
   the influence of the Spirit of the Prince of princes, in sealing; his
   favourites, is far from being of a common kind; and that there is no
   effect of God's Spirit whatsoever, which is in its nature more divine;
   nothing more holy, peculiar, inimitable, and distinguishing of
   divinity. Nothing is more royal than the royal seal; nothing more
   sacred to a prince, and more peculiarly denoting what belongs to him;
   it being the very design of it, to be the most peculiar stamp and
   confirmation of the royal authority. It is the great note of
   distinction, whereby that which proceeds from the king, or belongs to
   him, may be known from every thing else. And therefore undoubtedly the
   seal of the great King of heaven and earth enstamped on the heart, is
   something high and holy in its own nature, some excellent communication
   from the infinite fountain of divine beauty and glory; and not merely
   making known a secret fact by revelation or suggestion; which is a sort
   of influence of the Spirit of God of which the children of the devil
   have often been the subjects. The seal of the Spirit is an effect of
   the Spirit of God on the heart, of which natural men while such, can
   form no manner of notion. Rev. ii. 17. "To him that overcometh will I
   give to eat of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and
   in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that
   receiveth it." There is all reason to suppose that what is here spoken
   of, is the same evidence, or blessed token of special favour, which is
   elsewhere called the seal of the Spirit.

   What has misled many in their notion of that influence of the Spirit of
   God of which we are speaking, is the word witness, its being called the
   witness of the Spirit. Hence they have taken it to be not any work of
   the Spirit upon the heart, giving evidence from whence men may argue
   that they are the children of God, but an inward immediate suggestion,
   as though God inwardly spoke to the man, and told him that he was his
   child, by a kind of secret voice, or impression. The manner in which
   the word witness, or testimony, is often used in the New Testament,
   viz. holding forth evidence from whence a thing may be argued and
   proved to be true. Thus, Heb. ii. 4. God is said to bear witness, with
   signs and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost.
   Now these miracles are called God's witness, not because they are of
   the nature of assertions, but evidences and proofs. So Acts xiv. 3.
   "Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave
   testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to
   be done by their hands." And John v. 36. "But I have greater witness
   than that of John; for the works which the Father hath given me to
   finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father
   hath sent me." Again, chap. x. 25. "The works that I do in my Father's
   name, they bear witness of me." So the water and the blood are said to
   bear witness, 1 John v. 8. not that they asserted any thing, but they
   were evidences. So God's works of providence, in rain and fruitful
   seasons, are witnesses of God's being and goodness, i. e. they were
   evidences of these things. And when the Scripture speaks of the seal of
   the Spirit, it is an expression which properly denotes--not an
   immediate voice or suggestion, out--some work or effect of the Spirit
   left as a divine mark upon the soul, to be an evidence by which God's
   children might be known. The seals of princes were their distinguishing
   marks; and thus the seal of God is his mark, Rev. vii. 3. "Hurt not the
   earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants
   of our God in their foreheads;" Ezek. ix. 4. "Set a mark upon the
   foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations
   that are done in the midst thereof." When God sets his seal on a man's
   heart by his Spirit, there is some holy stamp, some image impressed,
   and left upon the heart by the Spirit, as by the seal upon the wax. And
   this holy stamp, or impressed image, exhibiting clear evidence to the
   conscience, that the subject of it is the child of God, is the very
   thing which in Scripture is called the seal of the Spirit, and the
   witness or evidence of the Spirit. And this mark enstamped by the
   Spirit on God's children, is his own image. That is the evidence by
   which they are known to be God's children; they have the image of their
   Father stamped upon their hearts by the Spirit of adoption. Seals
   anciently had en-engraven on them two things, viz. the image and the
   name of the person whose seal it was. Therefore when Christ says to his
   spouse, Cant. viii. 6. "Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal
   upon thine arm:" it is as much as to say, let my name and image remain
   impressed there. The seals of princes, moreover, were wont to bear
   their image; so that what they set their seal and royal mark upon, had
   their image left on it. It was their manner also to have their image
   engraven on their jewels and precious stones; the image of Augustus
   engraven on a precious stone, was used as the seal of the Roman
   emperors, in the times of Christ and the apostles. [477] The saints are
   the jewels of Jesus Christ, the great potentate, who possesses the
   empire of the universe: and these jewels have his image enstamped upon
   them by his royal signet, which is the Holy Spirit. And this is
   undoubtedly what the Scripture means by the seal of the Spirit;
   especially when it is fair and plain to the eye of conscience; which is
   what the Scripture calls our spirit. This is truly an effect that is
   spiritual, supernatural, and divine. This is in itself of a holy
   nature, being a communication of the divine nature and beauty. That
   kind of influence of the Spirit which gives and leaves this stamp upon
   the heart, is such as no natural man can have. If there were any such
   thing as a witness of the Spirit by immediate suggestion or revelation,
   this would be vastly more noble and excellent, and as much above it as
   the heaven is above the earth. This the devil cannot imitate. [478] The
   seal of the Spirit is called the earnest of the Spirit, in the
   Scripture. 2 Cor. i. 22. "Who hath also sealed us, and given the
   earnest of the Spirit in our hearts." And Eph. i. 13, 14. "In whom,
   after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
   promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption
   of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory." Now the
   earnest is part of the money agreed for given in hand, as a token of
   the whole to be paid in due time; a part of the promised inheritance
   granted now, in token of full possession of the whole hereafter. But
   surely that kind of communication of the Spirit of God, which is of the
   nature of eternal glory, is the highest and most excellent kind of
   communication, It is something in its own nature spiritual, holy, and
   divine; and therefore high above any thing of the nature of
   inspiration, or revelation of hidden facts by suggestion of the Spirit
   of God, which many natural men have had. What is the earnest and
   beginning of glory, but grace itself, especially in the more lively and
   clear exercises of it? It is not prophecy, nor tongues, nor knowledge,
   but that more excellent thing, charity that never faileth, which is a
   beginning of the light, sweetness, and blessedness of heaven, that
   world of love or charity. Grace is the seed of glory; the earnest of
   the future inheritance. What is the beginning or earnest of eternal
   life in the soul, but spiritual life? and what is that but grace? The
   inheritance that Christ has purchased for the elect, is the Spirit of
   God; not in any extraordinary gifts, but in his vital indwelling in the
   heart, exerting and communicating himself there, in his own proper,
   holy, or divine nature. The Father provides the Saviour, and the
   purchase is made of him; the Son is the purchaser and the price; and
   the Holy Spirit is the great blessing or inheritance purchased, as is
   intimated Gal. iii. 13, 14. and hence the Spirit is often spoken of as
   the sum of the blessings promised in the gospel. [479] This inheritance
   was the grand legacy which Christ left his disciples and church, in his
   last will and testament, John chap. xiv. xv. xvi. This is the sum of
   the blessings of eternal life, which shall be given in heaven. [480] It
   is through the vital communications and indwelling of the Spirit, that
   the saints have all their light, life, holiness, beauty, and joy in
   heaven: and it is through the vital communications and indwelling of
   the same Spirit, that the saints have all light, life, holiness,
   beauty, and comfort on earth; but only communicated in less measure.
   And this vital indwelling of the Spirit in the Saints, in this less
   measure, is the earnest of the Spirit, the earnest of the future
   inheritance, and the first-fruits of the Spirit, as the apostle calls
   it, Rom. viii. 22. where, by the first-fruits of the Spirit, the
   apostle undoubtedly means the same vital gracious principle, that he
   speaks of in all the preceding part of the chapter, which he calls
   Spirit, and sets in opposition to flesh or corruption. Therefore this
   earnest of the Spirit, and first-fruits, which has been shown to be the
   same with the seal of the Spirit, is his vital, gracious, sanctifying
   influence, and not any immediate suggestion or revelation of facts.
   [481]

   And indeed the apostle, when (Rom. viii. 16.) he speaks of the Spirit
   bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God,
   sufficiently explains himself. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of
   God, they are the sons of God: for ye have not received the spirit of
   bondage again to fear: but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
   whereby we cry, Abba, Father: the Spirit itself beareth witness with
   our spirits, that we are the children of God." Here, what the apostle
   says, if we take it together, plainly shows, that what he has respect
   to, when he speaks of the Spirit's giving us witness or evidence that
   we are God's children, is his dwelling in us, and leading us, as a
   spirit of adoption, or of a child, disposing us to behave towards God
   as to a father. And what is that, but the spirit of love? There are two
   kinds of spirits of which the apostle speaks, the spirit of bondage,
   that is fear; and the spirit of adoption, and that is love. The apostle
   says, we have not received the spirit of bondage, or of slaves, which
   is a spirit of fear; but we have received the more ingenuous, noble
   spirit of children, a spirit of love, which naturally disposes us to go
   to God, as children to a father. And this is the witness which the
   Spirit of God gives us that we are children. This is the plain sense of
   the apostle. The spirit of bondage works by fear, the slave fears the
   rod; but love cries, Abba, father; it disposes us to go to God, and
   behave ourselves as children. So that the witness of the Spirit of
   which the apostle speaks, is far from being any whisper, or immediate
   suggestion; but is that gracious, holy effect of the Spirit of God in
   the hearts of the saints, the disposition and temper of children,
   appearing in sweet child-like love to God, which casts out fear. It is
   plain the apostle speaks of the Spirit, over and over again, as
   dwelling in the hearts of the saints, as a gracious principle, in
   opposition to the flesh or corruption; as in the words that immediately
   introduce this passage, ver. 13. "For if ye live after the flesh, ye
   shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
   flesh, ye shall live."

   Indeed it is past doubt with me, that the apostle has a more special
   respect to the spirit of grace, or of love, or the spirit of a child,
   in its more lively actings; for it is perfect love or strong love only,
   which so witnesses or evidences that we are children, as to cast out
   fear, and wholly deliver from the spirit of bondage. The strong and
   lively exercises of evangelical, humble love to God, give clear
   evidence of the soul's relation to God, as his child; which very
   greatly and directly satisfies the soul. And though it be far from
   true, that the soul in this case judges only by an immediate witness,
   without any sign or evidence; vet the saint stands in no need of
   multiplied signs, or any long reasoning upon them. And though the sight
   of his relative union with God, and being in his favour, is not without
   a medium, viz. his love; yet his sight of the union of his heart to God
   is immediate. Love, the bond of union, is seen intuitively; the saint
   sees and feels plainly the union between his soul and God; it is so
   strong and lively, that he cannot doubt of it. And hence he is assured
   that he is a child. How can he doubt whether he stands in a child-like
   relation to God, when he plainly sees a child-like union between God
   and his soul, and hence cries, Abba, Father.

   And whereas the apostle says, the Spirit bears witness with our
   spirits; by our spirit here, is meant our conscience, which is called
   the spirit of man; Prov. xx. 27. "The spirit of man is the candle of
   the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly." We elsewhere
   read of the witness of this spirit, or of conscience, 2 Cor. i. 12.
   "For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience." And 1
   John iii. 19-21. "And hereby do we know that we are of the truth, and
   shall assure our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is
   greater than our heart, and knoweth all things. Beloved, if our heart
   condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God." When the apostle
   Paul speaks of the Spirit of God bearing witness with, our spirit, he
   does not mean two separate, collateral, independent witnesses; but that
   by one, we receive the witness of the other. The Spirit of God gives
   the evidence, by infusing and shedding abroad the love of God, the
   spirit of a child, in the heart; and our spirit, or our conscience,
   receives and declares this evidence for our rejoicing.

   Many mischiefs have arisen from that false and delusive notion of the
   witness of the Spirit, that it is a kind of inward voice, suggestion,
   or declaration from God to a man, that he is beloved, pardoned,
   elected, or the like, sometimes with and sometimes without a text of
   Scripture; for many have been the false and vain (though very high}
   affections that have arisen from hence. It is to be feared that
   multitudes of souls have been eternally undone by it; I have therefore
   insisted the longer on this head.--But I proceed now to a second
   characteristic of gracious affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [464] 1 Cor. iii. 1.

   [465] That by carnal the apostle means corrupt and unsanctified, is
   abundantly evident, by Rom. vii. 25. & viii 1, 4-12,13. Gal. v. 16. to
   the end. Col. ii. 18.

   [466] As Num. xxiv. 2. 1 Sam. x 10. and 1 Sam. xi. 6. xi. 6. and xvi.
   14. 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3. Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. and many others.

   [467] "Conceits and whimsies abound most in men of weak reason;
   children, and such as are cracked in their understanding, have most of
   them; strength of reason banishes them, as the sun does mists and
   vapours. But now the more rational any gracious person is, by so much
   more is he fixed and settled, and satisfied in the grounds of religion:
   yea, there is the highest and purest reason in religion; and when this
   change is wrought upon men, it is carried on in a rational way, Isa. i.
   18. John xix. 9." Flavel's Preparation for Sufferings, chap. vi.

   [468] "If any man should see and behold Christ really, immediately,
   this is not the saving knowledge of him. I know the saints do know
   Christ as if immediately present: they are not strangers by their
   distance: if others have seen them more immediately, I will not dispute
   it. But if they have seen the Lord Jesus as immediately as if here on
   earth, yet Capernaum saw him so; nay some of them were disciples for a
   time, and followed him. John vi. And yet the Lord was hid from their
   eyes. Nay, all the world shall see him in his glory, which shall amaze
   them; and yet this is far short of having the saving knowledge of him,
   which the Lord doth communicate to the elect. So that though you see
   the Lord so really, as that you become familiar with him, yet, Luke
   xiii. 26. Lord, have we not eat and drank, &c. -- and so perish."
   Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins, P. I. p. 197, 198.

   [469] "Satan is transformed into an angel of light: and hence we have
   heard that some have heard voices; some have seen the very blood of
   Christ dropping on them, and his wounds in his side; some have seen a
   great light shining in the chamber; some wonderfully affected with
   their dreams: some in great distress have had inward witness. Thy sins
   are forgiven; and hence such liberty and joy, that they are ready to
   leap up and down the chamber. O adulterous generation! this is natural
   and usual with men, they would fain see Jesus, and have him present to
   give them peace; and hence papists have his images--Woe to them that
   have no other manifested Christ, but such an one." Shepard's Parable of
   the Ten Virgins. P. I. 198.

   [470] "Consider how difficult, yea and impossible, it is to determine
   that such a voice, vision, or revelation is of God, and that Satan
   cannot feign or counterfeit it; seeing he hath left no certain marks by
   which we may distinguish one spirit from another." Flavel's Causes and
   Cures of Mental Errors, Cause 14.

   [471] See Deut. xiii. 1. 1 Kings xxii. 22. Isa. xxviii. 7. Ezek xiii.
   7. Zech. xiii. 4.

   [472] There is a remarkable passage of Mr. John Smith, in his discourse
   on the shortness of a Pharisaic righteousness, p. 370, 371. of his
   select discourses, describing that sort of religion which is built on
   such a foundation as I am here speaking of. I cannot forbear
   transcribing the whole of it. Speaking of a sort of Christians, whose
   life is nothing but a strong energy of fancy, he says, "Lest their
   religion might too grossly discover itself to be nothing else but a
   piece of art, there may be sometimes such extraordinary motions stirred
   up within them, which may prevent all their own thoughts, that they may
   seem to be a true operation of the divine life; when yet all this is
   nothing else but the energy of their own self-love, touched with some
   fleshly apprehensions of divine things, and excited by them. There are
   such things in our christian religion, when a carnal, unhallowed mind
   takes the chair, and gets the expounding of them, may seem very
   delicious to the fleshly appetites of men; some doctrines and notions
   of free grace and justification, the magnificent titles of sons of God
   and heirs of heaven, ever-flowing streams of joy and pleasure that
   blessed souls shall swim in to all eternity, a glorious paradise in the
   world to come, always springing up with well-scented and fragrant
   beauties, a new Jerusalem paved with gold, and bespangled with stars,
   comprehending in its vast circuit such numberless varieties, that a
   busy curiosity may spend itself about to all eternity. I doubt not but
   that sometimes the most fleshly and earthly men, that fly in their
   ambition to the pomp of this world, may be so ravished with the
   conceits of such things as these, that they may seem to be made
   partakers of the powers of the world to come. I doubt not but that they
   might be much exalted with them, as the souls of crazed or distracted
   persons seem to be sometimes, when their fancies play with those quick
   and nimble spirits, which a distempered frame of body, and unnatural
   heat in their beads, beget within them. Thus may these blazing comets
   rise up above the moon, and climb higher than the sun; which yet,
   because they have no solid consistence of their own, and are of a base
   and earthly alloy will soon vanish and fall down again, being only
   borne up by an external force. They may seem to themselves to have
   attained higher than those noble Christians, that are gently moved by
   the natural force of true goodness: they seem to be pleniores Deo. (i.
   e. more full of God,) than those that are really informed and actuated
   by the divine Spirit, and do move on steadily and constantly in the way
   towards heaven. As the seed that was sown in stony ground, grew up and
   lengthened out its blade faster, than that which was sown in the good
   and fruitful soil. And as the motions of our sense, and fancy, and
   passions, while our souls are in this mortal condition, sunk down
   deeply into the body, are many times more vigorous, and make stronger
   impressions upon us, than those of the higher powers of the soul, which
   are more subtle, and remote from these mixt animal perceptions: that
   devotion which is there seated, may seem to have more energy and life
   in it, than that which gently, and with a more delicate kind of touch,
   spreads itself upon the understanding, and from thence mildly derives
   itself through our wills and affections. But however the former may be
   more boisterous for a time, yet this is of a more consistent,
   spermatical, and thriving nature. For that proceeding indeed from
   nothing but a sensual and fleshly apprehension of God and true
   happiness, is but of a flitting and fading nature; and as the sensible
   powers and faculties grow more languid, or the sun of divine light
   shines more brightly upon us, these earthly devotions, like our
   culinary fires, will abate their heat and fervour. But a true celestial
   warmth will never be extinguished, because it is of an immortal nature;
   and being once seated vitally in the souls of men, it will regulate and
   order all the motions of it in a due manner; as the natural heat,
   radicated in the hearts of living creatures, hath the dominion and
   economy of the whole body under it. True religion is no piece of
   artifice; it is no boiling up of our imaginative powers, nor the
   glowing heats of passion; though these are too often mistaken for it,
   when in our jugglings in religion we cast a mist before our own eyes;
   but it is a new nature, informing the souls of men; it is a God-like
   frame of spirit, discovering itself most of all in serene and clear
   minds, in deep humility, meekness, self-denial, universal love to God
   and all true goodness, without partiality, and without hypocrisy,
   whereby we are taught to know God, and knowing him, to love him, and
   conform ourselves as much as may be to all that perfection which shines
   in him "

   [473] Mr. Stoddard in his Guide to Christ, p. 8. says, that "sometimes
   men, after they have been in trouble awhile, have some promises come to
   them, with a great deal of refreshing; and they hope God has accepted
   them:" And says, that "In this case, the minister may tell them, that
   God never gives a faith of assurance, before he gives a faith of
   dependence; for he never manifests his love, until men are in a state
   of favour and reconciliation, which is by faith of dependence. When men
   have comfortable scriptures come to them, they are apt to take them as
   tokens of God's love; but men must be brought into Christ, by accepting
   the offer of the gospel, before they are fit for such manifestations.
   God's method is, first to make the soul accept of the offers of grace,
   and then to manifest his good estate unto him." And p. 76. speaking of
   them "that scorn to be brought to lie at God's foot, and give an
   account of their closing with Christ, and that God revealed Christ to
   them, and drawn their hearts to him, and that they do accept of
   Christ," he says, "In this case, it is best to examine whether by that
   light that was given him, he saw Christ and salvation offered to him,
   or whether he saw that God loved him, or pardoned him: for the offer of
   grace and our acceptance goes before pardon, and therefore, much more,
   before the knowledge of it. Mr. Shepard, in his Parable of the Ten
   Virgins, Part II. p. 15. says, that "Grace and the love of Christ (the
   fairest colours under the sun) may be pretended; but if you shall
   receive, under this appearance, that God witnesseth his love, first by
   an absolute promise, take heed there; for under this appearance you may
   as well bring in immediate revelations, and from thence come to forsake
   the Scriptures. And in Part I. p. 66. he says, "Is Christ yours? Yes, I
   see it. How? By any word or promise? No: this is delusion." And p. 136.
   speaking of them that have no solid ground of peace, he reckons, "Those
   that content themselves with the revelation of the Lord's love, without
   the sight of any work, or not looking to it" And says presently after,
   "The testimony of the Spirit does not make a man more a Christian, but
   only evidenceth it; as it is the nature of a witness, not to make a
   thing to be true, but to clear and evidence it." And p. 140. speaking
   of them that say they have the witness of the Spirit, that makes a
   difference between them and hypocrites, he says. "The witness of the
   Spirit makes not the first difference: for first a man is a believer,
   and in Christ, and justified, called, and sanctified, before the Spirit
   does witness it; else the Spirit should witness to an untruth and lie."

   [474] Mr. Shepard, in his Sound Believer, p. 159. of the late
   impression at Boston, says, "Embrace in thy bosom, not only some few
   promises, but all." And then he asks the question, "When may a
   Christian take a promise without presumption, as spoken to him?" He
   answers, "The rule is very sweet, but certain: when he takes all the
   Scripture, and embraces it as spoken unto him. he may then take any
   particular promise boldly. My meaning is, when a Christian takes hold
   and wrestles with God for the accomplishment of all the promises of the
   New Testament, when he sets all the commands before him, as a compass
   and guide to walk after, when he applies all the threatenings to drive
   him nearer unto Christ the end of them. This no hypocrite can do; this
   the saints shall do; and by this they may know when the Lord speaks in
   particular unto them."

   [475] "Some Christians have rested with a work without Christ, which is
   abominable: but after a man is in Christ, not to judge by the work, is
   first not to judge from the word. For though there is a word, which may
   give a man a dependence on Christ, without feeling any work, nay when
   he feels none, as absolute promises; yet no word giving assurance, but
   that which is made to some work. He that believeth, or is poor in
   spirit, &c. until that work is seen, has no assurance from that
   promise." Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part I. p. 86. "If God
   should tell a saint that he has grace, he might know it by believing
   the word of God: but it is not in this way that godly men do know that
   they have grace: it is not revealed in the word, and the Spirit of God
   doth not testify it to particular persons." Stoddard's Nature of saving
   Conversion, p. 84, 85.

   [476] The late venerable Stoddard in his younger time, falling in with
   the opinion of some others, received this notion of the witness of the
   Spirit, by way of immediate suggestion: but in the latter part of his
   life, when he had more thoroughly weighed things, had experience of it:
   but they may easily mistake; when the Spirit of God doth eminently stir
   up a spirit of faith, and sheds abroad the love of God in the heart, it
   is easy to mistake it for a testimony. And that is not the meaning of
   Paul's words. The Spirit reveals things to us, by opening our eyes to
   see what is revealed in the word; but the Spirit doth not reveal new
   truths, not revealed in the word. The Spirit discovers the grace of God
   in Christ, and thereby draws forth special actings of faith and love,
   which are evidential; but it doth not work in way of testimony. If God
   do but help us to receive the revelations in the word, we shall have
   comfort enough without new revelation's."

   [477] See Chambers's Dictionary, under the word ENGRAVING.

   [478] Mr. Shepard is abundant in militating against the notion of men's
   knowing their good estate by an immediate witness of the Spirit,
   without judging by any effect or work of the Spirit wrought on the
   heart, as an evidence and proof that persons are the children of God.
   Parab. P. I. p. 134, 135, 137, 176, 177, 215, 216. P. II. 168. 169.
   Again, in his Sound Believer, there is a long discourse of
   sanctification as the chief evidence of justification, from p. 221, for
   many pages following; I shall transcribe but a very small part of it.
   "Tell me, how you will know that you are justified. You will say, by
   the testimony of the Spirit And cannot the same Spirit shine upon your
   graces, and witness that you are sanctified, as well? 1 John iv. 13,
   24. 1 Cor. ii. 12. Can the Spirit make the one clear to you, and not
   the other? Oh beloved, it is a sad thing, to hear such questions, and
   such cold answers also, that sanctification possibly may be an
   evidence. May be! Is it not certain?" Mr. Flavel also much opposes this
   notion of the witness of the Spirit by immediate revelation.
   Sacramental Meditations, med. 4. speaking of the sealing of the Spirit,
   he says, "In sealing the believer, he doth not make use of an audible
   voice, nor the ministry of angels, nor immediate and extraordinary
   revelations; but he makes use of his own graces, implanted in our
   hearts, and his own promises, written in the Scripture: and in this
   method, he usually brings the doubting, trembling heart of a believer
   to rest and comfort" Again, ibid. "Assurance is produced in our souls
   by the reflexive arts of faith: the Spirit helps us to reflect upon
   what hath been done by him formerly upon our hearts; hereby we know
   that we know him, 1 John ii. 3. To know that we know, is a reflex act.
   Now it is impossible there should be a reflex, before there hath been a
   direct act. No man can have the evidence of his faith, before the habit
   is infused, and the vital act performed. The object matter, to which
   the Spirit seals, is his own sanctifying operation." Afterwards, ibid,
   he says, "Immediate ways of the Spirit's sealing are ceased. No man may
   now expect, by any new revelation, or sign from heaven, by any voice,
   or extraordinary inspiration, to have his salvation sealed; but must
   expect that mercy in God's ordinary way and method, searching the
   Scriptures, examining our own hearts, and waiting on the Lord in
   prayer. The learned Gerson gives an instance of one that had been long
   upon the borders of despair, and at last sweetly assured and settled:
   he answered, Non ex nova aliqua revelatione; not by any new revelation,
   but by subjecting my understanding to, and comparing my heart with, die
   written word. And Mr. Roberts, in his treatise of the covenants, speaks
   of another, that so vehemently panted after the sealings and assurance
   of the love of God to his soul, that for a long time be earnestly
   desired some voice from heaven; and sometimes, walking in the solitary
   fields, earnestly desired some miraculous voice from the trees or
   stones there. This was denied him; but in time, a better was afforded,
   in a scriptural way." Again, ibid. "This method of sealing, is beyond,
   all other methods in the world. For in miraculous voices and
   inspirations, it is impossible there may subesse falsum, be found some
   cheat, or impostures of the devil: but the Spirit's witness in the
   heart, suitable to the revelation in the Scripture, cannot deceive us."

   [479] Luke xxiv. 49. Acts i. 4. and chap. ii. 38, 39. Gal. iii. 14.
   Eph. i. 13.

   [480] Compare John vii. 37, 38, 39. and John iv. 14. with Rev. xxi. 6.
   and Rev. xxii. 1, 17. Rev. xxii. 1, 17. xxii. 1, 17.

   [481] "After a man is in Christ, not to judge by the work, is not to
   judge by the Spirit For the apostle makes the earnest of the Spirit to
   be the teal. Mow, earnest is part of the money bargained for; the
   beginning of heaven, of the light and life of it. He that sees not that
   the Lord is his by that, sees no God his at all. Oh therefore, do not
   look for a spirit, without a word to reveal, nor a word to reveal,
   without seeing and feeling of some work first I thank the Lord, I do
   but pity those that think otherwise. If a sheep of Christ, oh, wander
   not." Shepard's Par. P. I. p. 86.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   The first objective ground of gracious affections, is the
   transcendently excellent and amiable nature of divine things, as they
   are in themselves; and not any conceived relation they bear to self, or
   self-interest.

   I SAY, that the supremely excellent nature of divine things is the
   first, or primary and original, objective foundation of the spiritual
   affections of true saints; for I do not suppose that all relation which
   divine things bear to themselves, and their own particular interest,
   are wholly excluded from all influence in their gracious affections.
   For this may have, and indeed has, a secondary and consequential
   influence in those affections that are truly holy and spiritual; as I
   shall show by and by.

   It was before observed, that the affection of love is as it were the
   fountain of all affection; and particularly, that Christian love is the
   fountain of all gracious affections. Now the divine excellency of God,
   and of Jesus Christ, the word of God, his works, ways, &c. is the
   primary reason, why a true saint loves these things; and not any
   supposed interest that he has in them, or any conceived benefit that he
   has received or shall receive from them.

   Some say that all love arises from self-love; and that it is impossible
   in the nature of things, for any man to love God, or any other being,
   but that love to himself must be the foundation of it. But I humbly
   suppose, it is for want of consideration they say so. They argue, that
   whoever loves God, and so desires his glory, or the enjoyment of him,
   desires these things as his own happiness; the glory of God, and the
   beholding and the enjoying of his perfections, are considered as things
   agreeable to him, tending to make him happy; he places his happiness in
   them, and desires them as objects which, if obtained, would fill him
   with delight and joy, and so make him happy. And so, they say, it is
   from self-love, or a desire of his own happiness, that he desires God
   should be glorified, and desires to behold and enjoy his glorious
   perfections. But then they ought to consider a little further, and
   inquire how the man came to place his happiness in God's being
   glorified, and in contemplating and enjoying God's perfections. There
   is no doubt, but that after God's glory, and beholding his perfections,
   are become agreeable to him, he will desire them, as he desires his own
   happiness. But how came these things to be so agreeable to him, that he
   esteems it his highest happiness to glorify God, &c.? is not this the
   fruit of love? Must not a man first love. God, or have his heart united
   to him, before he will esteem God's good his own, and before he will
   desire the glorifying and enjoying of God, as his happiness. It is not
   strong arguing, because after a roan has his heart united to God in
   love, and, as a fruit of this, he desires his glory and enjoyment as
   his own happiness, that therefore a desire of this happiness must needs
   be the cause and foundation of his love; unless it be strong arguing,
   that because a father begat a son, therefore his son certainly begat
   him. If after a man loves God, it will be a consequence and fruit of
   this, that even love to his own happiness will cause him to desire the
   glorifying and enjoying of God; it will not thence follow, that this
   very exercise of self-love went before his love to God, and that his
   love to God was a consequence and fruit of that. Something else,
   entirely distinct from self-love, might be the cause of this, viz. a
   change made in the views of his mind, and relish of his heart; whereby
   he apprehends a beauty, glory, and supreme good, in God's nature, as it
   is in itself. This may be the thing that first draws his heart to him,
   and causes his heart to be united to him, prior to all considerations
   of his own interest or happiness, although after this, and as a fruit
   of it, he necessarily seeks his interest and happiness in God.

   There is a kind of love or affection towards persons or things, which
   does properly arise from self-love. A preconceived relation to himself,
   or some respect already manifested by another to him, or some benefit
   already received or depended on, is truly the first foundation of his
   love; what precedes any relish of, or delight in, the nature and
   qualities inherent in the being beloved, as beautiful and amiable. When
   the first thing that draws a man's benevolence to another, is the
   beholding of those qualifications and properties in him, which appear
   to him lovely in themselves, love arises in a very different manner,
   than when it first arises from some gift bestowed by another, as a
   judge loves and favours a man that has bribed him; or from the relation
   he supposes another has to him, as a man who loves his child. When love
   to another arises thus, it arises truly and properly from self-love.

   That kind of affection to God or Jesus Christ, which thus properly
   arises from self-love, cannot be a truly gracious and spiritual love;
   as appears from what has been said already. For self-love is a
   principle entirely natural, and as much in the hearts of devils as
   angels; and therefore surely nothing that is the mere result of it, can
   be supernatural and divine, in the manner before described. [482]
   Christ plainly speaks of this kind of love, as what is nothing beyond
   the love of wicked men, Luke vi. 32. "If ye love them that love you,
   what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love them." And
   the devil himself knew that a mercenary respect to God, only for
   benefits received or depended on, (which is all one,) is worthless in
   the sight of God; Job i. 9, 10. "Doth Job serve God for nought? hast
   not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house," &c. God would
   never have implicitly allowed the objection to have been good, in case
   the accusation had been true, by allowing that matter to be tried, and
   Job to be so dealt with, that it might appear in the event, whether
   Job's respect to God was thus mercenary or no. Whereas the proof of the
   goodness of his respect was put upon that issue.

   It is unreasonable to think otherwise, than that the first foundation
   of a true love to God, is that whereby he is in himself lovely, or
   worthy to be loved, or the supreme loveliness of his nature. This is
   certainly what makes him chiefly amiable. What chiefly makes a man or
   any creature lovely, is his excellency; and so what chiefly renders God
   lovely, and must undoubtedly be the chief ground of true love, is his
   excellency. God's nature, or the divinity, is infinitely excellent; yea
   it is infinite beauty, brightness, and glory itself. But how can that
   be true Love of this excellent and lovely nature, which is not built on
   the foundation of its true loveliness! how can that be true love of
   beauty and brightness, which is not for beauty and brightness' sake?
   how can that be a true prizing of that which is in itself infinitely
   worthy and precious, which is not for the sake of its worthiness and
   preciousness? This infinite excellency of the divine nature, as it is
   in itself, is the true ground of all that is good in God in any
   respect; but how can a man truly love God, without loving him for that
   excellency, which is the foundation of all that is good or desirable in
   him? They whose affection to God is founded first on his profitableness
   to them, begin at the wrong end; they regard God only for the utmost
   limit of the stream of divine good, where it touches them, and reaches
   their interest. They have no respect to that infinite glory of God's
   nature, which is the original good, and the true fountain of all good,
   and of loveliness of every kind.

   A natural principle of self-love may be the foundation of great
   affections towards God and Christ, without seeing any thing of the
   beauty and glory of the divine nature. There is a certain gratitude
   that is a mere natural thing. Gratitude is one of the natural
   affections, as well as anger; and there is a gratitude that arises from
   self-love, very much in the same manner that anger does. Anger in men
   is an affection excited against, or in opposition to, another, for
   something in him that crosses self-love: gratitude is an affection one
   has towards another, for loving or gratifying him, or for something in
   him that suits self-love. And there may be a kind of gratitude, without
   any true or proper love; as there may be anger without hatred; as in
   parents towards their children, with whom they may be angry, and yet at
   the same time have a strong habitual love to them. Of this gratitude
   Christ declares, (Luke vi.) Sinners love those that love them; even the
   publicans, who were some of the most carnal and profligate sort of men,
   (Matt. v. 46.) This is the principle wrought upon by bribery, in unjust
   judges; and which even the brute beasts exercise; a dog will love his
   master that is kind to him. And we see in innumerable instances, that
   mere nature is sufficient to excite gratitude in men, or to affect
   their hearts with thankfulness to others for kindnesses received; and
   sometimes towards them against whom at the same time they have an
   habitual enmity. Thus Saul was once and again greatly affected, and
   even dissolved with gratitude towards David, for sparing his life; and
   yet remained an habitual enemy to him. And as men, from mere nature,
   may be thus affected towards men; so they may towards God. Nothing
   hinders, but that the same self-love may work after the same manner
   towards God, as towards men. And we have manifest instances of it in
   Scripture; as indeed the children of Israel, who sang God's praises at
   the Red sea, but soon forgot his works. Naaman the Syrian was greatly
   affected with the miraculous cure of his leprosy. His heart was engaged
   thenceforward to worship the God who had healed him, excepting when it
   would expose him to be ruined in his temporal interest. So was
   Nebuchadnezzar greatly affected with God's goodness to him, in
   restoring him to his reason and kingdom, after his dwelling with the
   beasts.

   Gratitude being thus a natural principle, ingratitude is so much the
   more vile and heinous; because it shows a dreadful prevalence of
   wickedness, when it even overbears and suppresses the better principles
   of human nature. It is mentioned as an evidence of the high degree of
   wickedness in many of the heathen, that they were without natural
   affection, Rom. ii. 31. But that the want of gratitude, or natural
   affection, are evidences of a high degree of vice, is no argument that
   all gratitude and natural affection has the nature of virtue, or saving
   grace.

   Self-love, through the exercise of a mere natural gratitude, may be the
   foundation of a sort of love to God many ways. A kind of love may arise
   from a false notion of God, that men have some way imbibed; as though
   he were only goodness and mercy, and no revenging justice; or as though
   the exercises of his goodness were necessary, and not free and
   sovereign; or as though his goodness were dependent on what is in them,
   and as it were constrained by them. Men on such grounds as these, may
   love a God of their own forming in their imaginations, when they are
   far from loving such a God as reigns in heaven.

   Again, self-love may be the foundation of an affection in men towards
   God, through a great insensibility of their state with regard to God,
   and for want of conviction of conscience to make them sensible how
   dreadfully they have provoked him to anger. They have no sense of the
   heinousness of sin, as against God, and of the infinite and terrible
   opposition of the holy nature of God against it. Having formed in their
   minds such a God as suits them, and thinking him to be such an one as
   themselves, who favours and agrees with them, they may like him very
   well, and feel a sort of love to him, when they are far from loving the
   true God. And men's affections may be much moved towards God from
   self-love, by some remarkable outward benefits received from him; as it
   was with Naaman, Nebuchadnezzar, and the children of Israel at the Red
   sea.

   Again, a very high affection towards God may, and often does, arise in
   men, from an opinion of the favour and love of God to them, as the
   first foundation of their love to him. After awakenings and distress,
   through fears of hell, they may suddenly get a notion, through some
   impression on their imagination, or immediate suggestion with or
   without texts of Scripture, or by some other means that God loves them,
   has forgiven their sins, and made them his children; and this is the
   first thing that causes their affections to flow towards God and Jesus
   Christ: and then, upon this foundation, many things in God may appear
   lovely to them, and Christ may seem excellent. And if such persons are
   asked, whether God appears lovely and amiable in himself? they would
   perhaps readily answer, Yes; when indeed, if the matter be strictly
   examined, this good opinion of God was purchased, and paid for, in the
   distinguishing and infinite benefits they imagined they received from
   God. They allow God to be lovely in himself no otherwise, than that he
   has forgiven and accepted them, loves them above most in the world, and
   has engaged to improve all his infinite power and wisdom in preferring,
   dignifying, and exalting them, and will do for them just as they would
   have him. When once they are firm in this apprehension, it is easy to
   own God and Christ to be lovely and glorious, and to admire and extol
   them. It is easy for them to own Christ to be a lovely person, and the
   best in the world, when they are first firm in the notion, that he,
   though Lord of the universe, is captivated with love to them, has his
   heart swallowed up in them, prizes them far beyond most of their
   neighbours, has loved them from eternity, and died for them, and will
   make them reign in eternal glory with him in heaven. When this is the
   case with carnal men, their very lusts will make him seem lovely; pride
   itself will prejudice them in favour of that which they call Christ.
   Selfish, proud man naturally calls that lovely which greatly
   contributes to his interest, and gratifies his ambition.

   And as this sort of persons begin, so they go on. Their affections are
   raised, from time to time, primarily on this foundation of self-love,
   and a conceit of God's love to them. Many have a false notion of
   communion with God, as though it were carried on by impulses, and
   whispers, and external representations, immediately made to their
   imagination. These things they take to be manifestations of God's great
   love to them, and evidences of their high exaltation above others; and
   so their affections are often renewedly set a-going.

   Whereas the exercises of true and holy love in the saints arise in
   another way. They do not first see that God loves them, and then see
   that he is lovely; but they first see that God is lovely, and that
   Christ is excellent and glorious; their hearts are first captivated
   with this view, and the exercises of their love are wont, from time to
   time, to begin here, and to arise primarily from these views; and then,
   consequentially, they see God's love, and great favour to them. [483]
   The saints' affections begin with God; and self-love has a hand in
   these affections consequentially and secondarily only. On the contrary,
   false affections begin with self, and an acknowledgment of an
   excellency in God, and an affectedness with it, is only consequential
   and dependent. In the love of the true saint, God is the lowest
   foundation; the love of the excellency of his nature is the foundation
   of all the affections which come afterwards, wherein self-love is
   concerned as an handmaid. On the contrary, the hypocrite lays himself
   at the bottom of all, as the first foundation, and lays on God as the
   superstructure; and even his acknowledgment of God's glory itself,
   depends on his regard to his private interest.

   Self-love may not only influence men, so as to cause them to be
   affected with God's kindness to them separately; but also with God's
   kindness to them, as parts of a community. A natural principle of
   self-love, without any other, may be sufficient to make a man concerned
   for the interest of the nation to which he belongs: as for instance, in
   the present war, self-love may make natural men rejoice at the
   successes of our nation, and sorry for their disadvantages, they being
   concerned as members of the body. The same natural principles may
   extend even to the world of mankind, and might be affected with the
   benefits the inhabitants of the earth have, beyond those of the
   inhabitants of other planets; if we knew that such there were, and knew
   how it was with them. So this principle may cause men to be affected
   with the benefits mankind have received beyond the fallen angels; with
   the wonderful goodness of God in giving his Son to die for fallen man,
   with the marvellous love of Christ in suffering such great things for
   us, and with the great glory they hear God has provided in heaven for
   us. Looking on themselves as persons concerned, interested, and so
   highly favoured; the same principle of natural gratitude may influence
   men here, as in the case of personal benefits.

   But these things by no means imply, that all gratitude to God is a mere
   natural thing, and that there is no such thing as a spiritual
   gratitude, which is a holy and divine affection. They imply no more,
   than that there is a gratitude which is merely natural, and that when
   persons have affections towards God only, or primarily, for benefits
   received, their affection is only the exercise of natural gratitude.
   There is doubtless such a thing as a gracious gratitude, which greatly
   differs from all that gratitude which natural men experience. It
   differs in the following respects.

   1. True gratitude, or thankfulness to God for his kindness to us,
   arises from a foundation, laid before, of love to God for what he is in
   himself; whereas a natural gratitude has no such antecedent foundation.
   The gracious stirrings of grateful affection to God, for kindness
   received, always are from a stock of love already in the heart,
   established in the first place on other grounds, viz. God's own
   excellency; and hence the affections are disposed to flow out, on
   occasions of God's kindness. The saint having seen the glory of God,
   and his heart overcome by it, and captivated into a supreme love to him
   on that account, his heart hereby becomes tender, and easily affected
   with kindness received. If a man has no love to another, yet gratitude
   may be moved by some extraordinary kindness; as in Saul towards David:
   but this is not the same in kind, as a man's gratitude to a dear
   friend, for whom his heart had before a nigh esteem and love. Self-love
   is not excluded from a gracious gratitude; the saints love God for his
   kindness to them, Psal. cxvi. 1. "I love the Lord, because he hath
   heard the voice of my supplication." But something else is included;
   another love prepares the way, and lays the foundation for these
   grateful affections.

   2. In a gracious gratitude, men are affected with the attribute of
   God's goodness and free grace, not only as they are concerned in it, or
   as it affects their interest, but as a part of the glory and beauty of
   God's nature. That wonderful and unparalleled grace of God which is
   manifested in the work of redemption, and shines forth in the face of
   Jesus Christ, is infinitely glorious in itself, and appears so to the
   angels; it is a great part of the moral perfection and beauty of God's
   nature. This would be glorious, whether it were exercised towards us or
   no; and the saint who exercises a gracious thankfulness for it, sees it
   to be so, and delights in it as such. Yea, his concern in it serves the
   more to engage his mind, and raise his attention and affection.
   Self-love here assists as an handmaid, being subservient to higher
   principles, to lead forth the mind to contemplation, and to heighten
   joy and love. God's kindness to them is a glass set before them,
   wherein to behold the beautiful attribute of God's goodness: the
   exercises and displays of this attribute, by this means, are brought
   near to them, and set right before them. So that in a holy thankfulness
   to God, the concern our interest has in God's goodness, is not the
   first foundation of our being affected with it; that was laid in the
   heart before, in love to God for his excellency in himself; that makes
   the heart tender, and suceptive of such impressions from his goodness
   to us. Nor is our own interest, or the benefits we have received, the
   only, or the chief objective ground of the present exercises of the
   affection, but rather God's goodness, as part of the beauty of his
   nature. The manifestations of that lovely attribute, however, set
   immediately before our eyes, in the exercise of it for us, are a
   special occasion of the mind's attention to that beauty, at that time;
   and this may serve to heighten the affection.

   Some may perhaps be ready to object, against the whole that has been
   said, that text, (1 John iv. 19.) "We love him, because he first loved
   us;" as though this implied that God's love to the true saints were the
   first foundation of their love to him. In answer to this I would
   observe, that the apostle's drift in these words, is to magnify the
   love of God to us from hence, that he loved us, while we had no love to
   him; as will be manifest to any one who compares this verse and the two
   following, with the 9th, 10th, and 11th verses. And that God loved us,
   when we had no love to him, the apostle proves by this argument, that
   God's love to the elect, is the ground of their love to him. And it is
   so three ways: 1. The saints' love to God is the fruit of God's love to
   them, as it is the gift of that love. God gave them a spirit of love to
   him, because he loved them from eternity; his love to his elect is the
   foundation of their regeneration, and the whole of their redemption. 2.
   The exercises and discoveries God has made of his wonderful love to
   sinful men by Jesus Christ, in the work of redemption, are among the
   chief manifestations of his glorious moral perfections to both angels
   and men; and so is one main objective ground of the love of both to
   God, in a good consistence with what was said before. 3. God's love to
   a particular elect person, discovered by his conversion, is a great
   manifestation of God's moral perfection and glory to him; and thus is a
   proper occasion of exciting holy gratitude, agreeable to what was
   before said. And that the saints, in these respects, love God, because
   he first loved them, fully answers the design of the apostle's argument
   in that place. So that no good argument can be drawn from hence,
   against a spiritual and gracious love in the saints, arising primarily
   from the excellency of divine things as they are in themselves, and not
   from any conceived relation they bear to their interest.

   And as it is with the love of the saints, so it is with their joy, and
   spiritual delight: the first foundation of it is not any consideration
   of their interest in divine things; but it primarily consists in the
   sweet entertainment their minds have in the contemplation of the divine
   and holy beauty of these things, as they are in themselves. And this is
   indeed the very main difference between the joy of the hypocrite, and
   the joy of the true saint. The former rejoices in himself; self is the
   first foundation of his joy: the latter rejoices in God. The hypocrite
   has his mind pleased and delighted, in the first place, with his own
   privilege, and happiness to which he supposes he has attained, or shall
   attain. True saints have their minds, in the first place, inexpressibly
   pleased and delighted with the sweet ideas of the glorious and amiable
   nature of the things of God. This is the spring of all their delights,
   and the cream of all their pleasures; it is the joy of their joy. This
   sweet and ravishing entertainment they have in viewing the beautiful
   and delightful nature of divine things, is the foundation of the joy
   they have afterward in the consideration of their being theirs. But the
   dependence of the affections of hypocrites is in a contrary order: they
   first rejoice and are elevated, that they are the favourites of God;
   and then, on that ground, he seems in a sort lovely to them.

   The first foundation of the delight a true saint has in God, is his own
   perfection; and the first foundation of the delight he has in Christ,
   in his own beauty; he appears in himself the chief among ten thousand,
   and altogether lovely. The way of salvation by Christ is a delightful
   way to him, for the sweet and admirable manifestations of the divine
   perfections in it. The holy doctrines of the gospel, by which God is
   exalted and man abased, holiness honoured and promoted, sin greatly
   disgraced and discouraged, and free, sovereign love manifested, are
   glorious doctrines in his eyes, and sweet to his taste, prior to any
   conception of his interest in these things. Indeed the saints rejoice
   in their interest in God, and that Christ is theirs; and so they have
   great reason: but this is not the first spring of their joy. They first
   rejoice in God as glorious and excellent in himself, and then
   secondarily rejoice in it, that so glorious a God is theirs. They first
   have their hearts filled with sweetness, from the view of Christ's
   excellency, the excellency of his grace, and the beauty of salvation by
   him; and then, they have a secondary joy, in that so excellent a
   Saviour and such excellent grace, is theirs. [484] But that which is
   the true saint's superstructure is the hypocrite's foundation. When
   they hear of the wonderful things of the gospel, of God's great love in
   sending his Son, of Christ's dying love to sinners, the great things
   Christ has purchased and promised to the saints, and hear these things
   eloquently set forth; they may hear with a great deal of pleasure, and
   be lifted up with what they near. But if their joy be examined, it will
   be found to have no other foundation than this, that they look upon
   these things as theirs, all this exalts them, they love to hear of the
   great love of Christ vastly distinguishing some from others; for
   self-love makes them affect great distinction from others. No wonder,
   in this confident opinion of their own good estate, that they feel well
   under such doctrine, and are pleased in the highest degree, in hearing
   how much God and Christ makes of them. So that their joy is really a
   joy in themselves, and not in God.

   And hence it comes to pass, that in their rejoicings and elevations,
   hypocrites are wont to keep their eye upon themselves; having received
   what they call spiritual discoveries, their minds are taken up about
   their own experiences; and not the glory of God, or the beauty of
   Christ. They keep thinking with themselves, what a good experience is
   this! what a great discovery is this! what wonderful things have I met
   with! and so they put their experiences in the place of Christ, his
   beauty and fulness. Instead of rejoicing in Christ Jesus, they rejoice
   in their admirable experiences. Instead of feeding and feasting their
   souls in viewing the innate, sweet, refreshing amiableness of the
   things exhibited in the gospel, they view them only as it were
   side-ways. The object that fixes their contemplation, is their
   experience; and they are ever feeding their souls, and feasting a
   selfish principle, with a view of their discoveries. They take more
   comfort in their discoveries than in Christ discovered. This is the
   true notion of living upon experiences and frames; and not our using
   them as an evidence of our good estate. It is very observable, that
   some who reject evidences are most notorious for living upon
   experience, according to the true notion of it.

   The affections of hypocrites are very often after this manner; they are
   first much affected with some impression on their imagination, or some
   impulse, which they take to be an immediate suggestion, or testimony
   from God, of his love and their happiness. They fancy a high privilege
   in some respect, either with or without a text of Scripture; they are
   mightily taken with this, as a great discovery; and hence arise high
   affections. When their affections are raised, they view those high
   affections, and call them great and wonderful experiences; and they
   have a notion that God is greatly pleased with those affections. This
   affects them still more; and so they are affected with their
   affections. Thus their affections rise higher and higher, until they
   sometimes are perfectly swallowed up; also self-conceit, and a fierce
   zeal rises; and all is built, like a castle in the air, on nothing but
   imagination, self-love, and pride.

   And as are the thoughts of such persons, so is their talk; for out of
   the abundance of their heart their mouth speaketh. As in their high
   affections they keep their eye upon the beauty of their experiences,
   and greatness of their attainments; so they are great talkers about
   themselves. The true saint, when under great spiritual affections, from
   the fulness of his heart is ready to speak much of God, his glorious
   perfections and works, the beauty and amiableness of Christ, and the
   glorious things of the gospel; but hypocrites, in their high
   affections, talk more of the discovery, than of the thing discovered.
   They are full of talk about the wonderful discoveries they have had,
   how sure they are of the love of God to them, how safe their condition
   is, how they know they shall go to heaven, &c.

   A true saint, when in the enjoyment of true discoveries of the sweet
   glory of God and Christ, has his mind too much captivated and engaged
   by what he views without himself, to stand at that time to view
   himself, and his own attainments. It would be a loss which he could not
   bear, to have his eye taken off from the ravishing object of his
   contemplation, in order to survey his own experience, and to spend time
   in thinking with himself, What a high attainment this is, and what a
   good story I now have to tell others! Nor does the pleasure and
   sweetness of his mind at that time, chiefly arise from the
   consideration of the safety of his state, or any thing he has in view
   of his own qualifications, experiences, or circumstances; but from the
   divine and supreme beauty of what is the object of his direct view,
   without himself; which sweetly entertains, and strongly holds his mind.

   As the love and joy of hypocrites are all from the source of self-love,
   so it is with their other affections, their sorrow for sin, their
   humiliation and submission, their religious desires and zeal. Every
   thing is as it were paid for beforehand, in God's highly gratifying
   their self-love, by making so much of them, and exalting them so
   highly, as things are in their imagination. It is easy for nature,
   corrupt as it is, under a notion of being already some of the highest
   favourites of heaven, and having a God who so protects and favours them
   in their sins, to love this imaginary God that suits them so well; and
   equally easy to extol him, submit to him, and to be fierce and zealous
   for him. The high affections of many are all built on the supposition
   of their being eminent saints. If that opinion which they have of
   themselves were taken away, if they thought they were some of the lower
   form of saints, (though they should yet suppose themselves to be real
   saints,) their high affections would fall to the ground. If they only
   saw a little of the sinfulness and vileness of their own hearts, and
   their deformity in the midst of their best duties and their best
   affections, it would destroy their affections; because they are built
   upon self, self-knowledge would destroy them. But as to truly gracious
   affections, they have their foundation in God and Jesus Christ; and
   therefore a discovery of themselves, of their own deformity, and the
   meanness of their experiences, though it will purify their affections,
   yet it will not destroy them, but in some respects sweeten and heighten
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [482] "There is a natural love to Christ, as to one that doth thee
   good, and for thine own ends; and spiritual, for himself, whereby the
   Lord only is exalted." Shepard's Par. of the Ten Virgins, P. I. p. 25

   [483] "There is a seeing of Christ after a man believes, which is
   Christ in his love, &c. But I speak of that first sight of him that
   precedes the second act of faith: and it is an intuitive, or real sight
   of him, as he is in his glory." Shepard's Par. of the Ten Virgins, Part
   I. p. 74.

   [484] Dr. Owen on the Spirit, p. 199, speaking of a common work of the
   Spirit, says, "The effects of this work on the mind, which is the first
   subject affected with it, proceeds not so far as to give it delight,
   complacency, and satisfaction, in the lovely spiritual nature and
   excellencies of the things revealed unto it The true nature of saving
   illumination consists in this, that it gives the mind such a direct
   intuitive insight and prospect into spiritual things, as that in their
   own spiritual nature they suit, please, and satisfy it; so that it is
   transformed into them, cast into the mould of them, and rests in them;
   Rom. vi. 17. chap. xii. 2. 1 Cor. ii. 13, 14. 2 Cor. iii. 18. chap. iv.
   6. This the work we have insisted on, reacheth not unto. For
   notwithstanding any discovery that is made therein of spiritual things
   unto the mind, it finds not an immediate, direct, spiritual excellency
   in them; but only with respect unto some benefit or advantage, which is
   to be attained by means thereof. It will not give such a spiritual
   insight into the mystery of God's grace by Jesus Christ, called his
   glory shining in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. iv. 6. as that the soul, in
   its first direct view of it, should, for what it is in itself, admire
   it, delight in it, approve it, and find spiritual solace, with
   refreshment, in it. But such a light, such a knowledge, it
   communicates, as that a man may like it well in its effects, as a way
   of mercy and salvation."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Those affections that are truly holy, are primarily founded on the
   moral excellency of divine things. Or, a love to divine things for the
   beauty and sweetness of their moral excellency, is the spring of all
   holy affections.

   HERE, for the sake of the more illiterate reader, I will explain what I
   mean by the moral excellency of divine things.--The word moral is not
   to be understood here, according to the common acceptation, when men
   speak of morality, and a moral behaviour; meaning an outward conformity
   to the duties of the moral law, and especially the duties of the second
   table. Nor is it taken for mere seeming virtues, proceeding from
   natural principles, in opposition to those that are more inward,
   spiritual, and divine. The honesty, justice, generosity, good-nature,
   and public spirit of many of the heathen, are called moral virtues, in
   distinction from the holy faith, love, humility, and
   heavenly-mindedness of true Christians; but the word moral is not to be
   understood so in this place.

   In order to a right understanding of what is meant, it must be
   observed, that divines commonly make a distinction between moral good
   and evil, and natural good and evil. By moral evil, they mean the evil
   of sin, or that evil which is against duty, and contrary to what is
   right and ought to be. By natural evil, they do not mean that evil
   which is properly opposed to duty; but that which is contrary to mere
   nature, without any respect to a rule of duty. So the evil of suffering
   is called natural evil, such as pain and torment, disgrace, and the
   like: these things are contrary to mere nature, hateful to wicked men
   and devils, as well as good men and angels. If a child be monstrous, or
   a natural fool, these are natural, but not moral evils, because they
   have not properly the nature of the evil of sin. On the other hand, as
   by moral evil divines mean sin, or that which is contrary to what is
   right; so by moral good, they mean that which is contrary to sin: or,
   in other words, that good in beings who have will and choice, whereby,
   as voluntary agents, they are, and act, as it becomes them to be and to
   act. And, it is obvious, that is becoming, which is most fit, suitable,
   and lovely. By natural good, they mean that good which is entirely of a
   different kind from holiness or virtue, viz. that which perfects or
   suits nature, considering nature abstractly from any holy or unholy
   qualifications, and without any relation to any rule or measure of
   right and wrong.

   Thus pleasure is a natural good; so is honour; so is strength; and so
   is speculative knowledge, human learning, and policy. Thus there is a
   distinction to be made between men's natural and their moral good; and
   also between the natural and moral good of the angels in heaven. The
   great capacity of angelic understandings, their great strength, and the
   honourable circumstances they are in as the great ministers of God's
   kingdom, whence they are called thrones, dominions, principalities, and
   powers, is their natural good. But their perfect holiness and glorious
   goodness, their pure and flaming love to God, to the saints and one
   another, is their moral good. So divines make a distinction between the
   natural and moral perfections of God: by the moral perfections of God,
   they mean those attributes which God exercises as a moral agent, or
   whereby the heart and will of God, are good, right, infinitely
   becoming, and lovely; such as his righteousness, truth, faithfulness,
   and goodness; or, in one word, his holiness. By God's natural
   perfections, they mean those attributes wherein his greatness consists;
   such as his power, his knowledge, his being from everlasting to ever
   lasting, his omnipresence, his awful and terrible majesty.

   The moral excellency of an intelligent voluntary being, is more
   immediately seated in the heart or wilt. That intelligent being whose
   will is truly right and lovely, he is morally good or excellent.--This
   moral excellency, when it is true and real, is holiness. Therefore
   holiness comprehends all the true moral excellency of intelligent
   beings: there is no other true virtue, but real holiness. Holiness
   comprehends all the true virtue of a good man; his love to God, his
   gracious love to men, his justice, his charity, his bowels of mercies,
   his gracious meekness and gentleness, and all other christian virtues,
   belong to his holiness. So the holiness of God, in the more extensive
   sense of the word--the sense in which the word is commonly, if not
   universally, used concerning God in Scripture--is the same with the
   moral excellency of the divine nature; comprehending all his moral
   perfections, his righteousness, faithfulness, and goodness. As in holy
   men, their christian kindness and mercy belong to their holiness; so
   the kindness and mercy of God belong to his holiness. Holiness in man,
   is but the image of God's holiness; and surely there are not more
   virtues belonging to the image, than are in the original. Has derived
   holiness more in it, than is in that underived holiness, which is its
   fountain?

   As there are two kinds of attributes in God, according to our way of
   conceiving of him, his moral attributes, which are summed up in his
   holiness, and his natural attributes--strength, knowledge, &c.--that
   constitute his greatness; so there is a twofold image of God in man,
   his moral or spiritual image, which is his holiness, that is the image
   of God's moral excellency; (which image was lost by the fall;) and
   God's natural image, consisting in man's reason and understanding, his
   natural ability, and dominion over the creatures, which is the image of
   God's natural attributes. From what has been said, it may easily be
   understood what I intend, when I say that love to divine things for the
   beauty of their moral excellency, is the spring of all holy affections.

   It has been already shown, under the former head, that the first
   objective ground of all holy affections is the supreme excellency of
   divine things as they are in their own nature. I now proceed further,
   and say more particularly, that the kind of excellency which is the
   first objective ground of all holy affections, is their holiness. Holy
   persons, in the exercise of holy affections, love divine things
   primarily for their holiness; they love God, in the first place, for
   the beauty of his holiness, or moral perfection, as being supremely
   amiable in itself. Not that the saints, in the exercise of gracious
   affections, love God only for his holiness; all his attributes are
   amiable and glorious in their eyes; they delight in every divine
   perfection; the contemplation of the infinite greatness, power,
   knowledge, and terrible majesty of God, is pleasant to them. But their
   love to God for his holiness is what is most fundamental and essential
   in their love. Here it is that true love to God begins; all other holy
   love to divine things flows from hence. Love to God for the beauty of
   his moral attributes, necessarily causes a delight in God for all his
   attributes; for his moral attributes cannot be without his natural
   attributes. Infinite holiness supposes infinite wisdom, and infinite
   greatness; and all the attributes of God as it were imply one another.

   The true beauty and loveliness of all intelligent beings primarily and
   most essentially consist in their moral excellency or holiness. Herein
   consists the loveliness of angels, without which, notwithstanding all
   their natural perfections, they would have no more loveliness than
   devils. It is moral excellency alone, that is in itself, and on its own
   account, the excellency of intelligent beings: it is this that gives
   beauty to, or rather is the beauty of, their natural perfections and
   qualifications. Moral excellency, if I may so speak, is the excellency
   of natural excellencies. Natural qualifications are either excellent or
   otherwise, according as they are joined with moral excellency or not.

   Strength and knowledge do not render any being lovely without holiness,
   but more hateful; though they render them more lovely when joined with
   holiness. Thus the elect angels are the more glorious for their
   strength and knowledge, because these natural perfections of theirs are
   sanctified by their moral perfection. But though the devils are very
   strong, and of great natural understanding, yet they are not the more
   lovely. They are more terrible, indeed, not more amiable; but on the
   contrary, the more hateful. The holiness of an intelligent creature, is
   the beauty of all his natural perfections. And so it is in God,
   according to our way of conceiving of the Divine Being: holiness is in
   a peculiar manner the beauty of the divine nature. Hence we often read
   of the beauty of holiness, (Psal. xxix. 2. Psal. xcvi. 9. and cx. 3.)
   This renders all his other attributes glorious and lovely. It is the
   glory of God's wisdom, that it is a holy wisdom, and not a wicked
   subtlety. This makes his majesty lovely, and not merely dreadful and
   horrible, that it is a holy majesty. It is the glory of God's
   immutability, that it is a holy immutability, and not an inflexible
   obstinacy in wickedness.

   And therefore it must needs be, that a sight of God's loveliness must
   begin here. A true love to God must begin with a delight in his
   holiness, and not with a delight in any other attribute; for no other
   attribute is truly lovely without this, and no otherwise than as
   (according to our way of conceiving God) it derives its loveliness from
   this. Therefore, it is impossible that other attributes should appear
   lovely, in their true loveliness, until this is seen: and it is
   impossible that any perfection of the divine nature should be loved
   with true love until this is loved. If the true loveliness of all God's
   perfections, arises from the loveliness of his holiness; then the true
   love of all his perfections, arises from the love of his holiness. They
   that do not see the glory of God's holiness, cannot see any thing of
   the true glory of his mercy and grace. They see nothing of the glory of
   those attributes, as any excellency of God's nature, as it is in
   itself; though they may be affected with them, and love them, as they
   concern their interest. For these attributes are no part of the
   excellency of God's nature, as that is excellent in itself, any
   otherwise than as they are included in his holiness, more largely
   taken; or as they are a part of his moral perfection.

   As the beauty of the divine nature primarily consists in God's
   holiness, so does the beauty of all divine things. Herein consists the
   beauty of the saints, that they are saints, or holy ones: it is the
   moral image of God in them, which is their beauty; and that is their
   holiness. Herein consists the beauty and brightness of the angels of
   heaven, that they are holy angels, and so not devils; (Dan. iv. 13, 17,
   23. Matt. xxv. 31. Mark viii. 38. Acts x. 22. Rev. xiv. 10.) Herein
   consists the beauty of the christian religion, above all other
   religions, that it is so holy & religion. Herein consists the
   excellency of the word of God, that it is so holy; [485] "Thy word is
   very pure, therefore thy servant loveth it." Ver. 128. I esteem all thy
   precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way.
   Ver. 138. Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded, are righteous, and
   very faithful. And 172. "My tongue shall speak of thy word; for all thy
   commandments are righteousness." And Psal. xix. 7-10. "The law of the
   Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is
   sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right,
   rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening
   the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the
   judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether: more to be
   desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than
   honey, and the honey-comb." Herein primarily consists the amiableness
   and beauty of the Lord Jesus, whereby he is the chief among ten
   thousands, and altogether lovely; even in that he is the holy One of
   God, Acts iii. 14. and God's holy Child, Acts iv. 27. and he that is
   holy, he that is true, Rev. iii. 7. All the spiritual beauty of his
   human nature, his meekness, lowliness, patience, heavenliness, love to
   God, love to men, condescension to the mean and vile, compassion to the
   miserable, &c. all is summed up in his holiness. And the beauty of his
   divine nature, of which the beauty of his human nature is the image and
   reflection, also primarily consists in his holiness. Herein primarily
   consists the glory of the gospel, that it is a holy gospel, and so
   bright an" emanation of the holy beauty of God and Jesus Christ. Herein
   consists the spiritual beauty of its doctrines, that they are holy
   doctrines, or doctrines according to godliness. Herein consists the
   spiritual beauty of the way of salvation by Jesus Christ, that it is so
   holy a way. And herein chiefly consists the glory of heaven, that it is
   the holy city, the holy Jerusalem, the habitation of God's holiness,
   and so of his glory, Isa. lxiii. 15. All the beauties of the new
   Jerusalem, as it is described in the two last chapters of Revelation,
   are but various representations of this. (See chap. xxi. 2, 10, 11, 18,
   21, 27. chap. xxii. 1, 3.)

   And therefore it is primarily on account of this kind of excellency,
   that the saints love all these things. Thus they love the word of God,
   because it is very pure. It is on this account they love the saints;
   and on this account chiefly it is, that heaven is lovely to them, and
   those holy tabernacles of God amiable in their eyes. It is on this
   account that they love God; and on this account primarily it is, that
   they love Christ, and that their hearts delight in the doctrines of the
   gospel, and sweetly acquiesce in the way of salvation therein revealed.
   [486]

   Under the head of the first distinguishing characteristic of gracious
   affection, I observed, that there is given to the regenerated a new
   supernatural sense, a certain divine spiritual taste. This is in its
   whole nature diverse from any former kinds of sensation of the mind, as
   tasting is diverse from any of the other five senses, and something is
   perceived by a true saint in the exercise of this new sense of mind, in
   spiritual and divine things, as entirely different from any thing that
   is perceived in them by natural men, as the sweet taste of honey is
   diverse from the ideas men get of honey by looking on it or feeling of
   it. Now the beauty of holiness, is that which is perceived by this
   spiritual sense, so diverse from all that natural men perceive in them;
   or, this kind of beauty is the quality that is the immediate object of
   this spiritual sense; this is the sweetness that is the proper object
   of this spiritual taste. The Scripture often represents the beauty and
   sweetness of holiness as the grand object of a spiritual taste and
   spiritual appetite. This was the sweet food of the holy soul of Jesus
   Christ, John iv. 32, 34. "I have meat to eat, that ye know not of--My
   meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work." I
   know of no part of the Holy Scriptures, where the nature and evidences
   of true and sincere godliness are so fully and largely insisted on and
   delineated, as in the 119th Psalm. The psalmist declares his design in
   the first verses of the psalm, keeps his eye on it all along, and
   pursues it to the end. The excellency of holiness is represented as the
   immediate object of a spiritual taste and delight. God's law, that
   grand expression and emanation of the holiness of God's nature, and
   prescription of holiness to the creature, is all along represented as
   the great object of the love, the complacence, and rejoicing of the
   gracious nature, which prizes God's commandments above gold, yea, the
   finest gold, and to which they are sweeter than the honey, and the
   honey-comb; and that upon account of their holiness, as I observed
   before. The same psalmist declares, that this is the sweetness that a
   spiritual taste relishes in God's law, Psal. xix. 7-10. "The law of the
   Lord is perfect--the commandment of the Lord is pure; the fear of the
   Lord is clean; the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
   heart--the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether;
   more to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold:
   sweeter also than honey, and the honey-comb."

   A holy love has a holy object: the holiness of love consists especially
   in this, that it is the love of that which is holy, for its holiness;
   so that the holiness of the object, is the quality whereon it fixes and
   terminates. A holy nature must needs love that chiefly, which is most
   agreeable to itself; but surely that which above all others is
   agreeable to a holy nature, is holiness; for nothing can be more
   agreeable to any nature than itself. And so the holy nature of God and
   Christ, the word of God, and other divine things, must be above all
   agreeable to the holy nature of the saints.

   Again, a holy nature doubtless loves holy things especially on account
   of that for which sinful nature has enmity against them: but that for
   which chiefly sinful nature is at enmity against holy things, is their
   holiness; it is for this, that the carnal mind is enmity against God,
   against the law, and the people of God. Now, it is just arguing from
   contraries; from contrary causes, to contrary effects; from opposite
   natures, to opposite tendencies. We know that holiness is of a directly
   contrary nature to wickedness: as therefore it is the nature of
   wickedness chiefly to oppose and hate holiness; so it must be the
   nature of holiness chiefly to tend to and delight in holiness.

   The holy nature of saints and angels in heaven (where the true tendency
   of it best appears) is principally engaged by the holiness of divine
   things. This is the divine beauty which chiefly engages the attention,
   admiration, and constant praise of the bright and burning seraphim;
   Isa. vi. 3. "One cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the
   Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory." Rev. iv. 8. "They
   rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
   which was, and is, and is to come." So the glorified saints, chap. xv.
   4. "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou
   only art holy."

   And the Scriptures represent the saints on earth as adoring God
   primarily on this account; they admire and extol all God's attributes,
   either as deriving loveliness from his holiness, or as being a part of
   it. Thus when they praise God for his power, his holiness is the beauty
   that engages them; Psal. xcviii. 1. "O sing unto the Lord a new song,
   for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand and his holy arm
   hath gotten him the victory." So when they praise him for his justice
   and terrible majesty; Psal. xcix. 2, 3. "The Lord is great in Zion, and
   he is high above all people. Let them praise thy great and terrible
   name, for it is holy." Verse 5. "Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship
   at his footstool: for he is holy." Ver. 8, 9. "Thou wast a God that
   forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
   Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill: for the Lord
   our God is holy." So when they praise God for his mercy and
   faithfulness; Psal. xcvii. 11, 12. "Light is sown for the righteous,
   and gladness for the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, ye
   righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness." 1 Sam.
   ii. 2. "There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee:
   neither is there any rock like our God."

   By this therefore all may try their affections, and particularly their
   love and joy. Various creatures show the difference of their natures,
   very much, in the things they relish as their proper good, one
   delighting in that which another abhors. Such a difference is there
   between true saints and natural men: natural men have no sense of the
   goodness and excellency of holy things, at least for their holiness.
   They have no taste for that kind of good, and so may be said not to
   know it; it is wholly hid from them. But the saints, by the mighty
   power of God, have it discovered to them; they have that supernatural
   sense given them, by which they perceive it. It is this that captivates
   their hearts, and delights them above all things; it is the most
   amiable and sweet thing, to the heart of a true saint in heaven or
   earth; that which above all others attracts and engages his soul; and
   that wherein, above all things, he places his happiness, both in this
   world, and in another. By this you may examine your love to God, to
   Jesus Christ, to the word of God, and to his people. By this you may
   examine your desires after heaven; whether they be from a supreme
   delight in this sort of beauty, without being primarily moved by your
   imagined interest in them, or expectations from them. There are many
   high affections, great seeming love and rapturous joys, which have
   nothing of this holy relish belonging to them.

   Particularly, you may try your discoveries of the glory of God's grace
   and love, and your affections arising from them. The grace of God may
   appear lovely two ways; either as bonum utile, a profitable good to me,
   what greatly serves my interest, and so suits my self-love; or as bonum
   formosum, a beautiful good in itself, and part of the moral and
   spiritual excellency of the divine nature. In this latter respect it is
   that true saints have their hearts affected, and love captivated, by
   the free grace of God.

   Thus it appears, that though persons may have a great sense of the
   natural perfections of God, and are greatly affected with them, or have
   any other sight or sense of God than that which consists in the beauty
   of his moral perfections, it is no certain sign of grace. What though
   men have a great sense of the awful greatness and terrible majesty of
   God; this is only his natural perfection, which men may see, and yet be
   entirely blind to the beauty of his moral perfection, and have nothing
   of that spiritual taste which relishes this divine sweetness.

   It has been shown already, in what was said upon the first
   distinguishing mark of gracious affections, that what is spiritual, is
   entirely different in its nature, from all that it is possible for any
   graceless person to have, while he continues graceless. But it is
   possible that those who are wholly without grace, should have a clear
   sight, and very great and affecting sense, of God's greatness, his
   mighty power, and awful majesty; for this is what the devils have,
   though they have lost the spiritual knowledge of God, consisting in a
   sense of the amiableness of his moral perfections. They are perfectly
   destitute of any relish of that kind of beauty, yet they have a very
   great knowledge of the natural glory of God, his awful greatness and
   majesty; this they behold, and therefore tremble before him. This glory
   of God all shall behold at the day of judgment; God will make all
   rational beings to behold it, angels and devils, saints and sinners.
   Christ will manifest his infinite greatness and awful majesty to every
   one, in a light that none can resist, when he shall come in the glory
   of his Father, and every eye shall see him. Then they shall cry to the
   mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the face of him that
   sits upon the throne. God will make all his enemies to behold this, and
   to live in a most clear and affecting view of it, to all eternity. God
   hath often declared his immutable purpose to make all his enemies to
   know him in this respect, in so often annexing these words to the
   threatenings he denounces against them, And they shall know that I am
   the Lord; yea, he hath sworn that all men shall see his glory in this
   respect, Num. xiv. 21. "As truly as I live, all the earth shall be
   filled with the glory of the Lord." And this kind of manifestation of
   God is very often spoken of in Scripture, as made, or to be made, in
   the sight of God's enemies in this world. [487] This was a
   manifestation which God made of himself in the sight of that wicked
   congregation at mount Sinai; deeply affecting them with it; so that all
   the people in the camp trembled Wicked men and devils will see, and
   have a great sense, of every thing that appertains to the glory of God,
   except the beauty of his moral perfection. They will see his infinite
   greatness, majesty, and power, and will be fully convinced of his
   omniscience, eternity, and immutability; and even will see every thing
   appertaining to his moral attributes themselves, except their beauty
   and amiableness. They will see and know that he is perfectly just,
   righteous, and true; and that he is a holy God, of purer eyes than to
   behold evil, who cannot look on iniquity; and they will see the
   wonderful manifestations of his infinite goodness and free grace to the
   saints. Nothing will be hid from their eyes, but the beauty of these
   moral attributes, and that beauty of the other attributes, which arises
   from it. And so natural men while in this world are capable of having a
   very affecting sense of every thing that appertains to God, but this
   only. Nebuchadnezzar had a great and very affecting sense of the
   infinite greatness and awful majesty of God; of his supreme and
   absolute dominion, his irresistible power, and high sovereignty. He saw
   that he, and all the inhabitants of the earth, were as nothing before
   him, had a great conviction in his conscience of his justice, and an
   affecting sense of his great goodness, Dan. iv. 1-3,34,35, 37. And the
   sense that Darius had of God's perfections, seems to be very much like
   his, Dan. vi. 25,. &c. But saints and angels behold the beauty of God's
   holiness: and this sight only, will melt and humble the hearts of men,
   wean them from the world, draw them to God, and effectually change
   them. A sight of the awful greatness of God may overpower men's
   strength, and be more than they can endure; but if the moral beauty of
   God be hid, the enmity of the heart will remain in its full strength.
   No love will be kindled, the will, instead of being effectually gained,
   will remain inflexible; whereas the first glimpse of the moral and
   spiritual glory of God shining into the heart, produces all these
   effects with a power which nothing can withstand.

   The sense that natural men may have of the awful greatness of God, may
   affect them various ways; it may not only terrify, but elevate them,
   and raise their joy and praise. This will be the natural effect of it,
   under the real or supposed receipt of some extraordinary mercy from
   God, by the influence of mere principles of nature. It has been shown
   already, that the receipt of kindness may, by the influence of natural
   principles, affect the heart with gratitude and praise to God; but if a
   person, at the same time, has a sense of his infinite greatness, and
   that he is as nothing in comparison of him, surely this will naturally
   raise his gratitude and praise the higher, for kindness to one so much
   inferior. A sense of God's greatness had this effect upon
   Nebuchadnezzar, on that extraordinary favour of his restoration, after
   he had been driven from men, and had his dwelling with the beasts. A
   sense of God's exceeding greatness raises his gratitude very high; so
   that he does, in the most lofty terms, extol and magnify God, and calls
   upon all the world to do it with him. If a natural man, at the same
   time that he is greatly affected with God's infinite greatness and
   majesty, entertains a strong conceit that this great God has made him
   his child and special favourite, and promised him eternal glory in his
   highest love, will not this have a tendency, according to the course of
   nature, to raise his joy and praise to a great height.

   Therefore, it is beyond doubt, that too much weight has been laid on
   the discoveries of God's greatness, awful majesty, and natural
   perfection, operating after this manner, without any real view of the
   holy, lovely majesty of God. And experience does abundantly confirm
   what reason and Scripture declare as to this matter; there having been
   very many persons, who have seemed to be overpowered with the greatness
   and awful majesty of God, but have been very far from a christian
   spirit and temper, in any proportion, or fruits in practice in any wise
   agreeable; nay, their discoveries have worked in a way contrary to the
   operation of truly spiritual discoveries.

   Not that a sense of God's greatness and natural attributes is not
   useful and necessary. For, as I observed before, this is implied in a
   manifestation of the beauty of God's holiness. Though that be something
   beyond it, it supposes it, as the greater supposes the less. And though
   natural men may have a sense of the natural perfections of God; yet
   undoubtedly this is more frequent and common with the saints, than with
   them. Grace enables men to see these things in a better manner, than
   natural men do; and not only enables them to see God's natural
   attributes, but that beauty of those attributes, which (according to
   our way of conceiving of God) is derived from his holiness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [485] Psal. cxix. 140.

   [486] "To the right closing with Christ's person, this is also
   required, to taste the bitterness of sin, as the greatest evil; else a
   man will never close with Christ, for his holiness in him, and from
   him, as the greatest good. For we told you, that that is the right
   closing with Christ for himself, when it is for his holiness. For ask a
   whorish heart, what beauty he sees in the person of Christ: he will,
   after he has looked over his kingdom, his righteousness, all his works,
   see a beauty in them, because they do serve his turn, to comfort him
   only. Ask a virgin, he will see his happiness in all; but that which
   makes the Lord amiable is his holiness, which is in him to make him
   holy too. As in marriage, it is the personal beauty draws the heart And
   hence I have thought it reason, that he that loves the brethren for a
   little grace, will love Christ much more." Shepard's Parable, Part I.
   p. 84.

   [487] See Exod. ix. 16 and chap. xiv. 18 and xv. 16. Psal lxvi. 3. and
   xlvi.10. and other places innumerable.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Gracious affections arise from the mind being enlightened rightly and
   spirituality to apprehend divine things.

   Holy affections are not heat without light; but evermore arise from
   some information of the understanding, some spiritual instruction that
   the mind receives, some light or actual knowledge. The child of God is
   graciously affected, because he sees and understands something more of
   divine things than he did before, more of God or Christ, and of the
   glorious things exhibited in the gospel. He has a clearer and better
   view than he had before, when he was not affected; either he receives
   some new understanding of divine things, or has his former knowledge
   renewed after the view was decayed; 1 John iv. 7. "Every one that
   loveth, knoweth God.'' Phil. i. 9. "I pray that your love may abound
   more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment." Rom. x. 2. "They have
   a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge." Col. iii. 10. "The new
   man, which is renewed in knowledge." Psal. xliii. 3, 4. "O send out thy
   light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy
   hill." John vi. 45. "It is written in the prophets, And they shall be
   all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and learned of
   the Father, cometh unto me." Knowledge is the key that first opens the
   hard heart, enlarges the affections, and opens the way for men into the
   kingdom of heaven; Luke xi. 52. "Ye have taken away the key of
   knowledge."

   Now there are many affections which do not arise from any light in the
   understanding; which is a sure evidence that these affections are not
   spiritual, let them be ever so high. [488] Indeed they have some new
   apprehensions which they had not before. Such is the nature of man,
   that it is impossible his mind should be affected, unless it be by
   something that he apprehends, or that his mind conceives. But in many
   persons those apprehensions or conceptions wherewith they are affected,
   have nothing of the nature of knowledge or instruction in them. For
   instance; when a person is affected with a lively idea, suddenly
   excited in his mind, of some shape, or beautiful pleasant form of
   countenance, a shining light, or other glorious outward appearance:
   here is something conceived by the mind; but nothing of the nature of
   instruction. Persons become never the wiser by such things, more
   knowing about God, a Mediator between God and man, the way of salvation
   by Christ, or any thing contained in the doctrines of the gospel.
   Persons by these external ideas have no further acquaintance with God,
   as to any of the attributes or perfections of his nature; nor have they
   any further understanding of his word, his ways, or works. Truly
   spiritual and gracious affections are not raised after this manner;
   these arise from the enlightening of the understanding, to understand
   the things taught of God and Christ, in a new manner. There is a new
   understanding of the excellent nature of God and his wonderful
   perfections, some new view of Christ in his spiritual excellencies and
   fulness; or things are opened to him in a new manner, whereby he now
   understands those divine and spiritual doctrines which once were
   foolishness to him. Such enlightenings of the understanding as these,
   are entirely different in their nature, from strong ideas of shapes and
   colours, outward brightness and glory, or sounds and voices. That all
   gracious affections arise from some instruction, or enlightening of the
   understanding, is therefore a further proof, that affections which
   arise from such an impression on the imagination, are not gracious.

   Hence also it appears, that affections arising from texts of Scripture
   coming to the mind, are vain, when no instruction received in the
   understanding from those texts, or any thing taught in them, is the
   ground of the affection, but the manner of their coming to the mind.
   When Christ makes the Scripture a means of the heart's burning with
   gracious affection, it is by opening the Scriptures to their
   understandings; Luke xxiv. 32. "Did not our heart burn within us, while
   he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the
   Scriptures?" It appears also that the affection which is occasioned by
   the coming of a text of Scripture must be vain, when the affection is
   founded on something supposed to be taught by it, which really is not
   contained in it, nor in any other Scripture; because such supposed
   instruction is not real instruction, but a misapprehension of the mind.
   For instance, when persons suppose that they are expressly taught by
   some scripture coming to their minds, that they in particular are
   beloved of God, that their sins are forgiven, that God is their Father,
   and the like; this is a misapprehension; for the Scripture no where
   reveals the individual persons who are beloved, expressly, but only by
   revealing the qualifications of persons beloved of God.--Therefore this
   matter is not to be learned from Scripture any other way than by
   consequence, from these qualifications; for things are not to be
   learned from the Scripture any other way than they are taught in the
   Scripture.

   Affections really arise from ignorance, rather than instruction, in the
   instances which have been mentioned; as likewise in some others that
   might be mentioned. Some, when they find themselves free of speech in
   prayer, call it God's being with them; this affects them, and their
   affections are increased; when they look not into the cause of this
   freedom of speech, which may arise many other ways besides God's
   spiritual presence. So some are much affected with apt thoughts that
   come into their minds about the Scripture, and call it the Spirit of
   God teaching them. They ascribe many of the workings of their own
   minds, of which they have a high opinion, to the special, immediate
   influences of God's Spirit; and so are mightily affected with their
   privilege. And there are some instances of persons, in whom it seems
   manifest, that the first ground of their affection is some bodily
   sensation. The animal spirits, by some cause, (and probably sometimes
   by the devil,) are suddenly and unaccountably put into a very agreeable
   motion, causing persons to feel pleasantly in their bodies; the spirits
   being put into such a motion as is wont to be connected with the
   exhilaration of the mind; and the soul, by the laws of its union with
   the body, hence feels pleasure. This motion of the animal spirits does
   not first arise from any apprehension of the mind whatsoever; but the
   very first thing felt, is an exhilaration and a pleasant external
   sensation, it may be, in their breasts. Hence through ignorance, the
   person being surprised, begins to think, surely this is the Holy Ghost
   coming into him. And then the mind begins to be affected and raised:
   there is first great joy; and then many other affections, in a very
   tumultuous manner, putting all nature, both body and mind, into a
   mighty ruffle. For though, as I observed before, it is the soul only
   that is the teat of the affections; yet this hinders not but that
   bodily sensations may, in this manner, be an occasion of affections in
   the mind.

   And though men's religious affections truly arise from some
   instruction, or light in the understanding; yet the affection is not
   gracious, unless the light which is the ground of it be spiritual.
   Affections may be excited by what they obtain merely by human teaching,
   with the common improvement of their faculties. Men may be much
   affected by knowledge of religious things obtained this way; as some
   philosophers have been mightily affected, and almost carried beyond
   themselves, by the discoveries they have made in mathematics and
   natural philosophy. So men may be much affected from common
   illuminations of the Spirit of God, in which he assists their faculties
   to a greater degree of that kind of understanding of religious matters,
   which they have by the ordinary exercise and improvement of their own
   faculties. Such illuminations may much affect the mind; as in many whom
   we read of in Scripture, that were once enlightened: but these
   affections are not spiritual.

   There is, if the Scriptures are of any use to teach us any thing, a
   spiritual, supernatural understanding of divine things, peculiar to the
   saints. 1 Cor. ii. 14. "But the natural man receiveth not the things of
   the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he
   know them, because they are spiritually discerned." It is certainly a
   kind of seeing spiritual things peculiar to the saints, which is spoken
   of in 1 John iii. 6. "Whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, neither
   known him." 3 John 11. "He that doth evil, hath not seen God." And John
   vi. 40. "This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
   seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life." Chap.
   xiv. 19. "The world seeth me no more; but ye see me. Chap. xvii. 3.
   "This is eternal life, that they might know thee the only true God, and
   Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." Matt. xi. 27. "No man knoweth the
   Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, but the Son,
   and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him." John xii. 45. "He that
   seeth me, seeth him that sent me." Psal. ix. 10. "They that know thy
   name, will put their trust in thee." "I count all things but loss, for
   the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord:" [489] -- ver.
   10. That I may know him."--Innumerable other places there are, all over
   the Bible, which show the same. And that there is an understanding of
   divine things, which in its nature and kind is wholly different from
   all knowledge that natural men have, is evident from this, that there
   is what the Scripture calls spiritual understanding; Col. i. 9. "We do
   not cease to pray for you, and to desire that you may be filled with
   the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding."
   It has been already shown, that what is spiritual, in the ordinary use
   of the word in the New Testament, is entirely different in nature and
   kind, from all which natural men are or can be the subjects of.

   From hence it may be surely inferred, wherein spiritual understanding
   consists. For if there be in the saints a kind of perception, which is
   in its nature perfectly diverse from all that natural men can have, it
   must consist in their having a certain kind of ideas, or sensations of
   mind, which are simply diverse from all that can be in the minds of
   natural men. And that is the same thing as to say, that it consists in
   the sensations of a new spiritual sense, which the souls of natural men
   have not; as is evident by what has been repeatedly observed. But I
   have already shown what that new spiritual sense is, which the saints
   have given them in regeneration, and what is the object of it. I have
   shown that the immediate object of it is the supreme beauty and
   excellency of the nature of divine things, as they are in themselves.
   And this is agreeable to the Scripture: the apostle very plainly
   teaches, that the great thing discovered by spiritual light, and
   understood by spiritual knowledge, is the glory of divine things, 2
   Cor. iv. 3, 4. "But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
   lost: in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them that
   believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is
   the image of God, should shine unto them:" together with ver. 6. "For
   God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into
   our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in
   the face of Jesus Christ." And chap. iii. 18. preceding, "But we all
   with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
   changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit
   of the Lord." And it must needs be so, for the Scripture often teaches,
   that all true religion summarily consists in the love of divine things.
   And therefore that kind of understanding or knowledge, which is the
   proper foundation of true religion, must be the knowledge of the
   loveliness of divine things. For doubtless, that knowledge which is the
   proper foundation of love, is the knowledge of loveliness. What that
   beauty or loveliness of divine things is, which is the proper and
   immediate object of a spiritual sense of mind, was showed under the
   last head insisted on, viz. That it is the beauty of their moral
   perfection. Therefore it is in the view or sense of this, that
   spiritual understanding does more immediately and primarily consist.
   And indeed it is plain it can be nothing else; for, (as has been
   shown,) there is nothing pertaining to divine things, besides the
   beauty of their moral excellency--and those properties and qualities of
   divine things of which this beauty is the foundation--but what natural
   men and devils can see and know, and will know fully and clearly to all
   eternity.

   From what has been said, therefore, we come necessarily to this
   conclusion, that spiritual understanding consists in a cordial sense of
   the supreme beauty and sweetness of the holiness or moral perfection of
   divine things, together with all that discerning and knowledge of
   things of religion, that depends upon and flows from such a sense.

   Spiritual understanding consists primarily in a cordial sense, or a
   sense of heart, of that spiritual beauty. I say, a sense of heart; for
   it is not speculation merely that is concerned in this kind of
   understanding: nor can there be a clear distinction made between the
   two faculties of understanding and will, as acting distinctly and
   separately, in this matter. When the mind is sensible of the beauty and
   amiableness of a thing, that implies a sensibleness of delight in the
   presence of its idea: and this carries in the very nature of it, the
   sense of the heart; or an effect and impression of the soul of a
   substance possessed of taste, inclination, and will.

   There is a distinction to be made between a mere notional
   understanding, wherein the mind only beholds things in the exercise of
   a speculative faculty; and the sense of the heart, wherein the mind not
   only speculates and beholds, but relishes and feels. That sort of
   knowledge, by which a man has a sensible perception of amiableness and
   loathsomeness, or of sweetness and nauseousness, is not the same sort
   of knowledge with that, by which he knows what a triangle or a square
   is. The one is mere speculative knowledge; the other sensible,
   knowledge, in which more than the mere intellect is concerned. The
   heart is the proper subject of it, or the soul, as a being that not
   only beholds, but has inclination, and is pleased or displeased. And
   yet there is the nature of instruction in it; as he that has perceived
   the sweet taste of honey, knows much more about it, than he who has
   only looked upon and felt it.

   The apostle seems to make a distinction between mere speculative and
   spiritual knowledge, in calling the former the form of knowledge, and
   of the truth; Rom. ii. 20. "Which hast the form of knowledge, and of
   the truth in the law." The latter is often represented by relishing,
   smelling, or tasting; 2 Cor. ii. 14. "Now thanks be to God, which
   always causeth us to triumph in Christ Jesus, and maketh manifest the
   savour of his knowledge in every place." Matt. xvi. 23. "Thou savourest
   not the things that be of God, but those things that be of men." 1 Pet.
   ii. 2, 3. "As new-born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that
   ye may grow thereby; if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
   gracious." Cant. i. 3. "Because of the savour of thy good ointments,
   thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love
   thee:" compared with 1 John ii. 20. "But ye have an unction from the
   Holy One, and ye know all things."

   Spiritual understanding primarily consists in this sense or taste of
   the moral beauty of divine things; so that no knowledge can be called
   spiritual, any further than it arises from. and has this in it. But
   secondarily, it includes all that discerning and knowledge of religious
   things, which depends upon and flows from such a sense. When the true
   beauty and amiableness in divine things, is discovered to the soul, it
   opens as it were a new world to its view. This shows the glory of all
   God's perfections, and of every thing appertaining to the Divine Being.
   For, as was observed before, the beauty of all arises from God's moral
   perfection. This shows the glory of all God's works, both of creation
   and providence. For it is their special glory, that God's holiness,
   righteousness, faithfulness, and goodness, are so manifested in them;
   and without these moral perfections, there would be no glory in that
   power and skill with which they are wrought. The glorifying of God's
   moral perfections, is the special end of all the works of God's hands.
   By this sense of the moral beauty of divine things, is known the
   sufficiency of Christ as a Mediator: for it is only by the discovery of
   beauty in the moral perfection of Christ, that the believer is let into
   the knowledge of the excellency of his person, so as to know any thing
   more of it than the devils do: and it is only by the knowledge of the
   excellency of Christ's person, that any know his sufficiency as a
   Mediator; for the latter depends upon and arises from the former. It is
   by seeing the excellency of Christ's person, that the saints are made
   sensible of the preciousness of his blood, and its sufficiency to atone
   for sin: for therein consists the preciousness of Christ's blood, that
   it is the blood of so excellent and amiable a person. And on this
   depends the meritoriousness of his obedience, the sufficiency and
   prevalence of his intercession. By this sight of moral beauty, is seen
   the beauty of salvation by Christ; for that consists in the beauty" of
   God's moral perfections, which wonderfully shines forth in every step
   of this method of salvation. By this is seen the fitness and
   suitableness of this way; which consists in its tendency to deliver us
   from sin and hell, and to bring us to happiness. For true happiness
   consists in the possession and enjoyment of moral good, in a way
   sweetly agreeing with God's moral perfections. And in the way being so
   contrived as to attain these ends, consists the excellent wisdom of
   that way. By this is seen the excellency of the word of God. Take away
   all the moral beauty and sweetness in the word, and the Bible is left
   wholly a dead letter, a dry, lifeless, tasteless thing. By this is seen
   the true foundation of our duty, the worthiness of God to be so
   esteemed, honoured, loved, submitted to, and served, as he requires of
   us, and the amiableness of the duties themselves required. And by this
   is seen the true evil of sin: for he who sees the beauty of holiness,
   must necessarily see the hatefulness of sin, its contrary. By this men
   understand the true glory of heaven, which consists in the beauty and
   happiness contained in holiness. By this is seen the amiableness and
   happiness of saints and angels. He that sees the beauty of holiness, or
   true moral good, sees the greatest and most important thing in the
   world, which is the fulness of all things, without which all the world
   is empty, yea, worse than nothing. Unless this is seen, nothing is seen
   that is worth the seeing; for there is no other true excellency or
   beauty. Unless this be understood, nothing is understood worthy the
   exercise of the noble faculty of understanding. This is the beauty of
   the Godhead, the divinity of divinity, (if I may so speak,) the good of
   the infinite fountain of good. Without this, God himself (if that were
   possible) would be an infinite evil, we ourselves had better never have
   been; and there had better have been no being. He therefore in effect
   knows nothing, that knows not this; his knowledge is but the shadow of
   knowledge, or the form of knowledge, as the apostle calls it. Well
   therefore may the Scripture represent those who are destitute of that
   spiritual sense, by which is perceived the beauty of holiness, as
   totally blind, deaf, and senseless, yea, dead. And well may
   regeneration, in which this divine sense is given to the soul by its
   Creator, be represented as opening the blind eyes, raising the dead,
   and bringing a person into a new world. For if what has been said be
   considered, it will be manifest, that when a person has this sense and
   knowledge given him, he will view nothing as he did before; though
   before he knew all things "after the flesh, yet henceforth he will know
   them so no more; and he is become a new creature, old things are passed
   away, behold all things are become new," (2 Cor. v. 16, 17.)

   Besides, there arises from this sense of spiritual beauty, all true
   experimental knowledge of religion, which is of itself as it were a new
   world of knowledge. He that sees not the beauty of holiness, knows not
   what one of the graces of God's Spirit is, he is destitute of any
   conception of gracious exercises of soul, holy comforts and delights,
   and effects of the saving influences of the Spirit of God on the heart.
   He is ignorant of the greatest works of God, the most important and
   glorious effects of his power upon the creature; he is wholly ignorant
   of the saints as saints, and knows not what they are; and in effect is
   wholly ignorant of the spiritual world. Thus, it plainly appears, that
   God implanting a spiritual, supernatural sense, makes a great change in
   a man. And were it not for the very imperfect degree in which this
   sense is commonly given at first, or the small degree of this glorious
   light that first dawns upon the soul; the change made by this spiritual
   opening of the eyes in conversion, would be much greater, and more
   remarkable every way, than if a man born blind should have the sense of
   seeing imparted to him at once, in the midst of the clear light of the
   sun, discovering a world of visible objects. For though sight be more
   noble than any of the other external senses, yet this spiritual sense
   is infinitely more noble, and the object infinitely more
   important.--This is that knowledge of divine things from whence all
   truly gracious affections proceed; by which therefore all affections
   are to be tried. Those affections that arise wholly from any other kind
   of knowledge, or do result from any other kind of apprehensions, are
   vain. [490]

   From what has been said may be learned, wherein the most essential
   difference lies between that light or understanding which is given by
   the common influences of the Spirit of God, on the hearts of natural
   men, and that saving instruction which is given to the saints. The
   latter primarily and most essentially lies in beholding the holy beauty
   of divine things; which is the only true moral good, and to which the
   soul of fallen man is by nature totally blind. The former consists only
   in a further understanding, through the assistance of natural
   principles, of those things which men may know, in some measure, by the
   ordinary exercise of their faculties; it is only the knowledge of those
   things pertaining to religion, which are natural. Thus for instance, in
   awakenings and convictions of conscience in natural men, the Spirit of
   God gives no knowledge of true moral beauty, but only assists the mind
   to a clearer idea of the guilt of sin, or its relation to punishment,
   and its connexion with the evil of suffering, (without any sight of its
   true moral evil, or odiousness as sin,) and a clearer idea of the
   natural perfections of God, wherein consists, not his holy beauty and
   glory, but his awful and terrible greatness. It is a clear sight of
   this, that will fully awaken the consciences of wicked men at the day
   of judgment, without any spiritual light. And it is a lesser degree of
   the same, that awakens the consciences of natural men, without
   spiritual light, in this world. The same discoveries are in some
   measure given in the conscience of an awakened sinner in this world,
   which will be given more fully at the day of judgment. The same kind of
   apprehension, in a lesser degree, makes awakened sinners in this world
   sensible of the dreadful guilt of sin against so great and terrible a
   God, and of its amazing punishment--and fills them with fearful
   apprehensions of divine wrath--that will thoroughly convince all wicked
   men, of the infinitely dreadful nature and guilt of sin, and astonish
   them with apprehensions of wrath, when Christ shall come in the glory
   of his power and majesty, and every eye shall see him, and all the
   kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. And in those common
   illuminations which are sometimes given to natural men, exciting in
   them some kind of religious desire, love, and joy, the mind is only
   assisted to a clearer apprehension of the natural good that is in
   divine things. Thus sometimes, under common illuminations, men are
   raised with the ideas of the natural good that is in heaven; as its
   outward glory, its ease, its honour and advancement, being there the
   objects of the high favour of God, and the great respect of men and
   angels, &c. So there are many things exhibited in the gospel,
   concerning God and Christ, and the way of salvation, that have a
   natural good in them, which suits the natural principle of self-love.
   Thus in that great goodness of God to sinners, and the wonderful dying
   love of Christ, there is a natural good, which all men love, as they
   love themselves; as well as a spiritual and holy beauty, which is seen
   only by the regenerate. Therefore there are many things appertaining to
   the word of God's grace delivered in the gospel, which may cause
   natural men, when they hear it, anon with joy to receive it. All that
   love which natural men have to God and Christ, Christian virtues, and
   good men, is not from any sight of the amiableness, or true moral
   excellency of these things; but only for the sake of the natural good
   there is in them. All natural men's hatred of sin, is as much from
   principles of nature, as their hatred of a tiger for his rapaciousness,
   or their aversion to a serpent for his poison and hurtfulness. Their
   love of Christian virtue, is from no higher principle than their love
   of a man's good nature, which appears amiable to natural men; but no
   otherwise than silver and gold appears amiable in the eyes of a
   merchant, or than the blackness of the soil is beautiful in the eyes of
   the farmer.

   From what has been said it appears, that spiritual understanding does
   not consist in any new doctrinal knowledge, or in having suggested to
   the mind any new proposition, not before read or heard of: for it is
   plain, that this suggesting of new propositions, is a thing entirely
   diverse from giving the mind a new taste or relish of beauty and
   sweetness. [491] It is also evident, that spiritual knowledge does not
   consist in any new doctrinal explanation of any part of the Scripture;
   for still, this is but doctrinal knowledge, or the knowledge of
   propositions; the doctrinal explaining of any part of Scripture, is
   only giving us to understand, what are the propositions contained or
   taught in that part of Scripture.

   Hence it appears, that the spiritual understanding of the Scripture,
   does not consist in opening to the mind the mystical meaning of the
   Scripture, in its parables, types, and allegories; for this is only a
   doctrinal explication of the Scripture. He that explains what is meant
   by the stony ground; and the seed springing up suddenly, and quickly
   withering away, only explains what propositions or doctrines are taught
   in it. So he that explains what is typified by Jacob's ladder, and the
   angels of God ascending and descending on it, or what was typified by
   Joshua's leading Israel through Jordan, only shows what propositions
   are hid in these passages. And many men can explain these types, who
   have no spiritual knowledge. It is possible that a man might know how
   to interpret all the types, parables, enigmas, and allegories in the
   Bible, and not have one beam of spiritual light in his mind; because he
   may not have any spiritual sense of the holy beauty of divine things,
   and may see nothing of this kind of glory in any of these mysteries, or
   any other part of the Scripture. It is plain, by what the apostle says,
   that a man might understand all such mysteries, and have no saving
   grace; 1 Cor. xiii. 2. "And though I have the gift of prophecy, and
   understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and have not charity, it
   profiteth me nothing." They therefore are very foolish, who are exalted
   in an opinion of their own spiritual attainments, from their notions of
   the mystical meaning of scripture passages, as though it was a
   spiritual understanding, immediately given them by the Spirit of God.
   Their affections may be highly raised; but what has been said, shows
   the vanity of such affections.

   From what has been said, it is also evident, that it is not spiritual
   knowledge, for persons to be informed of their duty, by having it
   immediately suggested to their minds, that such and such outward
   actions or deeds are the will of God. If we suppose that it is truly
   God's manner thus to signify his will to his people, by immediate
   inward suggestions, such suggestions have nothing of the nature of
   spiritual light. Such knowledge would only be doctrinal; for a
   proposition concerning the will of God, is as properly a doctrine of
   religion, as a proposition concerning the nature or a work of God.
   Having any proposition declared to a man, either by speech, or inward
   suggestion, differs vastly from having the holy beauty of divine things
   manifested to the soul, wherein spiritual knowledge most essentially
   consists. Thus there was no spiritual light in Balaam; though he had
   the will of God immediately suggested to him by the Spirit, concerning
   the way that he should go, and what he should do and say.

   It is manifest therefore, that being led and directed in this manner,
   is not that holy and spiritual leading of the Spirit of God, which is
   peculiar to the saints, and a distinguishing mark of the sons of God,
   spoken of Rom. viii. 14. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
   are the sons of God." Gal. v. 18. "But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye
   are not under the law."

   And if persons have the will of God concerning their actions, suggested
   to them by some text of Scripture suddenly brought to their
   minds--which text, as the words lay in the Bible before they came to
   their minds, related to the action and behaviour of some other
   person--it alters not the case. The suggestion being accompanied with
   an apt text of Scripture, does not make it to be of the nature of
   spiritual instruction. For instance, suppose a person in New England,
   on some occasion, were at a loss whether it was his duty to go into
   some popish or heathenish land, where he was like to be exposed to many
   difficulties and dangers, and should pray to God that he would show him
   the way of his duty; and after earnest prayer, should have those words
   which God spake to Jacob, Gen. xlvi. suddenly and extraordinarily
   brought to his mind, as if they were spoken to him; "Fear not to go
   down into Egypt; and I will go with thee; and I will also surely bring
   thee up again." In which words, though as they lay in the Bible before
   they came to his mind, they related only to Jacob and his behaviour;
   yet he supposes that God has a further meaning, as they were brought
   and applied to him; that by Egypt is to be understood this particular
   country he has in his mind, and that the action intended is his going
   thither, and the meaning of the promise is, that God would bring him
   back into New England again. There is nothing of the nature of a
   spiritual or gracious leading of the Spirit in this; for there is
   nothing of the nature of spiritual understanding in it. Spiritually to
   understand the Scripture, is rightly to understand what is in the
   Scripture, and what was in it before it was understood: it is to
   understand rightly, what used to be contained in the meaning of it, and
   not the making a new meaning. When the mind is enlightened spiritually
   and rightly to understand the Scripture, it is enabled to see that
   which before was not seen, by reason of blindness. But if it was by
   reason of blindness, that is an evidence that the same meaning was in
   it before, otherwise it would have been no blindness not to see it: it
   is no blindness not to see a meaning which is not there. Spiritually
   enlightening the eyes to understand the Scripture, is to open the eyes,
   Psal. cxix. 18. "Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
   out of thy law;" which argues, that the reason why the same was not
   seen in the Scripture before, was, that the eyes were shut; which would
   not be the case, if the meaning now understood was not there before,
   but is now newly added to the Scripture by the manner of the Scripture
   coming to the mind. This making of a new meaning to the Scripture, is
   the same thing as making a new scripture: it is properly adding to the
   word, which is threatened with so dreadful a curse. Spiritually to
   understand the Scripture, is to have the eyes of the mind opened to
   behold the wonderful, spiritual excellency of the glorious things
   contained in the true meaning of it, and that always were contained in
   it, ever since it was written; to behold the amiable and bright
   manifestations of the divine perfections, the excellency and
   sufficiency of Christ, the suitableness of the way of salvation by him,
   and the spiritual glory of the precepts and promises of the Scripture,
   &c. These things are, and always were in the Bible, and would have been
   seen before, if it had not been for blindness, without having any new
   sense added.

   And as to a gracious leading of the Spirit, it consists in two things;
   partly in instructing a person in his duty by the Spirit, and partly in
   powerfully inducing him to comply with that instruction. But so far as
   the gracious leading of the Spirit lies in instruction, it consists in
   a person's being guided by a spiritual and distinguishing taste of that
   which has in it true moral beauty. I have shown that spiritual
   knowledge primarily consists in a taste or relish of the amiableness
   and beauty of that which is truly good and holy: this holy relish
   discerns and distinguishes between good and evil, between holy and
   unholy, without being at the trouble of a train of reasoning. As he who
   has a true relish of external beauty, knows what is beautiful by
   looking upon it; he stands in no need of a train of reasoning about the
   proportion of the features, in order to determine whether that which he
   sees be a beautiful countenance or no; he needs nothing, but only the
   glance of his eye. He who has a rectified musical ear, knows whether
   the sound he hears be true harmony; he does not need first to be at the
   trouble of the reasonings of a mathematician, about the proportion of
   the notes. He that has a rectified palate, knows what is good food, as
   soon as he tastes it, without the reasoning of a physician about it.
   There is a holy beauty and sweetness in words and actions, as well as a
   natural beauty in countenances and sounds, and sweetness in food; Job
   xii. 11. "Doth not the ear try words, and the mouth taste his meat?"
   When a holy and amiable action is suggested to the thoughts of a holy
   soul; that soul, if in the lively exercise of its spiritual taste, at
   once sees a beauty in it, and so inclines to it, and closes with it. On
   the contrary, if an unworthy, unholy action be suggested, its
   sanctified eye sees no beauty in it, and is not pleased with it; its
   sanctified taste relishes no sweetness in it, but on the contrary, it
   is nauseous. Yea, its holy taste and appetite leads it to think of that
   which is truly lovely, and naturally suggests it; as a healthy taste
   and appetite naturally suggests the idea of its proper object. Thus a
   holy person is led by the Spirit, as he is instructed and led by his
   holy taste, and disposition of heart; whereby, in the lively exercise
   of grace, he easily distinguishes good and evil, and knows at once what
   is a suitable, amiable behaviour towards God, and towards man, in this
   case and the other; and judges what is right, as it were spontaneously,
   without a particular deduction, by any other arguments than the beauty
   that is seen, and goodness that is tasted. Thus Christ blames the
   Pharisees, that they did not, even of their ownselves, judge what was
   right, without needing miracles to prove it. Luke xii. 57. The apostle
   seems plainly to have respect to this way of judging of spiritual
   beauty, in Rom. xii. 2. "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
   mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and perfect, and acceptable
   will of God."

   There is such a thing as good taste of natural beauty, (of which
   learned men often speak,) exercised about temporal things, in judging
   of them; as about the justness of a speech, the goodness of style, the
   beauty of a poem, the gracefulness of deportment, &c. A late great
   philosopher of our nation, writes thus upon it; [492] "To have a taste,
   is to give things their real value, to be touched with the good, to be
   shocked with the ill; not to be dazzled with false lustres, but in
   spite of all colours, and every thing that might deceive or amuse, to
   judge soundly. Taste and judgment then, should be the same thing; and
   yet it is easy to discern a difference. The judgment forms its opinions
   from reflection: the reason on this occasion fetches a kind of circuit,
   to arrive at its end; it supposes principles, it draws consequences,
   and it judges; but not without a thorough knowledge of the case; so
   that after it has pronounced, it is ready to render a reason of its
   decrees. Good taste observes none of these formalities; ere it has time
   to consult, it has taken its side; as soon as ever the object is
   presented it, the impression is made, the sentiment formed, ask no more
   of it. As the ear is wounded with a harsh sound, as the smell is
   soothed with an agreeable odour, before ever the reason have meddled
   with those objects to judge of them, so the taste opens itself at once,
   and prevents all reflection. They may come afterwards to confirm it,
   and discover the secret reasons of its conduct; but it was not in its
   power to wait for them. Frequently it happens not to know them at all,
   and what pains soever it uses, cannot discover what it was determined
   it to think as it did. This conduct is very different from that the
   judgment observes in its decisions: unless we choose to say, that good
   taste is as it were a first motion, or a kind of instinct of right
   reason, which hurries on with rapidity, and conducts more securely,
   than all the reasonings she could make; it is a first glance of the
   eye, which discovers to us the nature and relations of things in a
   moment."

   Now as there is a taste of the mind, whereby persons are guided in
   their judgment concerning the natural beauty, gracefulness, propriety,
   nobleness, and sublimity of speeches and actions--whereby they judge as
   it were by the glance of the eye, or by inward sensation, and the first
   impression of the object--so there is likewise a divine taste, given
   and maintained by the Spirit of God, in the hearts of the saints,
   whereby they are in like manner led and guided in discerning and
   distinguishing the true spiritual and holy beauty of actions; and that
   more easily, readily, and accurately, as they have more or less of the
   Spirit of God dwelling in them. And thus the sons of God are led by the
   Spirit of God, in their behaviour in the world.

   A holy disposition and spiritual taste, where grace is strong and
   lively, will enable a soul to determine what actions are right and
   becoming Christians, not only more speedily, but far more exactly, than
   the greatest abilities without it. This may be illustrated by the
   manner in which some habits of mind, and dispositions of heart, of a
   nature inferior to true grace, will teach and guide a man in his
   actions. As for instance, if a man be a very good natured man, his good
   nature will teach him better now to act benevolently amongst mankind,
   and will direct him, on every occasion, to those speeches and actions,
   which are agreeable to rules of goodness, than the strongest reason
   will a man of a morose temper. So if a man's heart be under the
   influence of an entire friendship, and most endeared affection to
   another; though he be a man of an indifferent capacity, yet this habit
   of his mind will direct him, far more readily and exactly, to a speech
   and deportment, or manner of behaviour, which shall in all respects be
   sweet and kind, and agreeable to a benevolent disposition of heart,
   than the greatest capacity without it. He has as it were a spirit
   within that guides him; the habit of his mind is attended with a taste,
   by which he immediately relishes that air and mien which is benevolent,
   and disrelishes the contrary. It causes him to distinguish between the
   one and the other in a moment, more precisely, than the most accurate
   reasonings can find out in many hours. The nature and inward tendency
   of a heavy body that is let fall from a height, shows the way to the
   centre of the earth more exactly in an instant, than the ablest
   mathematician without it could determine, by his most accurate
   observations, in a whole day. Thus it is that a spiritual disposition
   and taste teaches and guides a man in his behaviour in the world. So an
   eminently humble, or meek, or charitable disposition, will direct a
   person of mean capacity to such a behaviour, as is agreeable to
   christian rules of humility, meekness, and charity, far more readily
   and precisely, than the most diligent study, and elaborate reasonings,
   of a man of the strongest faculties, who has not a christian spirit
   within him. So also will a spirit of love to God, holy fear and
   reverence towards God, and filial confidence in him, and a heavenly
   disposition, teach and guide a man in his behaviour.

   It is an exceeding difficult thing for a wicked man, destitute of
   christian principles in his heart to guide him, to know how to demean
   himself like a Christian, with the life, beauty, and heavenly sweetness
   of a truly holy, humble, Christ-like behaviour. He knows not how to put
   on these garments; neither do they fit him; Eccl. x. 2, 3. "A wise
   man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart is at his left.
   Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth
   him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool;" with verse 15. "The
   labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth
   not how to go to the city." Prov. x. 32. "The lips of the righteous
   know what is acceptable." Chap. xv. 2. "The tongue of the wise useth
   knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness." And
   chap. xvi. 23. "The heart of the righteous teacheth his mouth, and
   addeth learning to his lips."

   The saints in thus judging of actions by a spiritual taste, have not a
   particular recourse to the express rules of God's word, with respect to
   every word and action that is before them: but yet their taste itself
   in general, is subject to the rule of God's word, and must be tried by
   that, and a right reasoning upon it. A man of a rectified palate judges
   of particular morsels by his taste; but yet his palate itself must be
   judged of, whether it be right or no, by certain rules and reasons. But
   a spiritual taste mightily helps the soul in its reasonings on the word
   of God, and in judging of the true meaning of its rules; as it removes
   the prejudices of a depraved appetite, naturally leads the thoughts in
   the right channel, casts a light on the word, and causes the true
   meaning most naturally to come to mind, through the harmony there is
   between the disposition and relish of a sanctified soul, and the true
   meaning of the rules of God's word. Yea, this harmony tends to bring
   the texts themselves to mind on proper occasions; as the particular
   state of the stomach and palate, tends to bring such particular meats
   and drinks to mind, as are agreeable to that state. Thus the children
   of God are led by the Spirit of God in judging of actions themselves,
   and in their meditations upon the rules of God's holy word: and so God
   teaches them his statutes, and causes them to understand the way of his
   precepts; which the psalmist so often prays for.

   But this leading of the Spirit is exceedingly diverse from what some
   call so; which consists, according to them--not in teaching them God's
   statutes and precepts already given, but--in giving them new precepts,
   by immediate inward speech or suggestion. They do not determine what is
   the will of God by any taste, relish, or judgment of the nature of
   things, but by an immediate dictate concerning the thing to be done;
   indeed there is no such thing as any judgment or wisdom in the case.
   Whereas in that leading of the Spirit which is peculiar to God's
   children, there is imparted that true wisdom, and holy discretion, so
   often spoken of in the word of God; which is high above the other way,
   as the stars are higher than a glow-worm; and that which Balaam and
   Saul (who sometimes were led by the Spirit in that other way) never
   had, and no natural man can have, without a change of nature.

   What has been said of the nature of spiritual understanding, as
   consisting most essentially in a supernatural sense and relish of the
   heart, not only shows that there is nothing of it in this falsely
   supposed leading of the Spirit; but also shows the difference between
   spiritual understanding, and all kinds and forms of enthusiasm, all
   imaginary sights of God, and Christ, and heaven; all supposed
   witnessing of the Spirit and testimonies of the love of God by
   immediate inward suggestion; all impressions of future events, and
   immediate revelations of any secret facts whatsoever. Hereby we see how
   different is true spiritual religion, and all enthusiastical
   impressions and applications of Scripture, as though they were words
   now immediately spoken by God to a particular person, in a new meaning,
   and carrying something more in them, than the words contain as they lie
   in the Bible; and all interpretations of the mystical meaning of the
   Scripture, by supposed immediate revelation. None of these things
   consist in a divine sense and relish of the heart, of the holy beauty
   and excellency of divine things; nor have they any thing to do with
   such a sense; but all consist in impressions in the head; all are to be
   referred to the head of impressions on the imagination, and consist in
   exciting external ideas in the mind, either of outward shapes and
   colours, or words spoken, or letters written, or ideas of things
   external and sensible, belonging to actions done, or events
   accomplished or to be accomplished. An enthusiastical supposed
   manifestation of the love of God, is made by exciting an idea of a
   smiling countenance, or some other pleasant outward appearance, or by
   the idea of pleasant words spoken, or written, excited in the
   imagination, or some pleasant bodily sensation. So when persons have an
   imaginary revelation of some secret fact, it is by exciting external
   ideas; either of some words, implying a declaration of that fact, or
   some visible or sensible circumstances of such a fact. So the supposed
   leading of the Spirit, to do the will of God, in outward behaviour, is
   either by exciting the idea of words (which are outward things) in
   their minds, either the words of Scripture, or other words, which they
   look upon as an immediate command of God; or else by exciting and
   impressing strongly the ideas of the outward actions themselves. So
   when an interpretation of a scripture type or allegory is immediately,
   in an extraordinary way, strongly suggested, it is by suggesting words,
   as though one secretly whispered and told the meaning; or by exciting
   other ideas in the imagination.

   Such sort of experiences and discoveries as these commonly raise the
   affections of such as are deluded by them, to a great height, and make
   a mighty uproar in both soul and body. And a very great part of the
   false religion that has been in the world, from one age to another,
   consists in such discoveries as these, and in the affections that flow
   from them. In such things consisted the experiences of the ancient
   Pythagoreans among the heathen, and many others among them, who had
   strange ecstasies and raptures, and pretended to a divine afflatus, and
   immediate revelations from heaven. In such things as these seem to have
   consisted the experiences of the Essenes, an ancient sect among the
   Jews, at and after the times of the apostles. In such things consisted
   the experiences of many of the ancient Gnostics, the Montanists, and
   many other sects of ancient heretics, in the primitive ages of the
   christian church. And in such things as these consisted the pretended
   immediate converse with God and Christ, saints and angels, of the
   Monks, Anchorites, and Recluses, that formerly abounded in the church
   of Rome. In such things consisted the pretended high experiences and
   great spirituality of many sects of enthusiasts, that swarmed in the
   world after the reformation. [493] And in these things seems to lie the
   religion of the many kinds of enthusiasts of the present day. It is by
   such sort of religion as this chiefly that Satan transforms himself
   into an angel of light: and it is that which he has ever most
   successfully employed to confound hopeful and happy revivals of
   religion, from the beginning of the christian church to this day. When
   the Spirit of God is poured out to begin a glorious work, then the old
   serpent, as fast as possible, and by all means, introduces this bastard
   religion, and mingles it with the true; which has from time to time
   soon brought all things into confusion. The pernicious consequence of
   it is not easily imagined, until we see and are amazed with the awful
   effects of it, and the dismal desolation it has made. If the revival of
   true religion be very great in its beginning, yet if this bastard comes
   in, there is danger of its doing as Gideon's bastard Ahimelech did, who
   never left until he had slain all his threescore and ten true-born
   sons, excepting one that was forced to flee. Great and strict therefore
   should be the watch and guard that ministers maintain against such
   things, especially at a time of great awakening: for men, especially
   the common people, are easily bewitched with such things; they having
   such a glaring and glistering show of high religion. The devil hiding
   his own shape, and appearing as an angel of light, men may not be
   afraid of him.

   The imagination, or phantasy, seems to be that wherein are formed all
   these delusions of Satan, false religion, and counterfeit graces and
   affections. Here is the devil's grand lurking-place, the very nest of
   foul and delusive spirits. It is very much to be doubted, whether the
   devil can come at the soul of man to affect it, or to produce any
   effect whatsoever in it, any other way, than by the phantasy; that
   power of the soul by which it receives, and is the subject of the
   species, or ideas of outward and sensible things. As to the laws and
   means which the Creator has established, for the intercourse and
   communication of unbodied spirits, we know nothing about them; we do
   not know by what medium they manifest their thoughts to, or excite
   thoughts in, each other. But as to spirits united to bodies, those
   bodies are their medium of communication. They have no other medium of
   acting on other creatures, or being acted on by them, than the body.
   Therefore it is not to be supposed that Satan can excite any thought,
   or produce any effect in the soul of man, any otherwise, than by some
   motion of the animal spirits, or by causing some motion or alteration
   in something which appertains to the body. There is this reason to
   think that the devil cannot produce thoughts in the soul any other way
   than by the medium of the body, viz. that he cannot immediately know
   the thoughts of the soul. This is abundantly declared in the Scripture,
   to be peculiar to the omniscient God. But it is not likely that the
   devil can immediately produce an effect, which is out of the reach of
   his immediate view. It seems unreasonable to suppose, that his
   immediate agency should be out of his own sight, or that it should be
   impossible for him to see what he himself immediately does. Is it not
   unreasonable to suppose, that any intelligent agent should by the act
   of his will produce effects, according to his understanding, or
   agreeable to his own thoughts, and that immediately, and yet the
   effects produced be beyond the reach of his understanding, or where he
   can have no immediate perception? But if the devil cannot produce
   thoughts in the soul immediately, or any other way than by the animal
   spirits, or by the body, then it follows, that he never brings to pass
   any thing in the soul, but by the imagination or phantasy, or by
   exciting external ideas. For we know that alterations in the body do
   immediately excite no other sort of ideas in the mind, but external
   ones, or those of the outward senses. As to reflection, abstraction,
   reasoning, &c. and those thoughts and inward motions which are the
   fruits of these acts of the mind, they are not the nearest effects of
   impressions on the body. So that it must be only by the imagination
   that Satan has access to the soul, to tempt and delude it, or suggest
   any thing to it. [494] And this seems to be the reason why persons that
   are under the disease of melancholy, are commonly so visibly and
   remarkably subject to the suggestions and temptations of Satan; that
   being a disease which peculiarly affects the animal spirits, and is
   attended with weakness of that part of the body which is their
   fountain, even the brain, which is, as it were, the seat of the
   phantasy. It is by impressions made on the brain, that any ideas are
   excited in the mind, by the motion of the animal spirits, or any
   changes made in the body. The brain being thus weakened and diseased,
   it is less under the command of the higher faculties of the soul, and
   yields the more easily to extrinsic impressions, and is overpowered by
   the disordered motions of the animal spirits; and so the devil has
   greater advantage to affect the mind, by working on the imagination.
   And thus Satan, when he casts in those horrid suggestions into the
   minds of many melancholy persons, in which they have no hand
   themselves, does it by exciting imaginary ideas, either of some
   dreadful words or sentences, or other horrid outward ideas. And when he
   tempts other persons who are not melancholy, he does it by presenting
   to the imagination, in a lively and alluring manner, the objects of
   their lusts, or by exciting ideas of words, and so by them exciting
   thoughts; or by promoting an imagination of outward actions, events,
   circumstances, &c. Innumerable are the ways by which the mind might be
   led on to all kind of evil thoughts, by exciting external ideas in the
   imagination.

   If persons keep no guard at these avenues of Satan, by which he has
   access to the soul to tempt and delude it, they will be likely to have
   enough of him. And especially, if instead of guarding against him, they
   lay themselves open to him. and seek and invite him, because he appears
   as an angel of light, and counterfeits the illuminations and graces of
   the Spirit of God, by inward whispers, and immediate suggestions of
   facts and events, pleasant voices, beautiful images, and other
   impressions on the imagination. There are many who are deluded by such
   things, are lifted up with them, and seek after them. They have a
   continued course of them, and can have them almost when they will; and
   especially when their pride and vain-glory has most occasion for them,
   to make a show of them before company. It is with them, something as it
   is with those who are professors of the art of telling where lost
   things are to be found, by impressions made on their imaginations; they
   laying themselves open to the devil, he is always at hand to give them
   the desired impression.

   Before I finish what I would say on this head of imaginations,
   counterfeiting spiritual light, and affections arising from them, I
   would renewedly (to prevent misunderstanding of what has been said)
   desire it may be observed, that I am far from determining, that no
   affections are spiritual which are attended with imaginary ideas. Such
   is the nature of man, that he can scarcely think of anything intensely,
   without some kind of outward ideas. They arise and interpose themselves
   unavoidably, in the course of a man's thoughts; though oftentimes they
   are very confused, and are not what the mind regards. When the mind is
   much engaged, and the thoughts intense, oftentimes the imagination is
   more strong, and the outward idea more lively, especially in persons of
   some constitutions of body. But there is a great difference between
   these two things, viz. lively imaginations arising from strong
   affections, and strong affections arising from lively imaginations. The
   former may be, and doubtless often is, in case of truly gracious
   affections. The affections do not arise from the imagination, nor have
   any dependence upon it; but on the contrary, the imagination is only
   the accidental effect, or consequent of the affection, through the
   infirmity of human nature. But when the latter is the case, as it often
   is, that the affection arises from the imagination, and is built upon
   it as its foundation, instead of a spiritual illumination or discovery,
   then is the affection, however elevated, worthless and vain. And this
   is the drift of what has been now said, of impressions on the
   imagination. Having observed this, I proceed to another mark of
   gracious affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [488] "Many that have had mighty strong affections at first conversion,
   afterwards become dry, and wither, and consume, and pine, and die away:
   and now their hypocrisy is manifest; if not to all the world by open
   profaneness, yet to the discerning eye of living Christians, by a
   forMal. barren, unsavoury, unfruitful heart, and course; because they
   never bad light to conviction enough as yet--It is strange to see some
   people carried with mighty affection against sin and bell, and after
   Christ And what is the bell you fear? A dreadful place. What is Christ?
   They scarce know so much as devils do; but that is all. Oh trust them
   not! Many have, and these will fall away to some lust, or opinion, or
   pride, or world; and the reason is. they never had light enough, John
   v. 35. John was a burning and shining high, and they did joy in him for
   a season; yet glorious as it was, they saw not Christ by it, especially
   not with divine light It is rare to see Christians full both of light
   and affection. And therefore consider of this; many a man has been well
   brought up, and is of a sweet loving nature, mild, and gentle, and
   harmless, likes and loves the best things, and his meaning, and mind,
   and heart is good, and has more in heart than in show; and so hopes all
   shall go well with him. I say, there may lie greatest hypocrisy under
   greatest affections; especially if they want light. You shall be
   hardened in your hypocrisy by them. I never liked violent affections
   and pangs, but only such as were dropped in by light: because those
   come from an external principle, and last not but these do.--Men are
   not affrighted by the light of the sun, though clearer than the
   lightning-- Shepard's Parable, Part I p. 146.

   [489] Phil. iii. 8.

   [490] "Take heed of contenting yourselves with every kind of knowledge.
   Do not worship every image of your own heads; especially you that fall
   short of truth, or the knowledge of it. For when you have some, there
   may be yet that wanting, which may make you sincere. There are many men
   of great knowledge, able to teach themselves, and others too: and yet
   their hearts are unsound. How comes this to pass? Is it because they
   have so much light? No; but because they want much. And therefore
   content not yourselves with every knowledge. There is some knowledge
   which men have by the light of nature, (which leaves them without
   excuse,) from the book of creation; some by power of education: some by
   the light of the law, whereby men know their sin and evils; some by the
   letter of the gospel; and so men may know much, and speak well; and so
   in seeing, see not: some by the Spirit, and may see much, so as to
   prophesy in Christ's name, and yet bid depart. Matt vii. Now there is a
   light of glory, whereby the elect see things in another manner: to tell
   you how, they cannot: it is the beginning of light in heaven: and the
   same Spirit that fills Christ, filling their minds, that they know, by
   this anointing, all things: which if ever you have you must become
   babes and fools in your own eyes. God will never write his law in your
   minds, until all the scribblings of it are blotted out. Account all
   your knowledge loss for the gaining of this. It is sad to see many a
   man pleasing himself in his own dreaming delusions; yet the poor
   creature in seeing, sees not: which is God's heavy curse upon men under
   greatest means, and which lays all waste and desolate." Shepard's
   Parable. Part. I. p. 147.

   [491] Calvin, in his Institutions. Book I. chap. ix. § 1. says. "It is
   not the office of the Spirit that is promised us, to make new and
   before unheard of revelations, or to coin some new kind of doctrine,
   which tends to draw us away from the received doctrine of the gospel;
   but to seal and confirm to us that very doctrine which is by the
   gospel." And in the same place he speaks of some, that in those days
   maintained the contrary notion, pretending to be immediately led by the
   Spirit, as persons that were governed by a most haughty self-conceit;
   and not so properly to be looked upon as only labouring under a
   mistake, as driven by a sort of raving madness.

   [492] Chamber's Dictionary, under the word TASTE.

   [493] Such as the Anabaptists. Antinomians, and Familists, the
   followers of N. Stork, Th. Muncer, Jo. Becold, Henry Pleifer, David
   George, Casper Swenckfield, Henry Nicolas, Johannes Agricola Eislebius;
   and the many wild enthusiasts that were in England in the days of
   Oliver Cromwell; and the followers of Mrs. Hutchinson, in New England;
   as appears by the particular and large accounts given of all these
   sects, by that eminently holy man, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, in his
   Display of the Spiritual Antichrist And in such things as these
   consisted the experiences of the late French prophets, and their
   followers.

   [494] "The imagination is that room of the soul, wherein the devil doth
   often appear. Indeed (to speak exactly) the devil hath no efficient
   power over the rational part of a man: he cannot change the will, he
   cannot alter the heart of a man. So that the utmost he can do, in
   tempting a man to sin. is by suasion and suggestion only. But then how
   doth the devil do this? Even by working upon the imagination. He
   observeth the temper and bodily constitution or a man; and thereupon
   suggests to his fancy, and injects his fiery darts thereinto, by which
   the mind and will come to be wrought upon. The devil then, though he
   hath no imperious efficacy over thy will, yet because he can thus stir
   and move thy imagination, and thou being naturally destitute of grace,
   canst not withstand these suggestions; hence it is that any sin in thy
   imagination, tough but in the outward works of thy soul, yet doth
   quickly lay hold on all. And indeed, by this means do arise those
   horrible delusions, that are in many erroneous ways of religion: all is
   because their imaginations are corrupted. Yes, how often are these
   diabolical delusions of the imagination taken for the gracious
   operations of God's Spirit!--It is from hence that many have pretended
   to enthusiasms--they leave the Scriptures, and wholly attend to what
   they perceive and feel within them." Burgess On Original Sin. p. 369.
   The great Turretine, speaking on that question. What is the power of
   angels? says, "As to bodies there is no doubt, but that they can do a
   great deal upon all sorts of elementary and sublunary bodies, to move
   them locally, and variously to agitate them. It is also certain, that
   they can act upon the external and internal senses, to excite them, or
   to bind them. But as to the rational soul itself, they can do nothing
   immediately upon that; for to God alone, who knows and searches the
   hearts, and who has them in his hands, does it also appertain to bow
   and move them whithersoever he will. But angels can act upon the
   rational soul, only mediately, by imaginations." Theolog. Elench. Loc.
   VII. Quest. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Truly gracious affections are attended with a conviction of the reality
   and certainty of divine things.

   This seems to be implied in the text that was laid as the foundation of
   this discourse, Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though now ye
   see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full
   of glory. All gracious persons have a solid, full, thorough, and
   effectual conviction of the truth of the great things of the gospel.
   They no longer halt between two opinions; the great doctrines of the
   gospel cease to be any longer doubtful things, or matters of opinion,
   which, though probable, are yet disputable; but with them, they are
   points settled and determined, as undoubted and indisputable; so that
   they are not afraid to venture their all upon their truth. Their
   conviction is an effectual conviction; so that the great, spiritual,
   mysterious, and invisible things of the gospel, have the influence of
   real and certain things upon them; they have the weight and power of
   real things in their hearts; and accordingly rule in their affections,
   and govern them through the course of their lives. With respect to
   Christ's being the Son of God, and Saviour of the world, and the great
   things he has revealed concerning himself, and his Father, and another
   world, they have not only a predominating opinion that these things are
   true, and so yield their assent, as they do in many other matters of
   doubtful speculation; but they see that it is ready so: their eyes are
   opened, so that they see that really Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
   the living God. And as to the things which Christ has revealed, of
   God's eternal purposes and designs, concerning fallen man, and the
   glorious and everlasting things prepared for the saints in another
   world, they see that they are so indeed: and therefore these things are
   of great weight with them, and have a mighty power upon their hearts,
   and influence over their practice, in some measure answerable to their
   infinite importance.

   That all true Christians have such a kind of conviction, is abundantly
   manifest from the Holy Scriptures. I will mention a few places out of
   many: Matt. xvi. 15-17. "But whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter
   answered and said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. And
   Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona:--my
   Father which is in heaven hath revealed it unto thee." John vi. 68, 69.
   "Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe, and are sure that
   thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." John xvii. 6-8. "I
   have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
   world.--Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given
   me, are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest
   me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out
   from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me." Acts viii.
   37. "If thou believest with all thy heart thou mayest." 2 Cor. iv.
   11-14. "We which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus'
   sake.--Death worketh in us.--We having the spirit of faith, according
   as it is written, I believed and therefore have I spoken: we also
   believe, and therefore speak; knowing, that he which raised up the Lord
   Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you."
   Together with verse16. "For which cause we feint not." And verse 18.
   "While we look not at the things which are seen," &c. And chap. v. 1.
   "For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
   dissolved, we have a building of God."--And ver. 6-8. "Therefore we are
   always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we
   are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith, not by sight. We are
   confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and
   present with the Lord." 2 Tim. i. 12. "For the which cause I also
   suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I
   have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which 1
   have committed unto him against that day." Heb. iii. 6. "Whose house
   are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
   firm unto the end." Heb. xi. 1. "Now faith is the substance of things
   hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen:" together with that
   whole chapter. 1 John iv. 13-16. "Hereby know we that we dwell in him,
   and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen
   and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the
   world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God. God
   dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love
   that God hath to us." Chap. v. 4, 5. "For whatsoever is born of God,
   overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the
   world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that
   believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" Therefore truly gracious
   affections are attended with a conviction and persuasion of the truth
   of gospel declarations, and a sight of their evidence and reality.

   There are many religious affections, which are not attended with such a
   conviction of the judgment. Many apprehensions and ideas which some
   call divine discoveries, are affecting, but not convincing. Though for
   a little while, they may seem to be more persuaded of the truth of
   religion, than they used to be, and may yield a forward assent, like
   many of Christ's hearers who believed for a while; yet they have no
   thorough and effectual conviction. There is no great abiding change in
   them in this respect, that whereas formerly they did not realize the
   great things of the gospel, now these things, with regard to reality
   and certainty, appear new to them, and they behold them quite in
   another view than they used to do. There are many persons who have been
   exceedingly raised with religious affections, and think they have been
   converted, but they do not seem any more convinced of the truth of the
   gospel, than they used to be; or at least, there is no remarkable
   alteration. They do not live under the influence and power of a
   realizing conviction of the infinite and eternal things which the
   gospel reveals; if they were, it would be impossible for them to live
   as they do. Because their affections are not attended with a thorough
   conviction of the mind, they are not at all to be depended on; however
   great a show and noise they make, it is like the blaze of tow, or
   crackling of thorns, or like the forward flourishing blade on stony
   ground, that has no root, nor deepness of earth, to maintain its life.

   Some persons, under high affections and a confident persuasion of their
   good estate, have what they very ignorantly call seeing the truth of
   the word of God, but which is very far from it. They have some text of
   Scripture coming to their minds, in a sudden and extraordinary manner,
   immediately declaring unto them (as they suppose) that their sins are
   forgiven, or that God loves them, and will save them; and it may be
   have a chain of scriptures coming one after another, to the same
   purpose; and they are convinced that it is truth; i. e. they are
   confident that it is certainly so, that their sins are forgiven, and
   God does love them, &c.--they say they know it is so; and when the
   words of Scripture are suggested to them, and as they suppose
   immediately spoken to them by God, in this meaning, they are ready to
   cry out, Truth, truth! it is certainly so! the word of God is true."
   And this they call "seeing the truth of the word of God." Whereas the
   whole of their faith amounts to no more, than only a strong confidence
   of their own good estate, and so a confidence that those words are
   true, which they suppose tell them they are in a good estate: when
   indeed (as was shown before) there is no scripture which declares that
   any person is in a good estate directly, or any other way than by
   consequence. So that this, instead of being a real sight of the truth
   of the word of God, is a sight of nothing but a phantom, and is all
   over a delusion. Truly to see the truth of the word of God, is to see
   the truth of the gospel; which is the glorious doctrine the word of God
   contains, concerning God, Jesus Christ, the way of salvation by him,
   and the world of glory that he is entered into, and purchased for all
   them who believe; and not a revelation that such and such particular
   persons are true Christians, and shall go to heaven. Therefore those
   affections which arise from no other persuasion of the truth of the
   word of God than this, arise from delusion, and not true conviction;
   and consequently are themselves delusive and vain.

   But suppose the religious affections of persons indeed arise from a
   strong persuasion of the truth of the christian religion; their
   affections are not the better, unless it be a reasonable persuasion or
   conviction. By a reasonable conviction, I mean a conviction founded on
   real evidence, or upon that which is a good reason, or just ground of
   conviction. Men may have a strong persuasion that the christian
   religion is true, when their persuasion is not at all built on
   evidence, but altogether on education, and the opinion of others; as
   many Mahometans are strongly persuaded of the truth of the Mahometan
   religion, because their fathers, and neighbours, and nation believe it.
   That belief of the truth of the christian religion, which is built on
   the very same grounds With that of Mahometans who believe in the
   Mahometan religion, is the same sort of belief. And though the thing
   believed happens to be better; yet that does not make the belief itself
   to be of a better sort, for though the thing believed happens to be
   true, yet the belief of it is not owing to this truth, but to
   education. So that as the conviction is no better than the Mahometans'
   conviction; so the affections that flow from it, are no better, in
   themselves, than the religious affections of Mahometans.

   But suppose the belief of christian doctrines be not merely from
   education, but indeed from reasons and arguments, it will not from
   thence necessarily follow, that their affections are truly gracious:
   for in order to that, it is requisite, not only that the belief which
   their affections arise from. should be a reasonable, but also a
   spiritual belief, or conviction. I suppose none will doubt but that
   some natural men yield a kind of assent of their judgments to the truth
   of the christian religion, from the rational proofs or arguments that
   are offered to evince it. Judas, without doubt, thought Jesus to be the
   Messiah, from the things which he saw and heard; but yet all along was
   a devil. So in John ii. 23-25. we read of "many that believed in
   Christ's name, when they saw the miracles that he did;" whom yet Christ
   knew had not that within them, which was to be depended on. So Simon
   the sorcerer believed, when he beheld the miracles and signs which were
   done; but yet remained "in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
   iniquity,". Acts viii. 13, 23. And if there is such a belief or assent
   of the judgment in some natural men, none can doubt but that religious
   affections may arise from that assent or belief; as we read of some who
   believed for a while that were greatly affected, and anon with joy
   received the word.

   It is evident that there is a spiritual conviction of the truth, or a
   belief peculiar to those who are spiritual, who are regenerated, and
   who have the Spirit of God, in his holy communications, dwelling in
   them as a vital principle. So that their conviction does not only
   differ from that which natural men have, in that it is accompanied with
   good works; but the belief itself is diverse, the assent and conviction
   of the judgment is of a kind peculiar to those who are spiritual, and
   of which natural men are wholly destitute. This is evident by the
   Scripture, if any thing at all is so: John xvii. 8. "They have believed
   that thou didst send me." Tit. i. 1. "According to the faith of God's
   elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness."
   John xvi. 27. "The Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me,
   and have believed that I came out from God." 1 John iv. 15. "Whosoever
   shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he
   in God." Chap. v. 1. "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is
   born of God. Verse 10. He that believeth on the Son of God, hath the
   witness in himself."

   What a spiritual conviction of the judgment is, we are naturally led to
   determine from what has been said already, under the former head of a
   spiritual understanding. The conviction of the judgment arises from the
   illumination of the understanding: the passing of a right judgment on
   things, depends on a right apprehension. And therefore it follows, that
   a spiritual conviction of the truth of the great things of the gospel,
   is such a conviction as arises from having a spiritual apprehension of
   those things in the mind. And this is also evident from the Scripture,
   which often represents a saving belief of the reality and divinity of
   the things proposed and exhibited to us in the gospel, as what proceeds
   from the Spirit of God enlightening the mind. Hence right apprehensions
   of the nature of those things; the Spirit as it were unveiling, or
   revealing them, and enabling the mind to view them as they are. Luke x.
   21, 22. "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
   hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
   unto babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. All
   things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the
   Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to
   whom the Son will reveal him." John vi. 40. "And this is the will of
   him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on
   him, may have everlasting life." Where it is plain, that true faith
   arises from a spiritual sight of Christ. And John xvii. 6-8."I have
   manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
   world.--Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given
   me, are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest
   me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out
   from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me." Christ's
   manifesting God's name to the disciples, or giving them a true
   apprehension of divine things, was that whereby they knew that Christ's
   doctrine was of God, and that Christ himself was sent by him. Matt.
   xvi. 16, 17. "Simon Peter said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
   God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon
   Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
   Father which is in heaven." 1 John v. 10. "He that believeth on the Son
   of God, hath the witness in himself." Gal. i. 14-16. "Being more
   exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it
   pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by
   his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
   heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood."

   If that is a spiritual conviction of the divinity and reality of the
   things exhibited in the gospel, which arises from a spiritual
   understanding of those things; I have shown already what that is. In
   short, it consists in a sense and taste of the divine, supreme, and
   holy excellency and beauty of those things. So that then is the mind
   spiritually convinced of the divinity and truth of the great things of
   the gospel, when that conviction arises, either directly or remotely,
   from such a sense or view of their divine excellency and glory as is
   there exhibited. This clearly follows from what has been already said;
   and for this the Scripture is very plain and express: 2 Cor. iv. 3-6.
   "But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the
   god of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest
   the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
   should shine unto them. For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus
   the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake. For God who
   commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our
   hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
   face of Jesus Christ." Together with the last verse of the foregoing
   chapter, which introduces this, "But we all with open face, beholding
   as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
   from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." [495] Nothing
   can be more evident, than that a saving belief of the gospel is here
   spoken of by the apostle, as arising from the mind being enlightened to
   behold the divine glory of the things it exhibits. This view or sense
   of the divine glory, and unparalleled beauty of the things exhibited to
   us in the gospel, has a tendency to convince the mind of their divinity
   two ways; first, directly, and secondly, more indirectly and remotely.

   I. A view of this divine glory directly convinces the mind of the
   divinity of these things, as this glory is in itself a direct, clear,
   and all-conquering evidence of it; especially when clearly discovered,
   or when this supernatural sense is given in a good degree.

   He that has his judgment thus directly convinced and assured of the
   divinity of gospel truths by a clear view of their divine glory, has a
   reasonable conviction. His assurance is altogether agreeable to reason;
   because the divine glory and beauty of divine things is in itself a
   real evidence of their divinity, and the most direct and strong. He
   that truly sees the divine, transcendent, supreme glory of those things
   which are divine, does as it were know their divinity intuitively; he
   not only argues, but sees that they are divine. He sees that in them
   wherein divinity chiefly consists; for in this glory, which is so
   vastly and inexpressibly distinguished from the glory of artificial
   things, and all other glory, mainly consists the true notion of
   divinity. God is God, and distinguished from all other beings, and
   exalted above them, chiefly by his divine beauty, which is infinitely
   diverse from all other beauty. They therefore that see the stamp of
   this glory in divine things, they see divinity in them, they see God in
   them, and see them to be divine; because they see that in them wherein
   the truest idea of divinity consists. Thus a soul may have a kind of
   intuitive knowledge of the divinity of the things exhibited in the
   gospel; not that he judges the doctrines of the gospel to be from God,
   without any argument or deduction at all; but it is without any long
   chain of arguments; the argument is but one, and the evidence direct;
   the mind ascends to the truth of the gospel but by one step, and that
   is its divine glory.

   It would be very strange, if any professing Christian should deny it to
   be possible, that there should be an excellency in divine things, which
   is so transcendent, and exceedingly different from what is in other
   things, that if it were seen, would evidently distinguish them. We
   cannot rationally doubt, but that things which are divine, that
   appertain to the supreme Being, are vastly different from things that
   are human. There is God-like, high, and glorious excellency in them, so
   distinguishing them from the things which are of men, that the
   difference is ineffable; and therefore such as if seen, will have a
   most convincing, satisfying influence upon any one, that they are what
   they are, viz. divine. Doubtless there is that glory and excellency in
   the Divine Being, by which he is so infinitely distinguished from all
   other beings, that if it were seen, he might be known by it. It would
   therefore be very unreasonable to deny, that it is possible for God to
   give manifestations of this distinguishing excellency, in things by
   which he is pleased to make himself known; and that this distinguishing
   excellency may be clearly seen in them. There are natural excellencies
   that are very evidently distinguishing of the subjects or authors, to
   any one who behold them. How vastly is the speech of an intelligent man
   different from that of a little child! And how greatly distinguished is
   the speech of some men of great genius, as Homer, Cicero, Milton,
   Locke, Addison, and others, from that of many other intelligent men!
   There are no limits to be set to the degrees of manifestation of mental
   excellency, that there may be in speech. But the appearances of the
   natural perfections of God, in the manifestations he makes of himself,
   may doubtless be unspeakably more evidently distinguishing, than the
   appearances of those excellencies of worms of the dust, in which they
   differ one from another. He that is well acquainted with mankind, and
   their works, by viewing the sun, may know it is no human work. And it
   is reasonable to suppose, that when Christ comes at the end of the
   world, in the glory of his Father, it will be with such ineffable
   appearances of divinity, as will leave no doubt to the inhabitants of
   the world, even the most obstinate infidels, that he who appears is a
   divine person. But above all, do the manifestations of the moral and
   spiritual glory of the Divine Being (which is the proper beauty of the
   divinity) bring their own evidence, and tend to assure the heart. Thus
   the disciples were assured that Jesus was the Son of God, for "they
   beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full
   of grace and truth,". John i. 14. When Christ appeared in his
   transfiguration to his disciples, as an outward glory to their bodily
   eyes--which was a sweet and admirable symbol and semblance of his
   spiritual glory--together with his spiritual glory itself, manifested
   to their minds; the manifestation was such as did perfectly, and with
   good reason, assure them of his divinity; as appears by what one of
   them says concerning it, 2 Pet i. 16-18. "For we have not followed
   cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and
   coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his majesty:
   for he received from God the Father, honour and glory, when there came
   such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son,
   in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we
   heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." The apostle calls that
   mount, the holy mount, because the manifestations of Christ there made
   to their minds, and with which they were especially impressed and
   ravished, was the glory of his holiness, or the beauty of his moral
   excellency: or, as another of these disciples, who saw it, expresses
   it, "His glory, as full of grace and truth." [496]

   Now this distinguishing glory of the Divine Being has its brightest
   manifestation in the things exhibited to us in the gospel; the
   doctrines there taught, the word there spoken, and the divine counsels,
   acts, and works there revealed. These things have the clearest, most
   admirable, and distinguishing representations and exhibitions of the
   glory of God's moral perfections, that ever were made to the world. And
   if there be such a distinguishing, evidential manifestation of divine
   glory in the gospel, it is reasonable to suppose that there may be such
   a thing as seeing it: what should hinder but that it may be seen? It is
   no argument that it cannot be seen, because some do not see it; though
   they may be discerning men in temporal matters. If there be such
   ineffable, distinguishing, evidential excellencies in the gospel, it is
   reasonable to suppose, that they are such as are not to be discerned,
   but by the special influence and enlightenings of the Spirit of God.
   There is need of uncommon force of mind to discern the distinguishing
   excellencies of the works of authors of great genius. Those things in
   Milton, which to mean judges appear tasteless and imperfections, are
   his inimitable excellencies in the eyes of those who are of greater
   discerning, and better taste. And if there be a book of which God is
   the author, it is most reasonable to suppose, that the distinguishing
   glories of his word are of such a kind, as that the sin and corruption
   of men's hearts--which above all things alienate them from the Deity,
   and make the heart dull and stupid to any sense or taste of those
   things wherein the moral glory of the divine perfections
   consists--would blind them from discerning the beauties of such a book;
   and that therefore they will not see them, but as God is pleased to
   enlighten them, and restore a holy taste, to discern and relish divine
   beauties.

   This sense of the spiritual excellency and beauty of divine things,
   also tends directly to convince the mind of the truth of the gospel.
   Very many of the most important things declared in the gospel are hid
   from the eyes of natural men, the truth of which in effect consists in
   this excellency, or so immediately depends upon it, and results from
   it, that in this excellency being seen, the truth, of those things is
   seen. As soon as ever the eyes are opened to behold a holy beauty and
   amiableness in divine things, a multitude of most important doctrines
   of the gospel that depend upon it, (which all appear strange and dark
   to natural men,) are at once seen to be true. As for instance, hereby
   appears the truth of what the word of God declares concerning the
   exceeding evil of sin; for the same eye that discerns the transcendent
   beauty of holiness, necessarily therein sees the exceeding odiousness
   of sin: the same taste which relishes the sweetness of true moral good,
   tastes the bitterness of moral evil. And by this means a man sees his
   own sinfulness and loathsomeness; for he has now a sense to discern
   objects of this nature; and so sees the truth of what the word of God
   declares concerning the exceeding sinfulness of mankind, which before
   he did not see. He now sees the dreadful pollution of his heart, and
   the desperate depravity of his nature, in a new manner; for his soul
   has now a sense given it to feel the pain of such a disease. This shows
   him the truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the corruption
   of man's nature, his original sin, his ruinous condition, his need of a
   Saviour, and of the mighty power of God to renew his heart, and change
   his nature. Men by seeing the true excellency of holiness, see the
   glory of all those things which both reason and Scripture show to be in
   the Divine Being; for it has been shown, that the glory of them depends
   on this. And hereby they see the truth of all that the Scripture
   declares concerning God's glorious excellency and majesty, his being
   the fountain of all good, the only happiness of the creature, &c. This
   again shows the mind the truth of what the Scripture teaches concerning
   the evil of sin against so glorious a God; also the truth of what it
   teaches concerning sin's just desert of that dreadful punishment which
   it reveals; and concerning the impossibility of our offering any
   satisfaction, or sufficient atonement for that which is so infinitely
   evil and heinous. And this again shows the truth of what the Scripture
   reveals concerning the necessity of a Saviour, to offer an atonement of
   infinite value for sin. This sense of spiritual beauty enables the soul
   to see the glory of those things which the gospel reveals concerning
   the person of Christ; and so enables to see the exceeding beauty and
   dignity of his person, appearing in what the gospel exhibits of his
   word, works, acts, and life; and this apprehension of the superlative
   dignity of his person, shows the truth of what the gospel declares
   concerning the value of his blood and righteousness; the infinite
   excellency of that offering he has made to God for us, its sufficiency
   to atone for our sins, and recommend us to God. And thus the Spirit of
   God discovers the way of salvation by Christ; the soul sees the fitness
   and suitableness of this way, the admirable wisdom of the contrivance,
   and the perfect answerableness to our necessities of the provision that
   the gospel exhibits. A sense of true divine beauty being given, the
   soul discerns the beauty of every part of the gospel-scheme. This also
   shows the soul the truth of what the word of God declares concerning
   man's chief happiness, as consisting in holy exercises and enjoyments,
   and the unspeakable glory of the heavenly state. What the prophecies of
   the Old Testament and the writings of the apostles declare concerning
   the glory of the Messiah's kingdom, is now all plain; and also what the
   Scripture teaches concerning the reasons and grounds of our duty. The
   truth of all these things revealed in the Scripture, and many more that
   might be mentioned, appear to the soul, only by that spiritual taste of
   divine beauty, which has been spoken of; they being hidden things
   before.

   And besides all this, the truth of all those things which the Scripture
   says about experimental religion, is hereby known; for they are now
   experienced. And this convinces the soul, that one who knew the heart
   of man, better than we know our own hearts, and perfectly knew the
   nature of virtue and holiness, was the author of the Scriptures. And
   the opening to view, with such clearness, such a world of wonderful and
   glorious truth in the gospel, that before was unknown, being quite
   above the view of a natural eye, but now appearing so clear and bright,
   has a powerful and invincible influence on the soul, to persuade it of
   the divinity of the gospel.

   Unless men may come to a reasonable solid persuasion and conviction of
   the truth of the gospel, by internal evidences in the way that has been
   spoken, viz. by a sight of its glory; it is impossible that those who
   are illiterate, and unacquainted with history, should have any thorough
   and effectual conviction of it at all. They may without this see a
   great deal of probability of it; it may be reasonable for them to give
   much credit to what learned men and historians tell them; and they may
   tell them so much, that it may look very probable and rational to them,
   that the Christian religion is true; and so much that they would be
   very unreasonable not to entertain this opinion. But to have a
   conviction, so clear, and evident, and assuring, as to be sufficient to
   induce them, with boldness to sell all, confidently and fearlessly to
   run the venture of the loss of all things, and of enduring the most
   exquisite and long continued torments, and to trample the world under
   foot, and count all things but dung for Christ; the evidence they can
   have from history, cannot be sufficient. It is impossible that men, who
   have not something of a general view of the historical world, or the
   series of history from age to age, should come at the force of
   arguments for the truth of Christianity, drawn from history, to that
   degree, as effectually to induce them to venture their all upon it.
   After all that learned men have said to them, there will remain
   innumerable doubts on their minds; they will be ready, when pinched
   with some great trial of their faith, to say, "How do I know this, or
   that? How do 1 know when these histories were written? Learned men tell
   me these histories were so and so attested in their day; but how do I
   know that there were such attestations then? They tell me there is
   equal reason to believe these facts, as any whatsoever that are related
   at such a distance; but how do I know that other facts which are
   related of those ages, ever were?" Those who have not something of a
   general view of the series of historical events, and of the state of
   mankind from age to age, cannot see the clear evidence from history of
   the truth of facts in distant ages; but there will remain endless
   doubts and scruples.

   But the gospel was not given only for learned men. There are at least
   nineteen in twenty, if not ninety-nine in a hundred, of those for whom
   the Scriptures were written, who are not capable of any certain or
   effectual conviction of the divine authority of the Scriptures, by such
   arguments as learned men use. If men who have been brought up in
   heathenism, must wait for a clear and certain conviction of the truth
   of Christianity, until they have learning and acquaintance with the
   histories of politer nations, enough to see clearly the force of such
   kind of arguments; it will make the evidence of the gospel, to them,
   immensely cumbersome, and will render the propagation of the gospel
   among them infinitely difficult. Miserable is the condition of the
   Houssatunnuck Indians and others, who have lately manifested a desire
   to be instructed in Christianity, if they can come at no evidence of
   the truth of Christianity, sufficient to induce them to sell all for
   Christ, in any other way but this.

   It is unreasonable to suppose, that God has provided for his people, no
   more than probable evidences of the truth of the gospel. He has with
   great care abundantly provided, and given them the most convincing,
   assuring, satisfying, and manifold evidence of his faithfulness in the
   covenant of grace; and as David says, 2 Sam. xxiii. 5.made a covenant,
   ordered in all things and sure. Therefore it is rational to suppose,
   that at the same time, he would not fail of ordering the matter so,
   that there should not be wanting as great and clear evidence, that this
   is his covenant, and that these promises are his promises; or, which is
   the same thing, that the christian religion is true, and that the
   gospel is his word. Otherwise in vain are those great assurances he has
   given of his faithfulness in his covenant, by confirming it with his
   oath, and so variously establishing it by seals and pledges. For the
   evidence that it is his covenant, is properly the foundation on which
   all the force and effect of those other assurances do stand. We may
   therefore undoubtedly suppose and conclude, that there is some sort of
   evidence which God has given, that this covenant and these promises are
   his, beyond all mere probability; that there are some grounds of
   assurance of it held forth, which, if we are not blind to them, tend to
   give a higher persuasion, than any arguing from history, human
   tradition, &c. which the illiterate, and unacquainted with history, are
   capable of; yea, that which is good ground of the highest and most
   perfect assurance, that mankind have in any case whatsoever; agreeable
   to those high expressions which the apostle uses, Heb. x. 22. "Let us
   draw near in full assurance of faith." And Col. ii. 2. "That their
   hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
   riches of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of
   the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ." It is reasonable
   to suppose, that God would give the greatest evidence of those things
   which are greatest, and the truth of which is of greatest importance to
   us: and that we therefore, if we are wise, and act rationally, shall
   have the greatest desire of having full, undoubting, and perfect
   assurance thereof. But it is certain, that such an assurance is not to
   be attained by the greater part of them who live under the gospel, by
   arguments fetched from ancient traditions, histories, and monuments.

   And if we come to fact and experience, there is not the least reason to
   suppose, that one in a hundred of those who have been sincere
   Christians, and have had a heart to sell all for Christ, have come by
   their conviction of the truth of the gospel this way. If we read over
   the histories of the many thousands that died martyrs for Christ, since
   the beginning of the reformation, and have cheerfully undergone extreme
   tortures, in a confidence of the truth of the gospel, and consider
   their circumstances and advantages; how few of them were there, that we
   can reasonably suppose ever came by their assured persuasion this way;
   or indeed for whom it was possible, reasonably to receive so full and
   strong an assurance, from such arguments! Many of them were weak women
   and children, and the greater part of them illiterate persons; many of
   whom had been brought up in popish ignorance and darkness, were but
   newly come out of it, and lived and died in times, wherein those
   arguments for the truth of Christianity from antiquity and history, had
   been but very imperfectly handled. And indeed, it is but very lately
   that these arguments have been set in a clear and convincing light,
   even by learned men themselves: and since it has been done, there never
   were fewer thorough believers, among those who have been educated in
   the true religion; infidelity never prevailed so much, in any age, as
   in this, wherein these arguments are handled to the greatest advantage.

   The true martyrs of Jesus Christ, are not those who have only been
   strong in opinion that the gospel of Christ is true, but those that
   have seen the truth of it; as the very name of martyrs or witnesses (by
   which they are called in Scripture) implies. Those are very improperly
   called witnesses of the truth of any thing, who only declare they are
   very much of opinion that such a thing is true. Those only are proper
   witnesses, who can and do testify that they have seen the truth of the
   thing they assert; John iii. 11. "We speak that we do know, and testify
   that we have seen." John i. 34. "And I saw, and bare record, that this
   is the Son of God." 1 John iv. 14. "And we have seen and do testify,
   that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.". Acts
   xxii. 14, 15. "The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou
   shouldst know his will, and see that just One, and shouldst hear the
   voice of his mouth: for thou shalt be his witness unto all men, of what
   thou hast seen and heard." But the true martyrs of Jesus Christ are
   called his witnesses: and all the saints, who by their holy practice
   under great trials declare that faith which is the substance of things
   hoped for, and the evidence Of things not seen, are called witnesses,
   (Heb. xi. 1. and Gen. xii. 1.) By their profession and practice they
   declare their assurance of the truth and divinity of the gospel, having
   had the eves of their minds enlightened to see divinity in the gospel,
   or to behold that unparalleled, ineffably excellent, and truly divine
   glory shining in it, which is altogether distinguishing, evidential,
   and convincing: so that they may truly be said to have seen God in it,
   to have seen that it is indeed divine; and so can speak in the style of
   witnesses. They can not only say, that they think the gospel is divine,
   but that it is divine, giving it in as their testimony, because they
   have seen it to be so. Doubtless Peter, James, and John, after they had
   seen that excellent glory of Christ in the mount, would have been
   ready, when they came down, to speak in the language of witnesses, and
   to say positively that Jesus is the Son of God; as Peter says, they
   were eye-witnesses, 2 Pet. i. 16. And so all nations will be ready
   positively to say this, when they shall behold his glory at the day of
   judgment; though that will be universally seen, will be only his
   natural glory, and not his moral and spiritual glory, which is much
   more distinguishing.

   But yet, it must be noted, that among those who have a spiritual sight
   of the divine glory of the gospel; there is a great variety in degrees
   of strength of faith, as there is a vast variety of the degrees of
   clearness of views of this glory: but there is no true and saving
   faith, or spiritual conviction of the judgment, of the truth of the
   gospel, that has nothing in it, of this manifestation of its internal
   evidence, in some degree. The gospel of the blessed God does not go
   abroad a begging for its evidence, so much as some think: it has its
   highest and most proper evidence in itself. Though great use may be
   made of external arguments, they are not to be neglected, but highly
   prized and valued; for they may be greatly serviceable to awaken
   unbelievers, and bring them to serious consideration, and to confirm
   the faith of true saints; yea, they may be in some respects subservient
   to the begetting of a saving faith in men. Though what was said before
   remains true, that there is no spiritual conviction of the judgment,
   but what arises from an apprehension of the spiritual beauty and glory
   of divine things: for, as has been observed, this apprehension or view
   has a tendency to convince the mind of the truth of the gospel, two
   ways; either directly or indirectly.--Having therefore already observed
   how it does this directly, I proceed now.

   II. To observe how a view of this divine glory convinces the mind of
   the truth of Christianity, more indirectly.

   First, It doth so, as the prejudices of the heart against the truth of
   divine things are hereby removed, so that the mind thereby lies open to
   the force of the reasons which are offered. The mind of man is
   naturally full of enmity against the doctrines of the gospel; which is
   a disadvantage to those arguments that prove their truth, and causes
   them to lose their force upon the mind: but when a person has
   discovered to him the divine excellency of christian doctrines, this
   destroys that enmity, and removes the prejudices, and sanctifies the
   reason, and causes it to be open and free. Hence is a vast difference,
   as to the force that arguments have to convince the mind. Hence was the
   very different effect which Christ's miracles had to convince the
   disciples from what they had to convince the scribes and Pharisees: not
   that they had a stronger reason, or had their reason more improved; but
   their reason was sanctified, and those blinding prejudices, which the
   scribes and Pharisees were under, were removed, by the sense they had
   of the excellency of Christ and his doctrine.

   Secondly, It not only removes the hinderances of reason, but positively
   helps reason. It makes even the speculative notions more lively. It
   assists and engages the attention of the mind to that kind of objects;
   which causes it to have a clearer view of them, and more clearly to see
   their mutual relations. The ideas themselves, which otherwise are dim
   and obscure, by this means have light cast upon them, and are impressed
   with greater strength, so that the mind can better judge of them; as he
   that beholds the objects on the face of the earth, when the light of
   the sun is cast upon them, is under greater advantage to discern them
   in their true forms and mutual relations, and to see the evidences of
   divine wisdom and skill in their contrivance, than he that sees them in
   a dim star-light, or twilight.

   What has been said, may serve in some measure to show the nature of a
   spiritual conviction of the truth and reality of divine things; and so
   to distinguish truly gracious affections from others; for gracious
   affections are evermore attended with such a conviction of the
   judgment. But before I dismiss this head, it will be needful to observe
   the ways whereby some are deceived, with respect to this matter; and
   take notice of several things that are sometimes taken for a spiritual
   and saving belief of the truth, which are indeed very diverse from it.

   1. There is a degree of conviction of the truth of the great things of
   religion, that arises from the common enlightenings of the Spirit of
   God. The more lively and sensible apprehension of the things of
   religion, with respect to what is natural in them--such as natural men
   have who are under awakenings and common illuminations--will give some
   degree of conviction of the truth, beyond what they had before they
   were thus enlightened. For hereby they see the manifestations made in
   the Holy Scriptures, of the natural perfections of God; such as his
   greatness, power, and awful majesty; which tends to convince the mind,
   that this is the word of a great and terrible God. From the tokens
   there are of God's greatness and majesty in his word and works, of
   which they have a great sense, from the common influence of the Spirit
   of God, they may have a much greater conviction that these are indeed
   the word and works of a very great invisible Being. And the lively
   apprehension of the greatness of God, which natural men may have, tends
   to make them sensible of the great guilt, which sin against such a God
   brings, and the dreadfulness of his wrath for sin. And this tends to
   cause them more easily and fully to believe the revelation the
   Scripture makes of another world, and of the extreme misery it
   threatens, there to be inflicted on sinners. And so from that sense of
   the great natural good there is in the things of religion, which is
   sometimes given in common illuminations, men may be the more induced to
   believe the truth of religion. These things persons may have, and yet
   have no sense of the beauty and amiableness of the moral and holy
   excellency of religion; and therefore no spiritual conviction of their
   truth. But yet such convictions are sometimes mistaken for saving
   convictions, and the affections flowing from them, for saving
   affections.

   2. The extraordinary impressions which are made on the imaginations of
   some persons, in visions, and immediate strong impulses and
   suggestions, as though they saw sights, and had words spoken to them,
   may, and often do beget a strong persuasion of the truth of invisible
   things. Though the general tendency of such things, in their final
   issue, is to draw men off from the word of God, and to cause them to
   reject the gospel, and to establish unbelief and atheism: yet for the
   present, they may, and often do beget a confident persuasion of the
   truth of some things that are revealed in the Scriptures; however their
   confidence is founded in delusion, and so nothing worth. As for
   instance, if a person has by some invisible agent, immediately and
   strongly impressed on his imagination, the appearance of a bright
   light, and glorious form of a person seated on a throne, with great
   external majesty and beauty, uttering some remarkable words, with great
   force and energy; the person who is the subject of such an operation,
   may be from hence confident, that there are invisible agents, spiritual
   beings, from what he has experienced, knowing that he had no hand
   himself in this extraordinary effect, which he has experienced. He may
   also be confident, that this is Christ whom he saw and heard speaking;
   and this may make him confident that there is a Christ, and that Christ
   reigns on a throne in heaven, as he saw him; and may be confident that
   the words which he heard him speak are true, &c. in the same manner as
   the lying miracles of the papists, may for the present beget in the
   minds of the ignorant, deluded people, a strong persuasion of the truth
   of many things declared in the New Testament. Thus when the images of
   Christ, in popish churches, are on some extraordinary occasions, made
   by priestcraft to appear to the people as if they wept, and shed fresh
   blood, and moved, and uttered such and such words; the people may be
   verily persuaded that it is a miracle wrought by Christ himself; and
   from thence may be confident there is a Christ, and that what they are
   told of his death and sufferings, resurrection and ascension, and
   present government of the world, is true; for they may look upon this
   miracle, as a certain evidence of all these things, and a kind of
   ocular demonstration of them. This may be the influence of these lying
   wonders for the present; though the general tendency of them is not to
   convince that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, but finally to promote
   atheism. Even the intercourse which Satan has with witches, and their
   often experiencing his immediate power, has a tendency to convince them
   of the truth of some of the doctrines of religion; as particularly the
   reality of an invisible world, or world of spirits, contrary to the
   doctrine of the Sadducees. The general tendency of Satan's influences
   is delusion; but yet he may mix some truth with his lies, that his lies
   may not be so easily discovered.

   Multitudes are deluded with a counterfeit faith, from impressions on
   their imagination, in the manner now mentioned. They say they know that
   there is a God, for they have seen him; they know that Christ is the
   Son of God, for they have seen him in his glory; they know that Christ
   died for sinners, for they have seen him hanging on the cross, and his
   blood running from his wounds; they know there is a heaven and hell,
   for they have seen the misery of the damned souls in hell, and the
   glory of saints and angels in heaven; (meaning some external
   representations, strongly impressed on their imagination;) they know
   that the Scriptures are the word of God, and that such and such
   promises in particular are his word, for they have heard him speak them
   to them, they came to their minds suddenly and immediately from God,
   without their having any hand in it.

   3. Persons may seem to have their belief of the truth greatly
   increased, when the foundation of it is only a persuasion of their
   interest in them. They first, by some means or other, take up a
   confidence, that if there be a Christ and a heaven, they are theirs;
   and this prejudices them more in favour of their truth. When they hear
   of the great and glorious things of religion, it is with this notion,
   that all these things belong to them; and hence easily become confident
   that they are true; they look upon it to be greatly for their interest
   that they should be true. It is very obvious what a strong influence
   men's interest and inclinations have on their judgments. While a
   natural man thinks, that if there be a heaven and a hell, the latter
   and not the former belongs to him; then he will be hardly persuaded
   that there is a heaven or hell. But when he comes to be persuaded, that
   hell belongs only to others and not to him; then he can easily allow
   the reality of hell, and exclaim against the senselessness and
   sottishness of others in neglecting means of escape from it: and being
   confident that he is a child of God, and that God has promised heaven
   to him, he may seem strong in the faith of its reality, and may have a
   great zeal against that infidelity which denies it. But I proceed to
   another distinguishing sign of gracious affections.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [495] 2 Cor. iii. 18.

   [496] John i. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Gracious affections are attended with evangelical humiliation.

   Evangelical humiliation is a sense that a Christian has of his own
   utter insufficiency, despicableness, and odiousness, with an answerable
   frame of heart. There is a distinction to be made between a legal and
   evangelical humiliation. The former is what men may have while in a
   state of nature, and have no gracious affection; the latter is peculiar
   to true saints. The former is from the common influence of the Spirit
   of God, assisting natural principles, and especially natural
   conscience; the latter is from the special influences of the Spirit of
   God, implanting and exercising supernatural and divine principles. The
   former is from the mind being assisted to a greater sense of religious
   things, as to their natural properties and qualities, and particularly
   of the natural perfections of God, such as his greatness, terrible
   majesty, &c.--which were manifested to the congregation of Israel, in
   giving the law at mount Sinai--the latter is from a sense of the
   transcendent beauty of divine things in their moral qualities. In the
   former, a sense of the awful greatness and natural perfections of God,
   and of the strictness of his law, convinces men that they are exceeding
   sinful and guilty, and exposed to the wrath of God, as it will convince
   wicked men and devils at the day of judgment; but they do not see their
   own odiousness on account of sin; they do not see the hateful nature of
   sin; a sense of this is given in evangelical humiliation, by a
   discovery of the beauty of God's holiness and moral perfection. In a
   legal humiliation men are made sensible that they are nothing before
   the great and terrible God, and that they are undone, and wholly
   insufficient to help themselves; as wicked men will be at the day of
   judgment: but they have not an answerable frame of heart, consisting in
   a disposition to abase themselves, and exalt God alone. This
   disposition is given only in evangelical humiliation, by overcoming the
   heart, and changing its inclination, by a discovery of God's holy
   beauty. In a legal humiliation, the conscience is convinced; as the
   consciences of all will be most perfectly at the day of judgment; but
   because there is no spiritual understanding, the will is not bowed, nor
   the inclination altered. In legal humiliation, men are brought to
   despair of helping themselves; in evangelical, they are brought
   voluntarily to deny and renounce themselves: in the former, they are
   subdued and forced to the ground; in the latter, they are brought
   sweetly to yield, and freely and with delight to prostrate themselves
   at the feet of God.

   Legal humiliation has in it no spiritual good, nothing of the nature of
   true virtue; whereas evangelical humiliation is that wherein the
   excellent beauty of christian grace does very much consist. Legal
   humiliation is useful, as a means in order to evangelical; as a common
   knowledge of the things of religion is a means requisite in order to
   spiritual knowledge. Men may be legally humbled and have no humility;
   as the wicked at the day of judgment will be thoroughly convinced that
   they have no righteousness, but are altogether sinful, exceeding
   guilty, and justly exposed to eternal damnation--and be fully sensible
   of their own helplessness--without the least mortification of the pride
   of their hearts. But the essence of evangelical humiliation consists in
   such humility as becomes a creature in itself exceeding sinful, under a
   dispensation of grace; consisting in a mean esteem of himself, as in
   himself nothing, and altogether contemptible and odious; attended with
   a mortification of a disposition to exalt himself, and a free
   renunciation of his own glory.

   This is a great and most essential thing in true religion. The whole
   frame of the gospel, every thing appertaining to the new covenant, and
   all God's dispensations towards fallen man, are calculated to bring to
   pass this effect. They that are destitute of this, have no true
   religion, whatever profession they may make, and how high soever their
   religious affections may be; Hab. ii. 4. "Behold, his soul which is
   lifted up, is not upright in him; but the just shall live by his
   faith;" i. e. he shall live by his faith on God's righteousness and
   grace, and not his own goodness and excellency. God has abundantly
   manifested in his word, that this is what he has a peculiar respect to
   in his saints, and that nothing is acceptable to him without it; Ps.
   xxxiv. 18. "The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and
   saveth such as be of a contrite spirit." Ps. li. 17. "The sacrifices of
   God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou
   wilt not despise." Ps. cxxxviii. 6. "Though the Lord be high, yet hath
   he respect unto the lowly." Prov. iii. 34. "He giveth grace unto the
   lowly." Isa. lvii. 15. "Thus saith me high and lofty One who inhabiteth
   eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with
   him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit
   of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." Isa.
   lxvi. 1, 2. "Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the
   earth is my footstool:--but to this man will I look, even to him that
   is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word." Micah vi.
   8."He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord thy
   God require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
   humbly with thy God?" Matt. v. 3. "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for
   theirs is the kingdom of God." Matt. xviii. 3, 4. "Verily I say unto
   you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
   not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble
   himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of
   heaven." "Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
   kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." The
   centurion (Luke vii.) acknowledged that he was not worthy that Christ
   should enter under his roof, and that he was not worthy to come to him.
   See the manner of a sinner coming to Christ, Luke vii. 37,. &c. "And
   behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that
   Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box of
   ointment, and stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash
   his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head." She
   did not think the hair of her head, which is the natural crown and
   glory of a woman, (1 Cor. xi. 15.) too good to wipe the feet of Christ.
   Jesus most graciously accepted her, and says, Luke vii. 50."Thy faith
   hath saved thee, go in peace." The woman of Canaan submitted to Christ,
   in his saying, Mat. xv. 26."It is not meet to take the children's
   bread, and to cast it to the dogs," and did as it were own that she was
   worthy to be called a dog; whereupon Christ says unto her, "O woman,
   great is thy faith: be it unto thee, even as thou wilt,". Matt. xv.
   26-28. The prodigal son said, "I will arise, and go to my father, and I
   will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
   thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
   hired servants,". Luke xv. 18. &c. See also Luke xviii. 9. &c. "And he
   spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they
   were righteous, and despised others, &c.--The publican standing afar
   off, would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon
   his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this
   man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every
   one that exalteth himself shall be abased: and he that humbleth
   himself, shall be exalted." Matt. xxviii. 9. "And they came, and held
   him by the feet, and worshipped him." Col. iii. 12. "Put ye on, as the
   elect of God, --humbleness of mind." Ezek. xx. 41, 43. "I will accept
   you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out from the people,
   &c.--And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings,
   wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loathe yourselves in your
   own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed." Chap. xxxvi. 26,
   27, 31. "A new heart also will I give unto you,--and I will put my
   Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, &c.--Then
   shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
   good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight, for your
   iniquities, and for your abominations." Chap. xvi. 63. "That thou
   mayest remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more
   because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
   hast done, saith the Lord." Job xlii. 6. "I abhor myself, and repent in
   dust and ashes."

   As we would therefore make the Holy Scriptures our rule, in judging of
   the nature of true religion, and judging of our own religious
   qualifications and state; it concerns us greatly to look at this
   humiliation, as one of the most essential things pertaining to true
   Christianity. [497] This is the principal part of the great christian
   duty of self-denial. That duty consists in two things, viz. first, In a
   man's denying his worldly inclinations, and in forsaking and renouncing
   all worldly objects and enjoyments; and, secondly, In denying his
   natural self-exaltation, and renouncing his own dignity and glory, and
   in being emptied of himself; so that he does freely, and from his very
   heart, as it were renounce, and annihilate himself. Thus the Christian
   doth in evangelical humiliation. The latter is the greatest and most
   difficult part of self-denial: although they always go together, and
   one never truly is, where the other is not; yet natural men can come
   much nearer to the former than the latter. Many Anchorites and Recluses
   have abandoned (though without any true mortification) the wealth, and
   pleasures, and common enjoyments of the world, who were far from
   renouncing their own dignity and righteousness. They never denied
   themselves for Christ, but only sold one lust to feed another, sold a
   beastly lust to pamper a devilish one; and so were never the better,
   but their latter end was worse than their beginning. They turned out
   one black devil to let in seven white ones worse than the first, though
   of a fairer countenance. It is inexpressible, and almost inconceivable,
   how strong a self-righteous, self-exalting disposition is naturally in
   man. What will he not do and suffer, to feed and gratify it? What
   lengths have been gone in a seeming self-denial in other respects, by
   Essenes and Pharisees, among the Jews; by papists, many sects of
   heretics, and enthusiasts, among professing Christians; by many
   Mahometans; by Pythagorean philosophers, and others, among the heathen;
   and all to do sacrifice to this Moloch of spiritual pride or
   self-righteousness; and that they may have something wherein to exalt
   themselves before God, and above their fellow-creatures?

   Real humiliation is what all the most glorious hypocrites, who make the
   most splendid show of mortification to the world, and high religious
   affection, grossly fail in. Were it not that this is so much insisted
   on in Scripture, as a most essential thing in true grace; one would be
   tempted to think that many of the heathen philosophers were truly
   gracious, in whom was so bright an appearance of many virtues, and also
   great illuminations, and inward fervours and elevations of mind, as
   though they were truly the subjects of divine illapses and heavenly
   communications. [498] It is true, that many hypocrites make great
   pretences to humility, as well as other graces; and very often there is
   nothing whatsoever of which they make a higher profession. They
   endeavour to make a great show of humility in speech and behaviour; but
   they commonly make bungling work of it, though glorious work in their
   own eyes. They cannot find out what a humble speech and behaviour is,
   or how to speak and act so that there may indeed be a savour of
   christian humility in what they say and do: that sweet humble air and
   mien is beyond their art, being not led by the Spirit, or naturally
   guided to a behaviour becoming holy humility, by the vigour of a lowly
   spirit within them. And therefore they have no other way, many of them,
   but to be much in declaring that they are humble, and telling how they
   were humbled to the dust at such and such times, and abounding in very
   bad expressions about themselves; such as, I am the least of all
   saints, I am a poor vile creative, I am not worthy of the least mercy,
   or that God should look upon me! Oh, I have a dreadful wicked heart! my
   heart is worse than the devil! Oh, this cursed heart of mine, &c. Such
   expressions are very often used, not with a heart broken, not with
   spiritual mourning, not with the tears of her that washed Jesus's feet
   with her tears, not as remembering and being confounded, and never
   opening their mouth more because of their shame, when God is pacified,
   (Ezek. xvi. 63.) but with a light air, with smiles in the countenance,
   or with a pharisaical affectation. We must believe that they are thus
   humble, and see themselves so vile, upon the credit of their say so;
   for nothing appears in them of any savour of humility, in the manner of
   their deportment and deeds. There are many full of expressions of their
   own vileness, who yet expect to be looked upon as eminent and bright
   saints by others, as their due; and it is dangerous for any, so much as
   to hint the contrary, or to carry it towards them any otherwise, than
   as if we looked upon them some of the chief of Christians. Many are
   much in exclaiming against their wicked hearts, their great
   short-comings, and unprofitableness, and in speaking as though they
   looked on themselves as the meanest of the saints; who yet, if a
   minister should seriously tell them the same things in private, and
   should signify, that he feared they were very low and weak
   Christians--and thought they had reason solemnly to consider of their
   great barrenness and unprofitableness, and falling so much short of
   many others--it would be more than they could digest; they would think
   themselves highly injured; and there would be danger of a rooted
   prejudice in them against such a minister.

   Some are abundant in talking against legal doctrines, legal preaching,
   and a legal spirit, who do but little understand the thing they talk
   against. A legal spirit is a more subtle thing than they imagine, it is
   too subtle for them. It lurks, and operates, and prevails in their
   hearts, and they are most notoriously guilty of it, at the same time,
   when they are inveighing against it. So far as a man is not emptied of
   himself, and of his own righteousness and goodness, in whatever form or
   shape, so far he is of a legal spirit. A spirit of pride of a man's own
   righteousness, morality, holiness, affection, experience, faith,
   humiliation, or any goodness whatsoever, is a legal spirit. It was no
   pride in Adam before the fall, to be of a legal spirit; because of his
   circumstances, he might seek acceptance by his own righteousness. But a
   legal spirit in a fallen sinful creature, can be nothing but spiritual
   pride; and reciprocally, a spiritually proud spirit is a legal spirit.
   There is no man living lifted up with a conceit of his own experiences
   and discoveries, and upon the account of them glisters in his own eyes,
   but what trusts in his experiences, and makes a righteousness of them.
   However he may use humble terms, and speak of his experiences as of the
   great things God has done for him, and it may be calls upon others to
   glorify God for them: yet he that is proud of his experiences,
   arrogates something to himself, as though his experiences were some
   dignity of his. And if he looks on them as his own dignity, he
   necessarily thinks that God looks on them so too; for he necessarily
   thinks his own opinion of them to be true; and consequently judges that
   God looks on them as he does; and so unavoidably imagines that God
   looks on his experiences as a dignity in him, as he looks on them
   himself; and that he glisters as much in God's eyes, as he does in his
   own. And thus he trusts in what is inherent in him, to make him shine
   in God's sight, and recommend him to God. With this encouragement he
   goes before God in prayer; this makes him to expect much; to think that
   Christ loves him, and that he is willing to clothe him with his
   righteousness; because he supposes that he is taken with his
   experiences and graces. And this is a high degree of living on his own
   righteousness; and such persons are in the high road to hell. Poor
   deluded wretches, who think they look so glistering in God's eyes, when
   they are a smoke in his nose, and are many of them more odious to him,
   than the most impure beast in Sodom, that makes no pretence to
   religion! To do as these do, is to live upon experiences, according to
   the true notion of it; and not to do as those who only make use of
   spiritual experiences as evidences of a state of grace, and in that way
   receive hope and comfort from them.

   There is a sort of men, who indeed abundantly cry down works, and cry
   up faith in opposition to works, and set up themselves very much as
   evangelical persons, in opposition to those that are of a legal spirit,
   and make a fair show of advancing Christ and the gospel, and the way of
   free grace; who are indeed some of the greatest enemies to the
   gospel-way of free grace, and the most dangerous opposers of pure
   humble Christianity. [499]

   There is a pretended great humiliation, being dead to the law, and
   emptied of self, which is one of the most elated things in the world.
   Some there are, who have made great profession of experience of a
   thorough work of the law on their own hearts, and of being brought
   fully off from works whose conversation has savoured most of a
   self-righteous spirit, of any that ever I had opportunity to observe.
   Some, who think themselves quite emptied of themselves, confident that
   they are abased in the dust, are full as they can hold with the glory
   of their own humility, and lifted up to heaven with a high opinion of
   their abasement. Their humility is a swelling, self-conceited,
   confident, showy, noisy, assuming humility. It seems to be the nature
   of spiritual pride to make men conceited and ostentatious of their
   humility.--This appears in that firstborn of pride, among the children
   of men, that would be called his holiness, even the man of sin, that
   exalts himself above all that is called God or is worshipped; he styles
   himself servant of servants; and to make a show of humility, washes the
   feet of a number of poor men at his inauguration.

   For persons to be truly emptied of themselves, poor in spirit, and
   broken in heart, is quite another thing, and has other effects, than
   many imagine. It is astonishing how greatly many are deceived about
   themselves as to this matter, imagining themselves most humble, when
   they are most proud, and their behaviour is really the most haughty.
   The deceitfulness of the heart of man appears in no one thing so much,
   as this of spiritual pride and self-righteousness. The subtlety of
   Satan appears in its height, in his managing of persons with respect to
   this sin. And perhaps one reason may be, that here he has most
   experience: he knows the way of its coming in; he is acquainted with
   the secret springs of it; it was his own sin.--Experience gives vast
   advantage in leading souls, either to good or evil.

   But though spiritual pride be so subtle and secret an iniquity, and
   commonly appears under a pretext of great humility; yet there are two
   things by which it may (perhaps universally and surely) be discovered
   and distinguished.

   The first is this; he that is under the prevalence of this distemper,
   is apt to think highly of his attainments in religion, as comparing
   himself with others. It is natural for him to fall into that thought of
   himself, that he is an eminent saint, that he is very high amongst the
   saints, and has distinguishingly good and great experiences. That is
   the secret language of his heart, Luke xviii. 11. "God, I thank thee
   that I am not as other men." And Isa. lxv. 5. "I am holier than thou."
   Hence such are apt to put themselves forward among God's people, and as
   it were to take a high seat among them, as if there was no doubt of it
   but it belonged to them. They, as it were, naturally do that which
   Christ condemns, Luke xiv. 7. &c. "Take the highest room." This they
   do, by being forward to take upon them the place and business of the
   chief; to guide, teach, direct, and manage: "They are confident that
   they are guides to the blind, a light of them which are in darkness,
   instructors of the foolish, teachers of babes," Rom. ii. 19, 20. It is
   natural for them to take it for granted, that it belongs to them to do
   the part of dictators and masters in matters of religion; and so they
   implicitly affect to be called of men Rabbi, which is by interpretation
   Master, as the Pharisees did, Matt. xxiii. 6, 7. i. e. they are apt to
   expect that others should regard them, and yield to them, as masters,
   in matters of religion. [500]

   But he whose heart is under the power of christian humility, is of a
   contrary disposition. If the Scriptures are at all to be relied on,
   such an one is apt to think his attainments in religion to be
   comparatively mean, and to esteem himself low among the saints, and one
   of the least of saints. Humility, or true lowliness of mind, disposes
   persons to think others better than themselves; Phil. ii. 3. "In
   lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than themselves."
   Hence they are apt to think the lowest room belongs to them; and their
   inward disposition naturally leads them to obey that precept of our
   Saviour, Luke xiv. 10. It is not natural to them to take it upon them
   to do the part of teachers; but on the contrary, they are disposed to
   think that they are not the persons, that others are fitter for it than
   they; as it was with Moses and Jeremiah, (Exod. iii. 11. Jer. i. 6.)
   though they were such eminent saints, and of great knowledge. It is not
   natural to them to think that it belongs to them to teach, but to be
   taught: they are much more eager to hear, and to receive instruction
   from others, than to dictate; Jam. i. 19. "Be ye swift to hear, slow to
   speak." And when they do speak, it is not natural to them to speak with
   a bold, masterly air; but humility disposes them rather to speak
   trembling. Hos. xiii. 1. "When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted
   himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died." They are not
   apt to assume authority, and to take upon them to be chief managers and
   masters; but rather to be subject to others; Jam. iii. 1, 2. "Be not
   many masters." 1 Pet. v. 5. "All of you be subject one to another, and
   be clothed with humility" Eph. v. 21. "Submitting yourselves one to
   another in the fear of God."

   Some persons' experiences naturally make them think highly of their
   experiences; and they often speak of them as very great and
   extraordinary; they freely speak of the great things they have met
   with. This may be spoken and meant in a good sense. In one sense, every
   degree of saving mercy is a great thing: it is indeed a thing great,
   yea, infinitely great, for God to bestow the least crumb of children's
   bread on such dogs as we are in ourselves; and the more humble a person
   is that hopes that God has bestowed such mercy on him, the more apt
   will he be to call it a great thing that he has met with, in this
   sense. But if by great things which they have experienced, they mean
   comparatively great spiritual experiences, or great compared with
   others' experiences, or beyond what is ordinary, which is evidently
   oftentimes the case; then for a person to say, I have met with great
   things, is the very same thing as to say, I am an eminent saint, and
   have more grace than ordinary. To have great experiences, if the
   experiences be true and worth telling, is the same thing as to have
   great grace: there is no true experience, but the exercise of grace;
   and exactly according to the degree of true experience, is the degree
   of grace and holiness. The persons that talk thus about their
   experiences, when they give an account of them, expect that others
   should admire them. Indeed they do not call it boasting to talk after
   this manner about their experiences, nor do they look upon it as any
   sign of pride; because they say, they know that it was not they that
   did it, it was free grace, they are, the great things that God has done
   for them, they would acknowledge the great mercy God has shown them,
   and not make light of it . But so it was with the Pharisee, Luke xviii.
   He in words gave God the glory of making him to differ from other men;
   "God, I thank thee," says he, "that I am not as other men." [501] Their
   verbally ascribing it to the grace of God, that they are holier than
   other saints, does not hinder their forwardness to think so highly of
   their holiness, being a sure evidence of the pride and vanity of their
   minds. If they were under the influence of an humble spirit, their
   attainments in religion would not be so apt to shine in their own eyes,
   nor would they be so much in admiring their own beauty. The Christians
   that are really the most eminent saints, and therefore have the most
   excellent experiences, "and are greatest in the kingdom of heaven,
   humble themselves as a little child,".Matt. xviii. 4. because they look
   on themselves as but little children in grace, and their attainments to
   be but the attainments of babes in Christ. They are astonished at, and
   ashamed of, the low degrees of their love, their thankfulness, and
   their little knowledge of God.--Moses, when he had been conversing with
   God in the mount, and his face shone so bright in the eyes' of others
   as to dazzle their eyes, wish not that his free shone. Some persons go
   by the name of high professors, and some will own themselves to be high
   professors; but eminently humble saints that will shine brightest in
   heaven, are not at all apt to profess high. I do not believe there is
   an eminent saint in the world that is a high professor. Such will be
   much more likely to profess themselves to be the least of all saints,
   and to think that every saint's attainments and experiences are higher
   than his. [502]

   Such is the nature of grace, and of true spiritual light, that they
   naturally dispose the saints in the present state, to look upon their
   grace and goodness little, and their deformity great. And they that
   have the most grace and spiritual light, of any in this world, have
   most of this disposition. This will appear most clear and evident to
   any one that soberly and thoroughly weighs the nature and reason of
   things, and considers the things following.

   That grace and holiness is worthy to be called little, which is little
   in comparison of what it ought to be; and so it seems to one that is
   truly gracious. Such an one has his eye upon the rule of his duty; a
   conformity to that is what he aims at; it is what his soul reaches
   after; and it is by that he estimates and judges of what he does, and
   what he has. To a gracious soul, and especially to one eminently
   gracious, that holiness appears little, which is little compared with
   what it should be; little in comparison of that for which he sees
   infinite reason and obligation. If his holiness appears to him to be at
   a vast distance from this, it naturally appears despicable in his eyes,
   and not worthy to be mentioned as any beauty or amiableness in him. For
   the like reason as a hungry man naturally accounts that which is set
   before him, but a little food, a small matter, not worth mentioning, in
   comparison of his appetite. Or as the child of a great prince, who is
   jealous for the honour of his father, and beholds the respect which men
   show him, naturally looks on that honour and respect very little, and
   not worthy to be regarded, which is nothing in comparison of that which
   the dignity of his father requires.

   The nature of true grace and spiritual light, opens to a person's view
   the infinite reason there is that he should be holy in a high degree.
   The more grace he has, the greater sense he has of the infinite
   excellency and glory of the Divine Being, the infinite dignity of the
   person of Christ, and the boundless length and breadth, and depth and
   height, of the love of Christ to sinners. And as grace increases, the
   field opens more and more to a distant view, until the soul is
   swallowed up with the vastness of the object; the person is astonished
   to think how much it becomes him to love this God, and this glorious
   Redeemer who has so loved man, and how little he does love. And so the
   more he apprehends, the more the smallness of his grace and love
   appears strange and wonderful: and therefore is more ready to think
   that others are beyond him. Wondering at the littleness of his own
   grace, he can scarcely believe that so strange a thing happens to other
   saints. It is amazing to him, that one who is really a child of God,
   and who has actually received the saving benefits of the unspeakable
   love of Christ, should love no more. He is apt to look upon it as a
   thing peculiar to himself, a strange instance; for he sees only the
   outside of other Christians, but he sees his own inside.

   Here the reader may possibly object, that love to God is really
   increased in proportion as the knowledge of God is increased; and
   therefore how should an increase of knowledge in a saint, make his love
   appear less, in comparison of what is known? To which I answer, that
   although the love of God in the saints, be answerable to the degree of
   knowledge or sight of God; yet it is not in proportion to the object
   seen and known. The soul of a saint, by having something of God opened
   to sight, is convinced of much more than is seen. There is something
   seen, that is wonderful; and that sight brings with it a strong
   conviction of something vastly beyond, that is not immediately seen. So
   that the soul, at the same time, is astonished at its ignorance, and
   that it knows so little, as well as that it loves so little. And as the
   soul, in a spiritual view, is convinced of infinitely more in the
   object, yet beyond sight; so it is convinced of the capacity of the
   soul, of knowing vastly more, if clouds and darkness were but removed.
   Which causes the soul, in the enjoyment of a spiritual view, to
   complain greatly of spiritual ignorance and want of love, and long
   after more knowledge, and more love.

   The love of God in the most eminent saints in this world, is truly very
   little in comparison of what it ought to be. Because the highest love
   that ever any attain to in this life, is poor, cold, exceeding low, and
   not worthy to be named in comparison of what our obligations appear to
   be, from the joint consideration of these two things; viz. 1. The
   reason God has given us to love him, in the manifestations he has made
   of his infinite glory, in his word and works; and particularly in the
   gospel of his Son, and what he has done for sinful man by him. And, 2.
   The capacity there is in the soul of man, by those intellectual
   faculties which God has given it, of seeing and understanding these
   reasons, which God has given us to love him. How small indeed is the
   love of the most eminent saint on earth, in comparison of what these
   things jointly considered do require! And of this, grace tends to
   convince men; and especially eminent grace: for grace is of the nature
   of light, and brings truth to view. And therefore he that has much
   grace, apprehends much more than others, that great height to which his
   love ought to ascend; and he sees better than others, how little a way
   he has risen towards that height. And therefore, estimating his love by
   the whole height of his duty, hence it appears astonishingly little and
   low in his eyes.

   And the eminent saint, having such a conviction of the high degree in
   which he ought to love God, is shown, not only the littleness of his
   grace, but the greatness of his remaining corruption. In order to judge
   how much corruption or sin we have remaining in us, we must take our
   measure from that height to which the rule of our duty extends. The
   whole of the distance we are at from that height, is sin: for failing
   of duty is sin; otherwise our duty is not our duty; and by how much the
   more we fall short of our duty, so much the more sin have we. Sin is no
   other than disagreeableness, in a moral agent, to the law, or rule of
   his duty. And therefore the degree of sin is to be judged of by the
   rule; so much disagreeableness to the rule, so much sin, whether it be
   in defect or excess. Therefore if men, in their love to God, do not
   come up half way to that height which duty requires, then they have
   more corruption in their hearts than grace; because there is more
   goodness wanting, than is there; and all that is wanting is sin. Sin is
   an abominable defect; and appears so to the saints, especially those
   that are eminent; it appears exceeding abominable to them, that Christ
   should be loved so little, and thanked so little for his dying love; it
   is in their eyes hateful ingratitude.

   And then the increase of grace has a tendency another way, to cause the
   saints to think their deformity vastly more than their goodness. It not
   only tends to convince them that their corruption is much greater than
   their goodness, which is indeed the case; but it also tends to cause
   the deformity that there is in the least sin, or the least degree of
   corruption, to appear so great, as vastly to outweigh all the beauty
   there is in their greatest holiness; for this also is indeed the case.
   For the least sin against an infinite God, has an infinite hatefulness
   or deformity in it; but the highest degree of holiness in a creature,
   has not an infinite loveliness in it: and therefore the loveliness of
   it is as nothing, in comparison of the deformity of the least sin. That
   every sin has infinite deformity and hatefulness in it, is most
   demonstrably evident; because what the evil, or iniquity, or
   hatefulness of sin consists in, is the violating of an obligation, or
   the being or doing contrary to what we should be or do, or are obliged
   to. And therefore by how much the greater the obligation is that is
   violated, so much the greater is the iniquity and hatefulness of the
   violation. But certainly our obligation to love and honour any being,
   is in some proportion to his loveliness and honourableness, or to his
   worthiness to be loved and honoured by us; which is the same thing. We
   are surely under greater obligation to love a more lovely being, than a
   less lovely: and if a Being be infinitely lovely or worthy to be loved
   by us, then our obligations to love him, are infinitely great: and
   therefore, whatever is contrary to this love, has in it infinite
   iniquity, deformity, and unworthiness. But on the other hand, with
   respect to our holiness or love to God, there is not an infinite
   worthiness in that. The sin of the creature against God, is
   ill-deserving and hateful in proportion to the distance there is
   between God and the creature: the greatness of the object, and the
   meanness and inferiority of the subject, aggravate it. But it is the
   reverse with regard to the worthiness of the respect of the creature to
   God; it is worthless, and not worthy, in proportion to the meanness of
   the subject. So much the greater the distance between God and the
   creature, so much the less is the creature's respect worthy of God's
   notice or regard. The great degree of superiority increases the
   obligation on the inferior to regard the superior; and so makes the
   want of regard more hateful: but the great degree of inferiority
   diminishes the worth of the regard of the inferior; because the more he
   is inferior--the less is he worthy of notice; the less he is--the less
   is what he can offer worth; for he can offer no more than himself, in
   offering his best respect; and therefore as he is little, and little
   worth, so is his respect little worth. And the more a person has of
   true grace and spiritual light, the more will it appear thus to him;
   the more will he appear to himself infinitely deformed by reason of
   sin, and the less will the goodness that is in his grace, or good
   experience, appear in proportion to it. For indeed it is nothing to it;
   it is less than a drop to the ocean; for finite bears no proportion at
   all to that which is infinite. But the more a person has of spiritual
   light, the more do things appear to him, in this respect, as they are
   indeed. Hence it most demonstrably appears, that true grace is of that
   nature, that the more a person has of it, with remaining corruption,
   the less does his goodness and holiness appear, in proportion to his
   deformity; and not only to his past, but to his present deformity, in
   the sin that now appears in his heart, and in the abominable defects of
   his highest and best affections, and brightest experiences.

   The nature of many high religious affections, and great discoveries (as
   they are called) in many persons I have been acquainted with, is to
   hide the corruption of their hearts, and to make it seem to them as if
   all their sin was gone, and to leave them without complaints of any
   hateful evil left in them; (though it may be they cry out much of their
   past unworthiness;) a sure and certain evidence that their discoveries
   are darkness and not light. It is darkness that hides men's pollution
   and deformity; but light let into the heart discovers it, searches it
   out in its secret corners, and makes it plainly to appear; especially
   that penetrating, all-searching light of God's holiness and glory. It
   is true, that saving discoveries may for the present hide corruption in
   one sense; they restrain the positive exercises or it, such as malice,
   envy, covetousness, lasciviousness, murmuring, &c. but they bring
   corruption to light, in that which is privative, viz. that there is no
   more love, no more humility, no more thankfulness. Which defects appear
   most hateful, in the eyes of those who have the most eminent exercises
   of grace; and are very burdensome, and cause the saints to complain of
   their leanness, odious pride and ingratitude. And whatever positive
   exercises of corruption at any time arise, and mingle themselves with
   eminent actings of grace, grace will exceedingly magnify the view of
   them, and render their appearance far more heinous and horrible.

   The more eminent saints are, and the more they have of the light of
   heaven in their souls, the more do they appear to themselves, as the
   most eminent saints in this world do to the saints and angels in
   heaven. How can we rationally suppose the most eminent saints on earth
   appear to them, if beheld any otherwise than covered with the
   righteousness of Christ, and their deformities swallowed up and hid in
   the coruscation of the beams of his abundant glory and love? how can we
   suppose our most ardent love and praises appear to them, who behold the
   beauty and glory of God without a veil? how does our highest
   thankfulness for the dying love of Christ appear to them, who see
   Christ as he is, who know as they are known, and see the glory of the
   person of him that died, and the wonders of his dying love, without
   cloud or darkness? and how do they look on the deepest reverence and
   humility, with which worms of the dust on earth approach that infinite
   Majesty, which they behold? do they appear great to them, or so much as
   worthy of the name or reverence and humility, in those whom they behold
   at such an infinite distance from that great and holy God, in whose
   glorious presence they are? The reason why the highest attainments of
   the saints on earth appear so mean to them, is that they dwell in the
   light of God's glory, and see him as he is. And it is in this respect
   with the saints on earth, as it is with those in heaven, in proportion
   as they are more eminent in grace.

   I would not be understood, that the saints on earth have, in all
   respects, the worst opinion of themselves, when they have most of the
   exercise of grace. In many respects it is otherwise. With respect to
   the positive exercises of corruption, they may appear to themselves
   freest and best when grace is most in exercise, and worst when the
   actings of grace are lowest. And when they compare themselves with
   themselves, at different times, they may know, when grace is in lively
   exercise, that it is better with them than it was before; (though
   before, at the time, they did not see so much evil as they see now;)
   and when afterwards they sink again in the frame of their minds, they
   may know that they sink, and have a new argument of their great
   remaining corruption, and a rational conviction of a greater vileness
   than they saw before; and may have a sense of guilt, and a legal sense
   of their sinfulness, far greater than when in the lively exercise of
   grace. But yet it is true, and demonstrable from the forementioned
   considerations, that the children of God never have such a sensible and
   spiritual conviction of their deformity, and so great, quick, and
   abasing sense of their present vileness and odiousness, as when they
   are highest in the exercise of true grace; and never are they so much
   disposed to set themselves low among Christians as then. And thus he
   that is the greatest in the kingdom, or most eminent in the church of
   Christ, is he that humbles himself, as the least infant among them;
   Matt. xviii. 4.

   A true saint may know that he has some true grace: and the more grace
   there is, the more easily is it known; as was observed and proved
   before. But yet it does not follow, that an eminent saint is easily
   sensible that he is an eminent saint, when compared with others.--I
   will not deny that it is possible, that he who has much grace, and is
   an eminent saint, may know it. But he will not be apt to know it; it
   will not be obvious to him. That he is better than others, and has
   higher experiences and attainments, is not a foremost thought, nor does
   it readily offer itself. It is not in his way, but lies far out of
   sight; he must take pains to convince himself of it; there will be need
   of a great command of reason, and a high degree of strictness and care
   in arguing, to convince himself. And if he be rationally convinced, by
   a very strict consideration of his own experiences, compared with the
   great appearances of low degrees of grace in some other saints, it will
   hardly seem real to him, that he has more grace than they. He will be
   apt even to lose the conviction he has by pains obtained; nor will it
   seem at all natural to him to act upon that supposition. And this may
   be laid down as an infallible thing, That the person who is apt to
   think that he, as compared with others, is a very eminent saint, much
   distinguished in christian experience, in whom this is a first thought,
   that rises of itself, and naturally offers itself; he is certainly
   mistaken; he is no eminent saint; but under the great prevailing of a
   proud and self-righteous spirit. And if this be habitual with the man,
   and is statedly the prevailing temper of his mind, he is no saint at
   all; he has not the least degree of any true christian experience; so
   surely as the word of God is true.

   Experiences of that tendency, and found to have this effect, viz. to
   elevate the subject of them with a great conceit of those experiences,
   are certainly vain and delusive. Those supposed discoveries that
   naturally blow up the person with an admiration of the eminency of his
   discoveries, and fill him with conceit, that now he has seen, and knows
   more than most other Christians, have nothing of the nature of true
   spiritual light in them. All true spiritual knowledge is of that
   nature, that the more a person has of it, the more is he sensible of
   his own ignorance; 1 Cor. viii. 2. "He that thinketh he knoweth any
   thing, knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know." Agur, when he had a
   great discovery of God, the wonderful height of his glory and his
   marvellous works, acknowledging his greatness and incomprehensibleness;
   had, at the same time, the deepest sense of his brutish ignorance. He
   looked upon himself as the most ignorant of all the saints; Prov. xxx.
   2, 3, 4. "Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the
   understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
   knowledge of the holy. Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended?
   who hath gathered the wind in his fist? who hath bound the waters in a
   garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his
   name, and what is his Son's name, if thou canst tell?"

   For a man to be highly conceited of his spiritual knowledge, is for him
   to be wise in his own eyes, if any thing is. And therefore it comes
   under those prohibitions, Prov. iii. 7. "Be not wise in thine own
   eyes:" Rom. xii. 16. "Be not wise in your own conceits:" and brings men
   under that woe, Isa. v. 21. "Woe unto them that are wise in their own
   eyes, and prudent in their own sight." Those who are thus wise, are
   some of the least likely to get good of any in the world. Experience
   shows this truth, Prov. xxvi. 12. "Seest thou a man wise in his own
   conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him."

   To this some may object, that the psalmist, when we must suppose that
   he was in a holy frame, speaks of his knowledge as eminently great, and
   far greater than that of other saints, Psal. cxix. 99, 100. "I have
   more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
   meditation. I understand more than the ancients: because I keep thy
   precepts." To this I answer two things:

   (1.) There is no restraint to be laid upon the Spirit of God, as to
   what he shall reveal to a prophet, for the benefit of his church, who
   is speaking or writing under immediate inspiration. The Spirit of God
   may reveal to such an one, and dictate to him to declare to others,
   secret things, that otherwise would be hard, yea impossible for him to
   find out. As he may reveal to him mysteries, which otherwise would be
   above his reason; or things in a distant place, that he cannot see; or
   future events, which it would be impossible for him to know and
   declare, if they were not extraordinarily revealed to him: so the
   Spirit of God might reveal to David this distinguishing benefit, which
   he had received by conversing much with God's testimonies; and use him
   as his instrument to record it for the benefit of others, to excite
   them to the like duty, and to use the same means to gain knowledge.
   Nothing can be gathered concerning the natural tendency of the ordinary
   gracious influences of the Spirit of God, from what David declares of
   his distinguishing knowledge under the extraordinary influences of
   God's Spirit, immediately dictating to him what he pleased for the
   benefit of his church; any more than we can reasonably argue, that it
   is the natural tendency of grace to incline men to wish the most
   dreadful misery to others, because David under inspiration, often prays
   that such misery may come upon them.

   (2.) It is not certain that the knowledge David here speaks of, is
   spiritual knowledge, wherein holiness fundamentally consists. But it
   may be that greater revelation which God made to him of the Messiah and
   his future kingdom, and the far more clear and extensive knowledge of
   the mysteries and doctrines of the gospel, than others; as a reward for
   his keeping God's testimonies. In this, it is apparent by the book of
   Psalms, that David far exceeded all who had gone before him.

   Secondly, Another infallible sign of spiritual pride, is persons being
   apt to think highly of their humility. False experiences are commonly
   attended with a counterfeit humility. And it is the very nature of a
   counterfeit humility, to be highly conceited of itself. False religious
   affections have generally a tendency, especially when raised to a great
   height, to make persons think that their humility is great, and
   accordingly to take much notice of their great attainments in this
   respect, and admire them. But eminently gracious affections (I scruple
   not to say it) are evermore of a contrary tendency, and have
   universally a contrary effect. They indeed make their possessors very
   sensible that they should be deeply humbled, and cause them earnestly
   to thirst and long after it; but they make their present humility, or
   that which they have already attained, to appear small; and their
   remaining pride great, and exceedingly abominable.

   The reason why a proud person is apt to think his humility great, and a
   very humble person his humility small, may be easily seen, if it be
   considered, that it is natural for persons, in judging of the degree of
   their own humiliation, to take their measure from that which they
   esteem their proper height, or the dignity wherein they properly stand.
   That may be great humiliation in one, which is no humiliation at all in
   another; because the degree of honourableness or considerableness,
   wherein each properly stands, is very different. For some great man to
   stoop to loose the latchet of the shoes of another great man, his
   equal, or to wash his feet, would be taken notice of as an act of
   abasement in him; and he being sensible of his own dignity, would look
   upon it so himself. But if a poor slave is seen stooping to unloose the
   shoes of a great prince, nobody will take notice of this, as an act of
   humiliation in him, or token of any great degree of humility: nor would
   the slave himself, unless he be horribly proud, and ridiculously
   conceited: and if after he had done it, he should, in his talk and
   behaviour, show that he thought his abasement great in it, and had his
   mind much upon it, as an evidence of his being very humble; would not
   every body cry out, "Who do you think yourself to be, that you should
   think this a mark of deep humiliation?" This would make it plain to a
   demonstration, that the slave was swollen with a high degree of pride
   and vanity of mind, as much as if he declared in plain terms, I think
   myself to be some great one. And the matter is no less plain and
   certain, when worthless, vile, and loathsome worms of the dust, are apt
   to put such a construction on their acts of abasement before God; and
   to think it a token of great humility in them, that they acknowledge
   themselves to be mean and unworthy, and behave themselves as those who
   are so inferior. The very reason why such outward acts, and such inward
   exercises, look like great abasement in such a person is, that he has a
   high conceit of himself. Whereas if he thought of himself more justly,
   these things would appear nothing to him, and his humility in them
   worthy of no regard; but he would rather be astonished at his pride,
   that one so infinitely despicable and vile, is brought no lower before
   God. When he says in his heart, "This is a great act of humiliation; it
   is certainly a sign of great humility in me, that I should feel thus,
   and do so:" his meaning is, "This is great humility for me, for such a
   one as I, who am so considerable and worthy." He considers how low he
   is now brought, and compares this with the height of dignity, on which
   he thinks he stands, and the distance appears very great; he calls it
   humility, and as such admires it. Whereas, in him who is truly humble,
   and really sees his own vileness and loathsomeness before God, the
   distance appears the other way. When he is brought lowest of all, it
   does not appear to him that he is brought below his proper station, but
   that he is not come to it; he appears to himself yet vastly above it;
   he longs to get lower, that he may come to it; but appears at a great
   distance from it. And this distance he calls pride. And therefore his
   pride appears great to him, and not his humility. For although he is
   brought much lower than he used to be; yet it does not appear to him
   worthy of the name of humiliation, for him that is so infinitely mean
   and detestable, to come down to a place, which though it be lower than
   what he used to assume, is yet vastly higher than what is proper for
   him. Men would hardly count it worthy of the name of humility, in a
   contemptible slave, that formerly affected to be a prince, to have his
   spirit so far brought down, as to take the place of a nobleman; when
   this is still so far above his proper station.

   All men, in judging of the degree of their own and others' humility, as
   appearing in any act of theirs, consider two things; viz. the real
   degree of dignity they stand in; and the degree of abasement, with the
   relation it bears to that real dignity. Thus, what may be an evidence
   of great humility in one, evidences but little or no humility in
   another. But truly humble Christians have so mean an opinion of their
   own real dignity, that all their self-abasement, when considered with
   relation to, and compared with that, appears very small to them. It
   does not seem to them to be any great humility, for such poor, vile,
   abject creatures as they are, to lie at the foot of God.

   The degree of humility is to be judged of by the degree of abasement,
   and the degree of the cause for abasement: but he that is truly and
   eminently humble, never thinks his humility great. The cause why he
   should be abased appears so great, and the abasement of the frame of
   his heart so greatly short of it, that he takes much more notice of his
   pride than his humility.

   Every one that has been conversant with souls under convictions of sin,
   knows that they are not apt to think themselves greatly convinced. And
   the reason is, men judge of the degree of their own convictions by two
   things jointly considered; viz. the degree of sense which they have of
   guilt and pollution, and the degree of cause they have for such a
   sense, in the degree of their real sinfulness. It is really no argument
   of any great conviction of sin, for some men to think themselves
   sinful, beyond most others in the world; because they are so indeed,
   very plainly and notoriously: he must be very blind indeed not to be
   sensible of it. But he that is truly under great convictions of sin,
   naturally thinks, that the cause he has to be sensible of guilt and
   pollution, is greater than others have; and therefore he ascribes his
   sensibleness of this, to the greatness of his sin, and not to the
   greatness of his sensibility. It is natural for one under great
   convictions, to think himself one of the greatest of sinners. That man
   is under great convictions, whose conviction is great in proportion to
   his sin. But no man that is truly under great convictions, thinks his
   conviction great in proportion to his sin. For if he does, it is a
   certain sign that he inwardly thinks his sins small. And if that be the
   case, that is a certain evidence that his conviction is small. And
   this, by the way, is the main reason, that persons, when under a work
   of humiliation, are not sensible of it, in the time of it.

   And as it is with conviction of sin, just so it is, by parity of
   reason, with respect to persons' conviction of their own meanness and
   vileness, their blindness, their impotence, and all that low sense a
   Christian has of himself, in the exercise of evangelical humiliation.
   So that in a high degree of this, the saints are never disposed to
   think their sense of their own meanness, filthiness, impotence, &c. to
   be great; because it never appears great to them, considering the
   cause.

   An eminent saint is not apt to think himself eminent in any thing; all
   his graces and experiences appear to him to be comparatively small; but
   especially his humility. Nothing that appertains to christian
   experience, and true piety, is so much put of his sight. He is a
   thousand times more quick-sighted to discern his pride, than his
   humility. On the contrary, the deluded hypocrite, who is under the
   power of spiritual pride, is so blind to nothing as his pride; and so
   quick-sighted to nothing, as the shows of humility.

   The humble Christian is more apt to find fault with his own pride than
   with that of other men. He is apt to put the best construction on
   others' words and behaviour, and to think that none are so proud as
   himself. But the proud hypocrite is quick to discern the mote in his
   brother's eye, in this respect; while he sees nothing of the beam in
   his own. He is very often crying out of others' pride, finding fault
   with others' apparel, and way of living; and is affected ten times as
   much with his neighbour's ring or riband, as with all the filthiness of
   his own heart.

   From the disposition there is in hypocrites to think highly of their
   humility, it comes to pass that counterfeit humility is forward to put
   forth itself to view. Those who have it, are apt to be much in speaking
   of their humiliations, setting them forth in high terms, and making a
   great outward show of humility, in affected looks, gestures, manner of
   speech, meanness of apparel, or some affected singularity. So it was of
   old with the false prophets, Zech. xiii. 4. so it was with the
   hypocritical Jews, Isa. lvii. 5. and so Christ tells us it was with the
   Pharisees, Matt. vi. 16. But it is contrariwise with true humility;
   they who have it, are not apt to display their eloquence in setting it
   forth, or to speak of the degree of their abasement in strong terms.
   [503] It does not affect to show itself in any singular meanness either
   of apparel, or way of living; agreeable to what is implied in Matt. vi.
   17. "But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy
   face." Col. ii. 23. "Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in
   will-worship and humility, and neglecting of the body." Nor is true
   humility a noisy thing; it is not loud and boisterous. The Scripture
   represents it as of a contrary nature. Ahab, when he had a visible
   humility, a resemblance of true humility, went softly, 1 Kings xxi. 27.
   A penitent, in the exercise of true humiliation, is represented as
   still and silent, Lam. iii. 28. "He sitteth alone and keepeth silence,
   because he hath borne it upon him." And silence is mentioned as what
   attends humility, Prov. xxx. 32. "If thou hast done foolishly in
   lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon
   thy mouth."

   Thus I have particularly and largely shown the nature of that true
   humility which attends holy affections, as it appears in its tendency
   to cause persons to think meanly of their attainments in religion,
   compared with the attainments of others, and particularly, of their
   attainments in humility: and have shown the contrary tendency of
   spiritual pride, to dispose persons to think their attainments in these
   respects to be great. I have insisted the longer on this, because I
   think it a matter of great importance, as it affords a certain
   distinction between true and counterfeit humility; and also as this
   disposition of hypocrites--whereby they look on themselves as better
   than others--is what God has declared to be very hateful to him, a
   smoke in his nose, and a fire that burneth all the day,. Isa. lxv. 5.
   It is mentioned as an instance of pride in the inhabitants of that holy
   city (as it was called) Jerusalem, that they esteemed themselves far
   better than the people of Sodom; Ezek. xvi. 56. "For thy sister Sodom
   was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride."

   Let not the reader slightly pass over these things in application to
   himself. When you imagine, reader, that it is a bad sign for a person
   to be apt to think himself a better saint than others, take heed lest
   there arise a blinding prejudice in your own favour. There will
   probably be need of great strictness of self-examination, in order to
   determine whether it be so with you. If you conclude thus, It seems to
   me, none are so bad as I. Do not let the matter pass off so; but
   examine again, whether or no you do not think yourself better than
   others on this very account, because you imagine you think so meanly of
   yourself. Have not you a high opinion of this humility? If you answer,
   No; I have not a high opinion of my humility; it seems to me I am as
   proud as the devil: examine again, whether self-conceit do not rise up
   under this cover; whether on this very account--that you think yourself
   as proud as the devil--you do not think yourself to be very humble.

   From this opposition between the nature of a true and of a counterfeit
   humility, as to the esteem that the subjects of them have of
   themselves, arises a manifold contrariety of temper and behaviour. A
   truly humble person, having such a mean opinion of his righteousness
   and holiness, is poor in spirit. For a person to be poor in spirit, is
   to be in his own sense and apprehension poor, as to what is in him, and
   to be of an answerable disposition. Therefore a truly humble person,
   especially one eminently humble, naturally behaves himself in many
   respects as a poor man. The poor useth entreaties, but the rich
   answereth roughly. A poor man is not disposed to quick and high
   resentment when he is among the rich. He is apt to yield to others, for
   he knows others are above him; nor is he stiff and self-willed. He is
   patient with hard fare, expects no other than to be despised, and takes
   it patiently. He does not take it heinously that he is overlooked, and
   but little regarded; but is prepared to be in a low place; readily
   honours his superiors, and takes reproofs quietly. He easily yields to
   be taught, and does not claim much to his understanding and judgment;
   he is not over nice or humoursome, and has his spirit subdued to hard
   things; he is not assuming, nor apt to take much upon him, but it is
   natural for him to be subject to others. Thus it is with the humble
   Christian. Humility is (as the great Mastricht expresses it) a kind of
   holy pusillanimity. A man that is very poor is a beggar; so is he that
   is poor in spirit. This constitutes a great difference between those
   affections that are gracious, and those that are false: under the
   former, the person continues still a poor beggar at God's gates,
   exceeding empty and needy; but the latter make men appear to themselves
   rich, and increased with goods, and not very necessitous; they have a
   great stock in their own imagination for their subsistence. [504]

   A poor man is modest in his speech and behaviour; much more, and more
   certainly and universally, is one that is poor in spirit, humble and
   modest in his behaviour amongst men. It is in vain for any to pretend
   that they are humble, and as little children before God, when they are
   haughty, assuming, and impudent in their behaviour amongst men. The
   apostle informs us, that the design of the gospel is to cut off all
   glorying, not only before God, but also before men, Rom. iv. 1, 2. Some
   pretend to great humiliation, while yet they are very haughty,
   audacious, and assuming in their external appearance and behaviour: but
   they ought to consider those scriptures, Psal. cxxxi. 1. "Lord, my
   heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise myself
   in great matters, or in things too high for me." Prov. vi. 16, 17.
   "These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination
   unto him: a proud look," &c.--Chap. xxi. 4. "An high look, and a proud
   heart, are sin." Psal. xviii. 27. "Thou wilt bring down high looks."
   And Psal. ci. 5. "Him that hath an high look, and a proud heart, I will
   not suffer." 1 Cor. xiii. 4. "Charity vaunteth not itself, doth not
   behave itself unseemly." There is a certain amiable modesty and fear
   that belongs to a christian behaviour among men, arising from humility,
   of which the Scripture often speaks; 1 Pet. iii. 15. "Be ready to give
   an answer to every man that asketh you, with meekness and fear." Rom.
   xiii. 7. "Fear, to whom fear." 2 Cor. vii. 15. "Whilst he remembereth
   the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling you received
   him." Eph. vi. 5. "Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters
   according to the flesh, with fear and trembling." 1 Pet. ii. 18.
   "Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear." 1 Pet. iii. 2.
   "While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear." 1 Tim.
   ii. 9. "That women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
   shamefacedness and sobriety." In this respect a Christian is like a
   little child; a little child is modest before men, and his heart is apt
   to be possessed with fear and awe amongst them.

   The same spirit will dispose a Christian to honour all men; 1 Pet. ii.
   17. "Honour all men." An humble Christian is not only disposed to
   honour the saints in his behaviour; but others also, in all those ways
   that do not imply a visible approbation of their sins. Thus Abraham,
   the great pattern of believers, honoured the children of Heth; Gen.
   xxiii. 11, 12. "Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of
   the land." This was a remarkable instance of an humble behaviour
   towards them whom Abraham knew to be accursed; for which cause he would
   by no means suffer his servant to take a wife to his son from among
   them; and for which cause also Esau's wives, being of these children of
   Heth, were a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebekah. So Paul honoured
   Festus, Acts xxvi. 25. "I am not mad, most noble Festus." Not only will
   christian humility dispose persons to honour wicked men out of the
   visible church, but also false brethren and persecutors. Jacob, when he
   was in an excellent frame--having just been wrestling all night with
   God, and received the blessing--honoured Esau, his false and
   persecuting brother; Gen. xxxiii. 3. "Jacob bowed himself to the ground
   seven times, until he came near to his brother Esau." So he called him
   lord: and commanded all his family to honour him in like manner.

   Thus I have endeavoured to describe the heart and behaviour of one who
   is governed by a truly gracious humility as exactly agreeable to the
   Scriptures as I am able. Now, it is out of such a heart as this, that
   all truly holy affections flow. Christian affections are like Mary's
   precious ointment poured on Christ's head, that filled the whole house
   with a sweet odour. That was poured out of an alabaster box; so
   gracious affections flow out to Christ out of a pure heart. That was
   poured out of a broken box; (until the box was broken, the ointment
   could not flow, nor diffuse its odour;) so gracious affections flow out
   of a broken heart. Gracious affections are also like those of Mary
   Magdalene, (Luke vii. at the latter end,.) who in like manner pours
   precious ointment on Christ, out of an alabaster broken box, anointing
   therewith the feet of Jesus, when she had washed them with her tears,
   and wiped them with the hair of her head. All gracious affections,
   which are a sweet odour to Christ, filling the soul of a Christian with
   a heavenly sweetness and fragrancy, are brokenhearted affections. A
   truly Christian love, either to God or men, is an humble broken-hearted
   love. The desires of the saints, however earnest, are humble desires;
   their hope is an humble hope; and their joy, even when it is
   unspeakable and full of glory, is an humble, broken-hearted joy,
   leaving the Christian more poor in spirit, more like a little child,
   and more disposed to an universal lowliness of behaviour.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [497] Calvin, in his Institutions, Book II. chap. 2. § 11. says, "I was
   always exceedingly pleased with that saying of Chrysostom.' The
   foundation of our philosophy is humility;' and yet more pleased with
   that of Augustine, As,' says he, the rhetorician being asked, what was
   the first thing in the rules of eloquence, he answered, Pronunciation:
   what was the second, pronunciation; what was the third, still he
   answered, pronunciation. So if you should ask me concerning the
   precepts of the christian religion, I would answer, firstly, secondly,
   and thirdly, and for ever, Humility?' "

   [498] "Albeit the Pythagoreans were thus famous for Judaic mysterious
   wisdom, and many moral as well as natural accomplishments; yet were
   they not exempted from boasting and pride; which was indeed a vice most
   epidemic, and as it were congenial, among all the philosophers; but in
   a more particular manner, among the Pythagoreans. So Hornius Hist.
   Philosoph. L. 3. chap. II. The manners of the Pythagoreans were not
   free from boasting. They were all ?????????????? such as abounded in
   the sense and commendation of their own excellencies, and boasting even
   almost to the degree of immodesty and impudence, as great Heinsius ad
   Horat. has rightly observed. Thus indeed does proud nature delight to
   walk in the sparks of its own fire. And although many of these old
   philosophers could. by the strength of their own lights and heats,
   together with some common elevations and raisures of spirit,
   (peradventure from a more than ordinary, though not special and saving,
   assistance of the Spirit.) abandon many grosser vices; yet they were
   all deeply immersed in that miserable cursed abyss of spiritual pride:
   so that all their natural, and moral, and philosophic attainments, did
   feed, nourish, strengthen, and render most inveterate, this hell-bred
   pest of their hearts. Yea, those of them that seemed most modest, as
   the Academics, who professed they knew nothing, and the Cynics, who
   greatly decried, both in words and habits, the pride of others, yet
   even they abounded in the most notorious and visible pride. So
   connatural and morally essential to corrupt nature, is this envenomed
   root, fountain, and plague of spiritual pride; especially where there
   is any natural, moral, or philosophic excellence to feed the same.
   Whence Austin rightly judged all these philosophic virtues to be but
   splendid sins." Gales's Court of the Gentiles, Part II. B. ii. chap. x.
   § 17.

   [499] "Take not every opinion and doctrine from men or angels, that
   bears a fair show of advancing Christ; for they may be but the fruits
   of evangelical hypocrisy and deceit; that being deceived themselves,
   may deceive others too; Matt. vii. 15. Beware of them that come in
   sheep's clothing; in the Innocency, purity, and meekness of Christ and
   his people: but inwardly are wolves, proud, cruel, censorious, speaking
   evil of what they know not. By their fruits ye shall know them. Do not
   think, beloved, that Satan will not seek to send delusions among us.
   And do you think these delusions will come out of the popish pack,
   whose inventions smell above-ground here? No, he must come, and will
   come, with more evangelical, fine-spun devices. It is a rule observed
   amongst Jesuits, at this day, if they would conquer religion by
   subtlety, never oppose religion with a cross religion; but set it
   against itself. So oppose the gospel by the gospel. And look, as
   churches pleading for works, and new invented devised works; so when
   faith is preached, men will have their new inventions of faith. I speak
   not this against the doctrine of faith, where it is preached; but am
   glad of it: not that I would have men content themselves with every
   form of faith: for I believe that most men's faith needs confirming or
   trying. But I speak to prevent danger on that hand." Shepard Parable,
   Part I. p. 122.

   [500] "There be two things wherein it appears that a man has only
   common gifts, and no inward principle: 1. These gifts ever puff up, and
   make a man something in his own eyes; as the Corinthian knowledge did;
   and many a private man thinks himself fit to be a minister." Shepard's
   Parable, Part I. p. 181, 182.

   [501] Calvin, in his Institutions, B. III. chap. xii. § 7, speaking of
   this Pharisee, observes, "That in his outward confession, he
   acknowledges that the righteousness that he has is the gift of God: but
   (says he) because he trusts that he is righteous, he goes away out of
   the presence of God, unacceptable and odious."

   [502] Luther, as his words are cited by Rutherford, in his Display of
   the spiritual Antichrist. p. 143, 144, says thus, "So is the life of a
   Christian, that he that has begun seems to himself to have nothing; but
   strives and presses forward, that he may apprehend. Whence Paul says, I
   count not myself to have apprehended. For indeed nothing is more
   pernicious to a believer, than that presumption, that he has already
   apprehended, and has no further need of seeking. Hence also many fall
   back, and pine away in spiritual security and slothfulness. So Bernard
   says, To stand still in God's way, is to go back. Wherefore this
   remains to him that has begun to be a Christian, to think that he is
   not yet a Christian, but to seek that he may be a Christian, that he
   may glory with Paul, I am not, but I desire to be; a Christian not yet
   finished, but only in his beginnings. Therefore he is not a Christian,
   that is, he that thinks himself a finished Christian, and is not
   sensible how he falls short. We reach after heaven, but are not in
   heaven. Woe to him that is wholly renewed, that is, that thinks himself
   to be so. That man, without doubt, has never so much as begun to be
   renewed, nor did he ever taste what it is to be a Christian."

   [503] It is an observation of Mr. Jones, in his excellent treatise of
   the canon of the New Testament, that the evangelist Mark--who was the
   companion of St. Peter, and is supposed to have written his gospel
   under the direction of that apostle --when he mentions Peter's
   repentance after his denying his Master, does not use such strong terms
   to set it forth as the other evangelists: he only uses these words,
   When he thought thereon, he wept," Mark xiv. 72. whereas the other
   evangelists say thus. He went out and wept bitterly." Matt. xxvi. 75.
   Luke xxii. 62.

   [504] "This spirit ever keeps a man poor and vile in his own eyes, and
   empty --When the man hath got some knowledge, and can discourse pretty
   well, and hath some tastes of the heavenly gift, some sweet illapses of
   grace, and so his conscience is pretty well quieted: and if he hath got
   some answer to his prayers, and hath sweet affections, he grows full:
   and having ease to his conscience, casts off sense, and daily groaning
   under sin. And hence the spirit of prayer dies: he loses his esteem of
   God's ordinances; feels not such need of them; or gets no good, feels
   no life or power by them. This is the woful condition of some; but yet
   they know it not. But now he that is filled with the Spirit, the Lord
   empties him; and the more, the longer he lives. So that though others
   think he needs not much grace; yet he accounts himself the poorest"
   Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part II. p. 132. "After all
   fillings, be ever empty, hungry, and feeling need, and praying for
   more." Ibid. p. 151. "Truly, brethren, when I see the curse of God upon
   many Christians, that are now grown full of their parts, gifts, peace,
   comforts, abilities, duties, I stand adoring the riches of the Lord's
   mercy, to a little handful of poor believers; not only in making them
   empty, but in keeping them so all their days." Shepard's Sound
   Believer, the late edition in Boston, p. 158,159.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Another thing, wherein gracious affections are distinguishedfrom
   others, is, that they are attended with a change of nature.

   All gracious affections arise from a spiritual understanding, in which
   the soul has as the excellency and glory of divine things discovered to
   it, as was shown before. But all spiritual discoveries are also
   transforming. They not only make an alteration of the present exercise,
   sensation, and frame of the soul; but such is their power and efficacy,
   that they alter its very nature; 2 Cor. iii. 18. "But we all with open
   face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
   the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
   Lord." Such power as this, is properly divine, and is peculiar to the
   Spirit of the Lord. Other power may make a great alteration in men's
   present frames and feelings; but it is the power of a Creator only that
   can change the nature. And no discoveries or illuminations, but those
   that are divine and supernatural, will have this supernatural effect.
   But this effect all those discoveries have, that are truly divine. The
   soul is deeply affected by these discoveries; so affected, as to be
   transformed.

   Thus it is with those affections of which the soul is the subject in
   its conversion. The scriptural representations of conversion, strongly
   imply and signify a change of nature: such as being born again;
   becoming new creatures; rising from the dead; being renewed in the
   spirit of the mind; dying to sin, and living to righteousness; putting
   off the old man, and putting on the new man; being ingrafted into a new
   stock; having a divine seed implanted in the heart; being made
   partakers of the divine nature, &c.

   Therefore if there be no great and remarkable abiding change in
   persons, who think they have experienced a work of conversion, vain are
   all their imaginations and pretences, however they may have been
   affected. [505] Conversion (if we may give any credit to the Scripture)
   is a great and universal change of the man, turning him from sin to
   God. A man may be restrained from sin, before he is converted; but when
   he is converted, his very heart and nature is turned from it unto
   holiness: so that thenceforward he becomes a holy person, and an enemy
   to sin. If, therefore, after a person's high affections at his supposed
   first conversion, it happens that in a little time there is no very
   remarkable alteration in him, as to those bad qualities and evil habits
   which before were visible in him--and he is ordinarily under the
   prevalence of the same kind of dispositions as heretofore, and the same
   things seem to belong to his character, he appearing as selfish,
   carnal, stupid, and perverse, unchristian, and unsavoury as ever--it is
   greater evidence against him, than the brightest story of experiences
   that ever was told can be for him. For in Christ Jesus neither
   circumcision nor uncircumcision, neither high profession nor low
   profession, neither a fair story nor a broken one, avails any thing;
   but a new creature. If there be a very great alteration visible in a
   person for a while; yet if it be not abiding, but he afterwards return,
   in a stated manner, to his former habits; it appears to be no change of
   nature; for nature is an abiding thing. A swine may be washed, but the
   swinish nature remains; a dove may be defiled, but its cleanly nature
   remains. [506]

   Allowances, indeed, must be made for the natural temper, which
   conversion does not entirely eradicate: those sins which a man by his
   natural constitution was most inclined to before his conversion, he may
   be most apt to fell into still. But yet conversion will make a great
   alteration even with respect to these sins. Though grace, while
   imperfect, does not root out an evil natural temper, yet it is of great
   power and efficacy to correct it. The change wrought in conversion, is
   an universal change: grace changes a man with respect to whatever is
   sinful in him; the old man is put off, and the new man put on; he is
   sanctified throughout. He is become a new creature, old things are
   passed away, and all things are become new; all sin is mortified,
   constitutional sins, as well as others. If a man before his conversion
   was, by his natural constitution, prone to lasciviousness, or
   drunkenness, or maliciousness; converting grace will make a great
   alteration in him, with respect to these evil dispositions; so that
   however he may be still most in danger of these sins, they shall no
   longer have dominion over him; nor will they any more be properly his
   character. Yes, true repentance, in some respects especially, turns a
   man against his own iniquity; that wherein he has been most guilty, and
   has chiefly dishonoured God. He that forsakes other sins, but preserves
   the iniquity to which he is chiefly inclined, is like Saul, who, when
   sent against God's enemies the Amalekites, with a strict charge to save
   none of them alive, but utterly to destroy them, small and great; slew
   the people, but saved the king.

   Some foolishly make it an argument in favour of their discoveries and
   affections, that when they are gone, they are left wholly without any
   life or sense, or any thing beyond what they had before. They think it
   an evidence that what they experienced was wholly of God, and not of
   themselves, because (say they) when God is departed, all is gone; they
   can see and feel nothing, and are no better than they used to be. It is
   very true, that all grace and goodness in the hearts of the saints is
   entirely from God; and they are universally and immediately dependent
   on him for it. But yet these persons are mistaken, as to the manner of
   God's communicating himself and his Holy Spirit, in imparting saving
   grace to the soul. He gives his Spirit to be united to the faculties of
   the soul, and to dwell there after the manner of a principle of nature:
   so that the soul, in being endued with grace, is endued with a new
   nature: but nature is an abiding thing. All the exercises of grace are
   entirely from Christ: but are not from him as a living agent moves and
   stirs what is without life, and which yet remains lifeless. The soul
   has life communicated to it, so as through Christ's power to have
   inherent in itself a vital nature. In the soul where Christ savingly
   is, there he lives. He does not merely live without it, so as violently
   to actuate it, but he lives in it, so that the soul also is alive.
   Grace in the soul is as much from Christ, as the light in a glass, held
   out in the sunbeams, is from the sun. But this represents the manner of
   the communication of grace to the soul but in part; because the glass
   remaining as it was, the nature of it not being at all changed, it is
   as much without any lightsomeness in its nature as ever. But the soul
   of a saint receives light from the sun of righteousness in such a
   manner, that its nature is changed, and it becomes properly a luminous
   thing. Not only does the sun shine in the saints, but they also become
   little suns, partaking of the nature of the fountain of their light. In
   this respect; the manner of their derivation of light, is like that of
   the lamps in the tabernacle, rather than that of a reflecting glass;
   which though they were lit up by fire from heaven, yet thereby became
   themselves burning, shining things. The saints do not only drink of the
   water of life, that flows from the original fountain; but this water
   becomes a fountain of water in them, springing up there, and flowing
   out of them, John iv. 14. and chap. vii. 38, 39. Grace is compared to a
   seed implanted, that not only is in the ground, but has hold of it; has
   root there, grows there, and is an abiding principle of life and nature
   there.

   As it is with spiritual discoveries and affections given at first
   conversion, so it is in all subsequent illuminations and affections of
   that kind, they are all transforming. There is a like divine power and
   energy in them, as in the first discoveries: and they still reach the
   bottom of the heart, and affect and alter the very nature of the soul,
   in proportion to the degree in which they are given. And a
   transformation of nature is continued and carried on by them, to the
   end of life, until it is brought to perfection in glory. Hence the
   progress of the work of grace in the hearts of the saints, is
   represented in Scripture as a continued conversion and renovation of
   nature. So the apostle exhorts those that were at Rome, beloved of God,
   called to be saints--the subjects of God's redeeming mercies--to be
   transformed by the renewing of their mind, Rom. xii. 1, 2. "I beseech
   you therefore, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
   living sacrifice;--and be not conformed to this world: but be ye
   transformed by the renewing of your mind." (Compared with chap. i. 7.)
   So the apostle, writing to the saints and faithful in Christ Jesus, who
   were at Ephesus, (Eph. i. 1.)--who "were once dead in trespasses and
   sins, but now quickened, raised up, made to sit together in heavenly
   places in Christ, and created in Christ Jesus unto good works; who were
   once far off, but now made nigh by the blood of Christ: who were no
   more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and
   of the household of God; who were built together for an habitation of
   God through the Spirit; "--tells them, "that he ceased not to pray for
   them, that God would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in
   the knowledge of Christ: the eyes of their understanding being
   enlightened, that they might know (or experience) what was the
   exceeding greatness of God's power towards them that believe, according
   to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
   raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
   heavenly places," Eph. i.16, to the end. In this the apostle has
   respect to the glorious power and work of God in converting and
   renewing the soul; as is most plain by the sequel. So the apostle
   exhorts the same persons "to put off the old man, which is corrupt
   according to the deceitful lusts: and be renewed in the spirit of their
   minds: and put on the new man, which after God is created in
   righteousness and true holiness,". Eph. iv. 22, 23, 24.

   There is a sort of high affections which leave persons without any
   appearance of an abiding effect. They go off suddenly; so that from the
   very height of their emotion, and seeming rapture, they pass at once to
   be quite dead, and void of all sense and activity. It surely is not
   wont to be thus with high gracious affections; [507] they leave a sweet
   savour and relish of divine things on the heart, and a stronger bent of
   the soul towards God and holiness. As Moses's face not only shone while
   he was in the mount, extraordinarily conversing with God, but it
   continued to shine after he came down from the mount. When men have
   been conversing with Christ in an extraordinary manner, a sensible
   effect of it remains upon them; there is something remarkable in their
   disposition and frame, of which if we take knowledge, and trace to its
   cause, we shall find it is because they have been with Jesus, Acts iv.
   13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [505] "I would not judge of the whole soul's coming to Christ, so much
   by sudden pangs, as by an inward bent. For the whole soul, in
   affectionate expressions and actions, may be carried to Christ; but
   being without this bent, and change of affections, is
   unsound."--Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 203.

   [506] "It is with the soul, as with water; all the cold may be gone,
   but the native principle of cold remains still. You may remove the
   burning of lusts, not the blackness of nature. Where the power of sin
   lies, change of conscience from security to terror, change of life from
   profaneness to civility, and fashions of the world, to escape the
   pollutions thereof, change of lusts, nay quenching them for a time: but
   the nature is never changed, in the best hypocrite that ever
   was."--Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 194.

   [507] "Do you think the Holy Ghost comes on a man, as on Balaam, by
   immediate acting, and then leaves him, and then he has nothing?--
   Shepard's Parable. Part I. p. 126.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   Truly gracious affections differ from those that are false and
   delusive, in that they naturally beget and promote such a spirit of
   love., meekness, quietness, forgiveness, and mercy, as appeared in
   Christ.

   The evidence of this in the Scripture is very abundant. If we judge of
   the nature of Christianity, and the proper spirit of the gospel, by the
   word of God, this spirit is what may, by way of eminency, be called the
   christian spirit; and may be looked upon as the true and distinguishing
   disposition of the hearts of Christians, as such. When some of the
   disciples of Christ said something, through inconsideration and
   infirmity, that was not agreeable to such a spirit, he told them that
   they knew not what manner of spirit they were of, Luke ix. 55.
   implying, that this spirit of which I am speaking, is the proper spirit
   of his religion and kingdom. All real disciples of Christ have this
   spirit in them; and not only so, but they are of this spirit; it is the
   spirit by which they are so possessed and governed, that it is their
   true and proper character. This is evident by what the wise man says,
   Prov. xvii. 27. (having respect plainly to such a spirit as this,) "A
   man of understanding is of an excellent spirit;" and by the particular
   description Christ gives of the qualities and temper of such as are
   truly blessed, that shall obtain mercy, and are God's children and
   heirs, Matt. v. "Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the
   earth. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed
   are the peace-makers: for they shall be called the children of God."
   And that this spirit is the special character of the elect of God, is
   manifest by Col. iii. 12, 13. "Put on therefore as the elect of God,
   holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
   meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one
   another." The apostle discoursing of that temper and disposition which
   he speaks of, as the most excellent and essential thing in Christianity
   --that without which none are true Christians, and the most glorious
   profession and gifts are nothing, calling this spirit by the name of
   charity--describes it thus; (1 Cor. xiii. 4, 5.) "Charity suffereth
   long, and, is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself;
   is not puffed up; doth not behave itself unseemly; seeketh not her own;
   is not easily provoked; thinketh no evil." And the same apostle, (Gal.
   v.) designedly declaring the distinguishing marks and fruits of true
   christian grace, chiefly insists on the things that appertain to such a
   temper and spirit, ver 22, 23.) "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
   peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
   temperance." And so does the apostle James in describing true grace, or
   that wisdom that is from above, with that declared design, that others
   who are of a contrary spirit may not deceive themselves--and lie
   against the truth, in professing to be Christians, when they are
   not--James iii. 14-17. "If ye have bitter envying and strife in your
   hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom
   descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where
   envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. But the
   wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
   easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits."

   Every thing that appertains to holiness of heart, does indeed belong to
   the nature of true Christianity, and the character of Christians; but a
   spirit of holiness, as appearing in some particular graces, may more
   especially be called the christian spirit or temper. Some amiable
   qualities and virtues more especially agree with the nature of the
   gospel constitution, and christian profession; because there is a
   special agreeableness in them with those divine attributes which God
   has more remarkably manifested and glorified in the work of redemption
   by Jesus Christ, the grand subject of the christian revelation. There
   is also a special agreeableness with those virtues which were so
   wonderfully exercised by Jesus Christ towards us in that affair, and
   the blessed example he hath therein set us. And they are peculiarly
   agreeable to the special drift and design of the work of redemption,
   the benefits we thereby receive, and the relation that it brings us
   into, to God and one another. And what are these virtues but such as
   humility, meekness, love, forgiveness, and mercy; which belong to the
   character of Christians, as such?

   These things are spoken of as what are especially the character of
   Jesus Christ himself, the great head of the christian church. They are
   so spoken of in the prophecies of the Old Testament; as in that cited
   Matt. xxi. 5. "Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh
   unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of an
   ass." So Christ himself speaks of them, Matt. xi. 29. "Learn of me, for
   I am meek and lowly in heart." The same appears by the name by which
   Christ is so often called in Scripture, viz. the lamb. And as these
   things are especially the character of Christ; so they are also
   especially the character of Christians. Christians are Christ-like;
   none deserve the name who are not so in their prevailing character.
   "The new man is renewed, after the image of him that created him,."
   Col. iii. 10. All true Christians "behold as in a glass the glory of
   the Lord, and are changed into the same image, by his Spirit,". 2 Cor.
   iii. 18. The elect are all "predestinated to be conformed to the image
   of the Son of God, that he might be the first-born among many
   brethren,". Rom. viii. 29. "As we have borne the image of the first
   man, that is earthy, so we must also bear the image of the heavenly:
   for as is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the
   heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly,". 1 Cor. xv. 47-49.
   Christ is full of grace; and Christians all receive of his fulness, and
   grace for grace; i. e. there is grace in Christians answering to grace
   in Christ, such an answerableness as there is between the wax and the
   seal. There is character for character; such kind of graces, such a
   spirit and temper; the same things that belong to Christ's character
   belong to theirs. In that disposition wherein Christ's character in a
   special manner consists, does his image in a special manner consist.
   Christians who shine by reflecting the light of the Sun of
   righteousness, shine with the same sort of brightness, the same mild,
   sweet, and pleasant beams. These lamps of the spiritual temple,
   enkindled by fire from heaven, burn with the same sort of flame. The
   branch is of the same nature with the stock and root, has the same sap,
   and bears the same sort of fruit. The members have the same kind of
   life with the head. It would be strange if Christians should not be of
   the same temper and spirit with that of Christ; when they are his flesh
   and his bone, yea, are one spirit, 1 Cor. vi. 17. and so live, that it
   is not they that live, but Christ that lives in them. A christian
   spirit is Christ's mark, which he sets upon the souls of his people;
   his seal in their foreheads, bearing his image and superscription.
   Christians are the followers of Christ, as they are obedient to that
   call of Christ, Matt. xi. 28, 29. "Come to me, and learn of me, for I
   am meek and lowly of heart." They follow him as the Lamb; Rev. xiv. 4.
   "These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth." True
   Christians are as it were clothed with the meek, quiet, and loving
   temper of Christ; for as many as are in Christ, have put on Christ. And
   in this respect the church is clothed with the sun, not only by being
   clothed with his imputed righteousness, but also by being adorned with
   his graces, Rom. xiii. 14. Christ the great Shepherd is himself a lamb,
   and believers are also lambs; all the flock are lambs; John xxi. 15.
   "Feed my lambs." Luke x. 3. "I send you forth as lambs in the midst of
   wolves." The redemption of the church by Christ from the power of the
   devil, was typified of old by David's delivering the lamb out of the
   mouth of the lion and the bear.

   That such virtue is the very nature of the christian spirit, or the
   spirit that worketh in Christ and in his members, is evident by this,
   that the dove is the very symbol or emblem, chosen of God to represent
   it. Those things are the fittest emblems of other things, which best
   represent that which is most distinguishing in their nature. The Spirit
   that descended on Christ, when he was anointed of the Father, descended
   on him tike a dove. The dove is a noted emblem of meekness,
   harmlessness, peace, and love. But the same Spirit that descended on
   the head of the church, descends to the members. "God hath sent forth
   the Spirit of his Son into their hearts,". Gal. iv. 6. And "if any man
   have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.". Rom. viii. 9. There
   is but one Spirit to the whole mystical body, head and members, (1 Cor.
   vi. 17. Eph. iv. 4.) Christ breathes his own Spirit on his disciples,
   John xx. 22. As Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost, descending on
   him like a dove, so Christians "have an anointing from the Holy One,."
   1 John ii. 20, 27. They are anointed with the same oil; it is the same
   "precious ointment on the head, that goes down to the skirts of the
   garments." And on both it is a spirit of peace and love: Ps. cxxxiii.
   1, 2. "Behold, how good and pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
   together in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that
   ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
   skirts of his garments." The oil on Aaron's garments, had the same
   sweet and inimitable odour with that on his head; the smell of the same
   sweet spices. Christian affections, and a christian behaviour, are the
   flowing out of the savour of Christ's sweet ointments. Because the
   church has a dove-like temper and disposition, therefore it is said of
   her that she has doves' eyes, Cant. i. 15. "Behold thou art fair, my
   love; behold, thou art fair, thou hast doves' eyes." And chap. iv. 1.
   "Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou hast
   doves' eyes within thy locks." The same is said of Christ, chap vi. 12.
   "His eyes are as the eyes of doves." And the church is frequently
   compared to a dove, Cant. ii. 14. "O my dove, that art in the clefts of
   the rock."--chap. v. 2."Open to me, my love, my dove." chap. vi. 9. "My
   dove, my undefiled is but one." Ps. lxviii. 13. "Ye shall be as the
   wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
   gold." And lxxiv. 19. "O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto
   the multitude of the wicked." The dove that Noah sent out of the
   ark--that could find no rest for the sole of her foot until she
   returned--was a type of a true saint.

   Meekness is so much the character of the saints, that the meek and the
   godly are used as synonymous terms in Scripture: so Ps. xxxvii. 10, 11.
   the wicked and the meek are set in opposition, as wicked and godly,
   "Yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: but the meek shall
   inherit the earth." So Ps. cxlvii. 6. ". The Lord lifteth up the meek:
   he casteth the wicked down to the ground."

   It is doubtless very much on this account, that Christ represents all
   his disciples, though the heirs of heaven, as little children: Matt.
   xix. 14. "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not;
   for of such is the kingdom of heaven." Matt. x. 42. "Whosoever shall
   give to drink unto one of those little ones a cup of cold water, in the
   name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his
   reward." Matt. xviiii. 6. "Whoso shall offend one of these little
   ones," &c. Ver. 10. "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
   ones." Ver. 14. "It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven,
   that one of these little ones should perish." John xiii. 33. "Little
   children, yet a little while I am with you." Little children are
   innocent and harmless; they do not much mischief in the world; men need
   not be afraid of them; their anger does not last long, they do not lay
   up injuries in high resentment, entertaining deep and rooted malice. So
   Christians, in malice are children, 1 Cor. xiv. 20. Little children are
   not guileful and deceitful, but plain and simple; they are not versed
   in the arts of fiction and deceit; and are strangers to artful
   disguises. They are yielding and flexible, and not wilful and
   obstinate; do not trust to their own understanding, but rely on the
   instructions of parents, and others of superior understanding. Here is
   therefore a fit and lively emblem of the followers of the Lamb. Persons
   being thus like little children, is not only a thing highly
   commendable, what Christians aim at, and which some of extraordinary
   proficiency attain; but it is their universal character, and absolutely
   necessary in order to enter into the kingdom of heaven; Matt. xviii. 3.
   "Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
   children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." Mark x. 15.
   "Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
   as a little child, he shall not enter therein."

   But here some may be ready to say, Is there no such thing as Christian
   fortitude, and boldness for Christ, being good soldiers in the
   Christian warfare, and coming out bold against the enemies of Christ
   and his people?

   To which I answer, there doubtless is such a thing. The whole Christian
   life is fitly compared to a warfare. The most eminent Christians are
   the best soldiers, endued with the greatest degrees of Christian
   fortitude. And it is the duty of God's people to be stedfast, and
   vigorous in their opposition to the designs and ways of such as are
   endeavouring to overthrow the kingdom of Christ, and the interest of
   religion. But yet many persons seem to be quite mistaken concerning the
   nature of Christian fortitude. It is an exceeding diverse thing from a
   brutal fierceness, or the boldness of beasts of prey. True Christian
   fortitude consists in strength of mind, through grace, exerted in two
   things; in ruling and suppressing the evil passions and affections of
   the mind; and in stedfastly and freely exerting and following good
   affections and dispositions, without being hindered by sinful fear, or
   the opposition of enemies. But the passions restrained, and kept under
   in the exercise of this Christian strength and fortitude, are those
   very passions that are vigorously and violently exerted in a false
   boldness for Christ. And those affections which are vigorously exerted
   in true fortitude, are those Christian holy affections, that are
   directly contrary to the others. Though Christian fortitude appears in
   withstanding and counteracting enemies without us; yet it much more
   appears in resisting and suppressing the enemies that are within us;
   because they are our worst and strongest enemies, and have greatest
   advantage against us. The strength of the good soldier of Jesus Christ
   appears in nothing more, than in stedfastly maintaining the holy, calm
   meekness, sweetness, and benevolence of his mind, amidst all the
   storms, injuries, strange behaviour, and surprising acts and events, of
   this evil and unreasonable world. The Scripture seems to intimate that
   true fortitude consists chiefly in this, Prov. xvi. 32. "He that is
   slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his
   spirit, than he that taketh a city."

   The surest way to make a right judgment of what is a holy fortitude in
   fighting with God's enemies, is to look to the Captain of all God's
   hosts, our great leader and example, and see wherein his fortitude and
   valour appeared, in his chief conflict. View him in the greatest battle
   that ever was or ever will be fought with these enemies, when he fought
   with them all alone, and of the people there was none with him. See how
   he exercised his fortitude in the highest degree, and got that glorious
   victory which will be celebrated in the praises and triumphs of all the
   hosts of heaven, through all eternity. Behold Jesus Christ in his last
   sufferings, when his enemies in earth and hell made their most violent
   attack upon him, compassing him round on every side, like roaring
   lions. Doubtless here we shall see the fortitude of a holy warrior and
   champion in the cause of God, in its highest perfection and greatest
   lustre, and an example fit for the soldiers to follow, that fight under
   this Captain. But how did he show his holy boldness and valour at that
   time? Not in the exercise of any fiery passions; not in fierce and
   violent speeches, vehemently declaiming against the intolerable
   wickedness of opposers, giving them their own in plain terms; but in
   not opening his mouth when afflicted and oppressed, in going as a lamb
   to the slaughter, and, as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, not
   opening his mouth; praying that the Father would forgive his cruel
   enemies, because they knew not what they did; nor shedding others'
   blood, but with all-conquering patience and love shedding his own.
   Indeed one of his disciples, who made a forward pretence to boldness
   for Christ, and confidently declared he would sooner die with Christ
   than deny him, began to lay about him with a sword: but Christ meekly
   rebukes him, and heals the wound he gives. And never was the patience,
   meekness, love, and forgiveness of Christ, in so glorious a
   manifestation, as at that time. Never did he appear so much a Lamb, and
   never did he show so much of the dove-like spirit, as at that time. If
   therefore we see any of the followers of Christ, in the midst of the
   most violent, unreasonable, and wicked opposition, maintaining the
   humility, quietness, and gentleness of a lamb, and the harmlessness,
   love, and sweetness of a dove, we may well judge that here is a good
   soldier of Jesus Christ.

   When persons are fierce and violent, and exert their sharp and bitter
   passions, it shows weakness, instead of strength and fortitude. 1 Cor.
   iii. at the beginning, "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
   unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.--For
   ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envying, and strife,
   and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?"

   There is a pretended boldness for Christ that arises from no better
   principle than pride. A man may be forward to expose himself to the
   dislike of the world, and even to provoke their displeasure, out of
   pride. For it is the nature of spiritual pride to cause men to seek
   distinction and singularity; and so oftentimes to set themselves at war
   with those whom they call carnal, that they may be more highly exalted
   among their party. True boldness for Christ is universal, and carries
   men above the displeasure of friends and foes; so that they will
   forsake all rather than Christ; and will rather offend all parties, and
   be thought meanly of by all, than offend Christ. And that duty which
   tries whether a man is willing to be despised by those of his own
   party, and thought the least worthy to be regarded by them, is a more
   proper trial of his boldness for Christ, than his being forward to
   expose himself to the reproach of opposers. The apostle declined to
   seek glory, not only of heathens and Jews, but of Christians; as he
   declares, 1 Thess. ii. 26. [508] He is bold for Christ, who has
   Christian fortitude enough to confess his fault openly, when he has
   committed one that requires it, and as it were to come down upon his
   knees before opposers. Such things as these are much greater evidence
   of holy boldness, than resolutely and fiercely confronting opposers. As
   some are much mistaken concerning the nature of true boldness for
   Christ, so they are concerning christian zeal. It is indeed a flame,
   but a sweet one; or rather it is the heat and fervour of a sweet flame.
   For the flame of which it is the heat, is no other than that of divine
   love, or christian charity; which is the sweetest and most benevolent
   thing that can be, in the heart of man or angel. Zeal is the fervour of
   this flame, as it ardently and vigorously goes out towards the good
   that is its object; and so consequently in opposition to the evil that
   is contrary to, and impedes it. There is indeed opposition, vigorous
   opposition, that is an attendant of it; but it is against things, and
   not persons. Bitterness against the persons of men is no part of, but
   is contrary to it; insomuch that the warmer true zeal is, and the
   higher it is raised, so much the further are persons from such
   bitterness, and so much fuller of love both to the evil and to the
   good. It is no other, in its very nature and essence, than the fervour
   of christian love. And as to what opposition there is in it to things,
   it is firstly and chiefly against the evil things in the person himself
   who has this zeal; against the enemies of God and holiness in his own
   heart; (as these are most in his view, and what he has most to do
   with;) and but secondarily against the sins of others. And therefore
   there is nothing in a true christian zeal contrary to the spirit of
   meekness, gentleness, and love; the spirit of a little child, a lamb
   and dove, that has been spoken of; but is entirely agreeable to, and
   tends to promote it.

   But I would say something particularly concerning this christian spirit
   as exercised in these three things, forgiveness, love, and mercy. The
   Scripture is very clear and express concerning the absolute necessity
   of each of these, as belonging to the temper and character of every
   Christian. A forgiving spirit is necessary, or a disposition to
   overlook and forgive injuries. Christ gives it to us both as a negative
   and positive evidence; and is express in teaching us, that if we are of
   such a spirit, it is a sign we are in a state of forgiveness and favour
   ourselves; and that if we are not of such a spirit, we are not forgiven
   of God; and seems to take special care that we should always bear it on
   our minds. Matt. vi. 12, 14, 15. "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
   our debtors. For, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
   Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
   trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." Christ
   expresses the same at another time, Mark xi. 25, 26. and again in Matt.
   xviii. 22. to the end, in the parable of the servant, who owed his lord
   ten thousand talents, and who would not forgive his fellow-servant a
   hundred pence; and therefore was delivered to the tormentors. In the
   application of the parable Christ says, ver. 35. "So likewise shall my
   heavenly Father do, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
   brother their trespasses."

   And that all true saints are of a loving, benevolent, and beneficent
   temper, the Scripture is very plain and abundant. Without it, the
   apostle tells us, though we should speak with the tongues of men and
   angels, we are as a sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal: and though we
   have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
   knowledge; yet without this spirit we are nothing. There is no one
   virtue, or disposition of mind, so often and so expressly insisted on,
   as marks laid down in the New Testament, whereby to know true
   Christians. It is often given as a sign peculiarly distinguishing, by
   which all may know Christ's disciples, and by which they may know
   themselves; and is often laid down, both as a negative and positive
   evidence. Christ calls the law of love, by way of eminence, his
   commandment, John xiii. 34. "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye
   love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another."
   And chap. xv. 12. "This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as
   I have loved you." And ver. 17. "These things I command you, that ye
   love one another." And says, chap. xiii. 35. "By this shall all men
   know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.". And
   chap. xiv. 21. (still with a special reference to this which he calls
   his commandment,) "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he
   it is that loveth me." The beloved disciple, who had so much of this
   sweet temper himself, abundantly insists on it, in his epistles. Not
   one of the apostles is so express in laying down signs of grace, for
   professors to try themselves by, as he; and in his signs, he insists
   scarcely on any thing but a spirit of christian love, and an agreeable
   practice: 1 John ii. 9, 10. "He that saith he is in the light, and
   hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loveth his
   brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling
   in him." Chap. iii. 14. "We know that we are passed from death unto
   life, because we love the brethren: he that loveth not his brother,
   abideth in death." Ver. 18, 19. "My little children, let us not love in
   word and in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. And hereby we know that
   we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him." Ver. 23,
   24. "This is his commandment, that we should love one another. And he
   that keepeth his commandments, dwelleth in him, and he in him: and
   hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given
   us." Chap. iv. 7, 8. "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of
   God: and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that
   loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love." Ver. 12, 13. "No man
   hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us,
   and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him,
   because he hath given us of his Spirit." Ver. 16. "God is love; and he
   that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him." Ver. 20. "If a
   man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that
   loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he
   hath not seen?"

   And the Scripture is as plain as possible, that none are true saints,
   but those who are of a disposition to pity and relieve their
   fellow-creatures, who are poor, indigent, and afflicted: "The righteous
   showeth mercy, and giveth." [509] Ver. 26. "He is ever merciful, and
   lendeth." "A good man showeth favour and lendeth." [510] Ver. 9. "He
   hath dispersed abroad, and given to the poor." Prov. xiv. 31. "He that
   honoureth God, hath mercy on the poor." Prov. xxi. 26. "The righteous
   giveth, and spareth not." Jer. xxii. 16. "He judged the cause of the
   poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not this to know me?
   saith the Lord." Jam. i. 27. " Pure religion and undefiled before God
   and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
   affliction," &c. Hos. vi. 6. "For I desired mercy and not sacrifice;
   and the knowledge of God, more than burnt-offerings." Matt. v. 7.
   "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." 2 Cor. viii.
   8. "I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of
   others, and to prove the sincerity of your love." Jam. ii. 13-16. "For
   he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath showed no mercy.--What
   doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have
   not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and
   destitute of daily food; and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace,
   be you warmed and filled: notwithstanding ye give them not those things
   which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?" 1 John iii. 17.
   "Whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and
   shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of
   God in him?" Christ in that description he gives us of the day of
   judgment, Matt. xxv. (which is the most particular in all the Bible,)
   represents, that judgment will be passed at that day, according as men
   have been of a merciful spirit and practice, or otherwise. Christ's
   design in giving such a description of the process of that day, is
   plainly to possess all his followers with the apprehension, that unless
   this was their spirit and practice, there was no hope of their being
   accepted and owned by him at that day. We find in Scripture, that a
   righteous man and a merciful man are synonymous expressions; Isa. lvii.
   1. "The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and
   merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
   taken away from the evil to come."

   Thus we see how full, clear, and abundant, the evidence from Scripture
   is, that those who are truly gracious, are under the government of that
   lamb-like, dove-like Spirit of Jesus Christ, and that this is
   essentially and eminently the nature of the saving grace of the gospel,
   and the proper spirit of true Christianity. We may therefore
   undoubtedly determine, that all truly christian affections are attended
   with such a spirit: and that this is the natural tendency of the fear
   and hope, the sorrow and the joy, the confidence and the zeal of true
   Christians.

   None will understand me, that true Christians have no remains of a
   contrary spirit, and can never, in any instances, be guilty of a
   behaviour not agreeable to such a spirit. But this I affirm, and shall
   affirm until I deny the Bible to be any thing worth, that every thing
   in Christians that belongs to true Christianity, is of this tendency,
   and works this way; and that there is no true Christian upon earth, but
   is so under the prevailing power of such a spirit, that he is properly
   denominated from it, and it is truly and justly his character.
   Therefore, ministers and others have no warrant from Christ to
   encourage persons of a contrary character and behaviour, to think they
   are converted, because they tell a fair story of illuminations and
   discoveries. In so doing, they would set up their own wisdom against
   Christ's, and judge against that rule by which Christ has declared all
   men should know his disciples. Some persons place religion so much in
   certain transient illuminations and impressions, (especially if they
   are in such a particular method,) and so little in the spirit and
   temper, that they greatly deform religion, and form notions of
   Christianity quite different from what it is, as delineated in the
   Scriptures. The Scripture knows no true Christians, of a sordid,
   selfish, cross, and contentious spirit. Nothing can be a greater
   absurdity, than a morose, hard, close, high-spirited, spiteful, true
   Christian. We must learn the way of bringing men to rules; and not
   rules to men, and so strain the rules of God's word, in order to take
   in ourselves, and some of our neighbours, until we make them wholly of
   none effect

   It is true, allowances must be made for men's natural temper; but we
   must not allow men, that once were wolves and serpents, to be now
   converted, without any remarkable change in the spirit of their mind.
   The change made by true conversion, is wont to be most remarkable, with
   respect to the past notorious wickedness of the person. Grace has as
   great a tendency to restrain and mortify such sins, as are contrary to
   the spirit that has been spoken of, as it has to mortify drunkenness or
   lasciviousness. Yea, the Scripture represents the change wrought by
   gospel-grace, as especially appearing in an alteration of the former
   sort; Isa. xi. 6-9. "The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the
   leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf, and the young lion,
   and the fading together, and a little child shall lead them. And the
   cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together:
   and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall
   play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on
   the cockatrice' den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
   mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
   the waters cover the sea." And to the same purpose is Isa. lxv. 25.
   Accordingly we find, that in the primitive times of the christian
   church, converts were remarkably changed in this respect; Tit. iii. 3,.
   &c. "For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
   deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
   envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the kindness and
   love of God our Saviour toward man appeared,--he saved us by the
   washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." And Col. iii.
   7, 8. "In the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them.
   But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
   filthy communication out of your mouth."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [508] Mr. Shepard, speaking of hypocrites affecting applause, says,
   "Hence men forsake their friends, and trample under foot the scorns of
   the world; they have credit elsewhere. To maintain their interest in
   the love of godly men, they will suffer much." Parable of Ten Virgins.
   Part I. p. 180.

   [509] Psal. xxxvii. 21.

   [510] Psal. cxii. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   Gracious affections soften the heart, and are attended with a christian
   tenderness of spirit.

   False affections, however persons may seem to be melted by them while
   they are new, have a tendency in the end to harden the heart. A
   disposition to some kind of passions may be established; such as imply
   self-seeking, self-exaltation, and opposition to others. But false
   affections, with the delusion that attends them, finally tend to
   stupify the mind, and shut it up against those affections wherein
   tenderness of heart consists. The effect of them at last is, that
   persons in the settled frame of their minds, become less affected with
   their present and past sins, and less conscientious with respect to
   future sins; less moved with the warnings and cautions of God's word,
   or chastisements in his providence; more careless of the frame of their
   hearts, and the manner and tendency of their behaviour; less
   quick-sighted to discern what is sinful, and less afraid of the
   appearance of evil, than they were while under legal awakenings and
   fears of hell. Now they have been the subjects of impressions and
   affections, have a high opinion of themselves, and look on their state
   to be safe, they can be much more easy than before, though living in
   the neglect of duties that are troublesome and inconvenient.--They are
   much more slow and partial in complying with difficult commands; and
   are not alarmed at the appearance of their own defects and
   transgressions. They are emboldened to favour themselves more, with
   respect to the labour and painful exactness in their walk, and more
   easily yield to temptations, and the solicitations of their lusts; and
   have far less care of their behaviour, when they come into the holy
   presence of God, in the time of public or private worship. Formerly it
   may be, under legal convictions, they took much pains in religion, and
   denied themselves in many things: but now, thinking themselves out of
   the danger of hell, they very much put off the burden of the cross, and
   save themselves the trouble of difficult duties, allowing themselves
   more of the enjoyment of their ease and lusts.

   Such persons as these, instead of embracing Christ as their Saviour
   from sin, trust in him as the saviour of their sins; instead of flying
   to him as their refuge from their spiritual enemies, they make use of
   him as the defence of their spiritual enemies, from God, and to
   strengthen them against him. They make Christ the minister of sin, the
   great officer and vicegerent of the devil, to strengthen his interest,
   and make him above all things in the world strong against jehovah; so
   that they may sin against him with good courage, and without any fear,
   being effectually secured from restraints by his most solemn warnings"
   and most awful threatenings. They trust in Christ to preserve to them
   the quiet enjoyment of their sins, and to be their shield to defend
   them from God's displeasure; while they come close to him, even to his
   bosom, the place of his children, to fight against him, with their
   mortal weapons, hid under their skirts. [511] However, some of these,
   at the same time, make a great profession of love to God, and assurance
   of his favour, and great joy in tasting the sweetness of his love.

   After this manner they trusted in Christ, of whom the apostle Jude
   speaks, who crept in among the saints unknown; but were really "ungodly
   men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness,". Jude 4. These are
   they that trust in their being righteous; and because God has promised
   that the righteous shall surely live, or certainly be saved, are
   therefore emboldened to commit iniquity, whom God threatens in Ezek.
   xxxiii. 13. "When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely
   live: if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity; all
   his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity that he
   hath committed, he shall die for it."

   Gracious affections are of a quite contrary tendency; they turn a heart
   of stone more and more into a heart of flesh. Holy love and hope are
   principles vastly more efficacious upon the heart, to make it tender,
   and to fill it with a dread of sin, or whatever might displease and
   offend God; and to engage it to watchfulness, and care, and strictness,
   than a slavish fear of hell. Gracious affections, as was observed
   before, flow out of a contrite heart, or (as the word signifies) a
   bruised heart, bruised and broken with godly sorrow; which makes the
   heart tender, as bruised flesh is tender, and easily hurt. Godly sorrow
   has much greater influence to make the heart tender, than mere legal
   sorrow from selfish principles.

   The tenderness of the heart of a true Christian, is elegantly signified
   by our Saviour, in his comparing such a one to a little child. The
   flesh of a little child is very tender: so is the heart of one that is
   new-born. This is also represented in what we are told of Naaman's cure
   of his leprosy, by his washing in Jordan, by the direction of the
   prophet; which was undoubtedly a type of the renewing of the soul, by
   washing in the laver of regeneration. We are told, 2 Kings v. 14. that
   "he went down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to
   the saying of the man of God; and his flesh came again like unto the
   flesh of a little child." Not only is the flesh of a little child
   tender, but his mind is tender. A little child has his heart easily
   moved, wrought upon, and bowed: so is a Christian in spiritual things.
   A little child is apt to be affected with sympathy, to weep with them
   that weep, and cannot well bear to see others in distress: so it is
   with a Christian; John xi. 35. Rom. xii. 15. 1 Cor. xii. 26. A little
   child is easily won by kindness: so is a Christian. A little child is
   easily affected with grief at temporal evils, his heart is melted, and
   he falls a-weeping; thus tender is the heart of a Christian, with
   regard to the evil of sin. A little child, is easily affrighted at the
   appearance of outward evils, or any thing that threatens its hurt: so
   is a Christian apt to be alarmed at the appearance of moral evil, and
   any thing that threatens the hurt of the soul. A little child when it
   meets enemies, or fierce beasts, is not apt to trust its own strength,
   but flies to its parents: for refuge so a saint is not self-confident
   in engaging spiritual enemies, but flies to Christ. A little child is
   apt to be suspicious of evil in places of danger, afraid in the dark,
   afraid when left solitary, or far from home: so is a saint apt to be
   sensible of his spiritual dangers, jealous of himself, full of fear
   when he cannot see his way plain before him, afraid to be left alone,
   and to be at a distance from God; Prov. xxviii. 14. "Happy is the man
   that feareth alway; but he that hardeneth his heart, shall fall into
   mischief." A little child is apt to be afraid of superiors, and to
   dread their anger, and tremble at their frowns and threatenings: so is
   a true saint with respect to God; Psal. cxix. 120. "My flesh trembleth
   for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments." Isa. lxvi. 2. "To
   this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and trembleth at my
   word." Ver. 5. "Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
   word." Ezra ix 4. "Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled
   at the words of the God of Israel." Chap. x. 3. "According to the
   counsel of my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our
   God." A little child approaches superiors with awe: so do the saints
   approach God with holy awe and reverence; Job xiii. 11. "Shall not his
   excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon you?" Holy fear is
   so much the nature of true godliness, that it is called in Scripture by
   no other name more frequently, than the fear of God.

   Hence gracious affections do not tend to make men bold, forward, noisy,
   and boisterous; but rather to speak trembling; Hos. xiii. 1. "When
   Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
   offended in Baal, he died." It tends to clothe them with a kind of holy
   fear in all their behaviour towards God and man; agreeable to Psal. ii.
   11. 1 Pet. iii. 15. 2 Cor. vii. 15. Eph. vi. 5. 1 Pet. iii. 2. Rom. xi.
   20.

   But, is there no such thing as a holy boldness in prayer, and the
   duties of divine worship? There is doubtless such a thing; and it is
   chiefly to be found in eminent saints, persons of great degrees of
   faith and love. But this holy boldness is not in the least opposite to
   reverence; though it be to disunion and servility. It abolishes or
   lessens that disposition which arises from moral distance or
   alienation; and also distance of relation, as that of a slave: but not
   at all, that which becomes the natural distance, whereby we are
   infinitely inferior. No boldness in poor sinful worms of the dust, who
   have a right view of God and themselves, will prompt them to approach
   God with less fear and reverence, than spotless and glorious angels in
   heaven, who cover their faces before his throne, Isa. vi. 1,. &c.
   Rebecca, (who in her marriage with Isaac, in almost all its
   circumstances, was manifestly a great type of the church, the spouse of
   Christ,) when she meets Isaac, alights from her camel, takes a vail,
   and covers herself; although she was brought to him as his bride, to be
   with him, in the nearest relation, and most intimate union. [512]
   Elijah, that great prophet, who had so much holy familiarity with God,
   at a time of special nearness to him, even when he conversed with him
   in the mount, wrapped his face in his mantle. Which was not because he
   was terrified with any servile fear, by the terrible wind, and
   earthquake, and fire; but after these were all over, and God spake to
   him as a friend, in a still small voice; 1 Kings xix. 12, 13. "And
   after the fire, a still small voice; and it was so, when Elijah heard
   it, he wrapped his face in his mantle." And Moses, with whom God spake
   face to face, as a man speaks with his friend, and who was
   distinguished above all the prophets, in the familiarity with God to
   which he was admitted--at a time when he was brought nearest of all,
   when God showed him his glory in that same mount, where he afterwards
   spake to Elijah--"made haste, and bowed his head towards the earth, and
   worshipped,". Exod. xxxiv. 8. There is in some persons a most
   unsuitable and unsufferable boldness, in their addresses to the great
   jehovah--an affectation of holy boldness, and ostentation of eminent
   nearness and familiarity--the very thoughts of which would make them
   shrink into nothing, with horror and confusion, if they saw the
   distance that is between God and them. They are like the Pharisee, that
   boldly drew near, in confidence of his own eminence in holiness.
   Whereas, if they saw their vileness, they would be more like the
   publican, that "stood afar off, and durst not so much as lift up his
   eyes to heaven: but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to
   me a sinner." It becomes such sinful creatures as we, to approach a
   holy God (although with faith, and without terror, yet) with
   contrition, penitent shame, and confusion of face. It is foretold that
   this should be the disposition of the church, at the time of her
   highest privileges on earth, in her latter day of glory, when God
   should remarkably comfort her, by revealing to her his covenant-mercy;
   Ezek. xvi. 60,. &c. "I will establish unto thee an everlasting
   covenant. Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed. And I will
   establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that I am the
   Lord: that thou mayest remember and be confounded, and never open thy
   mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for
   all that thou hast done, saith the Lord God." The woman we read of in
   the 7th chapter of Luke., who was an eminent saint and had much of that
   true love which casts out fear, (by Christ's own testimony, ver. 47.)
   approached Christ in an acceptable manner when she came with humble
   modesty, reverence, and shame. She stood at his feet, weeping behind
   him, as not being fit to appear before his face, and washed his feet
   with her tears.

   One reason why gracious affections are attended with this tenderness of
   spirit, is, that true grace tends to promote convictions of conscience.
   Persons are wont to have some convictions of conscience before they
   have any grace: and if afterwards they are truly converted, have true
   repentance, joy, and peace in believing; this has a tendency to put an
   end to terrors, but has no tendency to put an end to convictions of
   sin; it rather increases them. Grace does not stupify a man's,
   conscience; but makes it more sensible, more easily and thoroughly to
   discern the sinfulness of that which is sinful, and to receive a
   greater conviction of the heinous and dreadful nature of sin. The
   conscience becomes susceptive of a quicker and deeper sense of sin, and
   the man is more convinced of his own sinfulness, and the wickedness of
   his heart; consequently grace has a tendency to make him more jealous
   of his heart. Grace tends to give the soul a further and better
   conviction of the same things concerning sin, that it was convinced of
   under a legal work of the Spirit; viz. its great contrariety to the
   will, and law, and honour of God, the greatness of God's hatred of it,
   and displeasure against it, and the dreadful punishment it exposes to
   and deserves. And not only so, but it convinces the soul of something
   further concerning sin, of which it saw nothing, while only under legal
   convictions; and that is, the infinitely hateful nature of sin, and its
   dreadfulness upon that account. And this makes the heart tender with
   respect to sin; like David's heart, that smote him when he had cut off
   Saul's skirt. The heart of a true penitent is like a burnt child that
   dreads the fire. Whereas, on the contrary, he that has had a
   counterfeit repentance, and false comforts and joys, is like iron that
   has been suddenly heated and quenched; it becomes much harder than
   before. A false conversion puts an end to convictions of conscience;
   and so, either takes away or much diminishes that conscientiousness
   which was manifested under a work of the law.

   All gracious affections have a tendency to promote this christian
   tenderness of heart. Not only godly sorrow, but even a gracious joy
   does this. Psal. ii. 11. "Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
   trembling." As also a gracious hope; Psal. xxxiii. 18. "Behold, the eye
   of the Lord is upon them that fear him; upon them that hope in his
   mercy." And Psal. cxlvii. 11. "The Lord taketh pleasure in them that
   fear him, in those that hope in his mercy." Yea, the most confident and
   assured hope, that is truly gracious, has this tendency. The higher a
   holy hope is raised, the more there is of this christian tenderness.
   The banishing of servile fear by a holy assurance, is attended with a
   proportionable increase of a reverential fear. The diminishing of the
   fear of God's displeasure in future punishment, is attended with a
   proportionable increase of fear of his displeasure itself; a diminished
   fear of hell, with an increase of the fear of sin. The vanishing of
   jealousies concerning the person's state, is attended with a
   proportionable increase of jealousy of his heart, in a distrust of its
   strength, wisdom, stability, faithfulness, &c. The less apt he is to be
   afraid of natural evil--having his heart fixed, trusting in God, and
   so, not afraid of evil tidings--the more apt is he to be alarmed with
   the appearance of moral evil, or the evil of sin. As he has more holy
   boldness, so he has less of self-confidence, or a forward assuming
   boldness, and more modesty. As he is more sure than others of
   deliverance from hell, so he has a greater sense of its desert. He is
   less apt than others to be shaken in faith; but more apt to be moved
   with solemn warnings, with God's frowns, and with the calamities of
   others. He has the firmest comfort, but the softest heart: richer than
   others, but poorest of all in spirit. He is the tallest and strongest
   saint, but the least and tenderest child among them.+
     __________________________________________________________________

   [511] "These are hypocrites that believe, but fail in regard of the use
   of the gospel, and of the Lord Jesus. And these we read of, Jude 3.
   viz. of some men that did turn grace into wantonness. For therein
   appears the exceeding evil of a man's heart, that not only the law, but
   also the glorious gospel of the Lord Jesus, works in him all manner of
   unrighteousness. And it is too common for men at the first work of
   conversion. On then to cry for grace and Christ, and afterwards grow
   licentious, live and lie in the breach of the law, and take their
   warrant for their course from the gospel."-- Shepard's Parable, Part I.
   p. 126. Again, p. 232. Mr. Shepard speaks of such hypocrites as those,
   "who, like strange eggs being put into the same nest, where honest men
   have lived, they have been hatched up; and when they are young, keep
   their nest, and live by crying and opening their mouths wide after the
   Lord, and the food of his word; but when their wings are grown, and
   they have got some affections, some knowledge, some hope of mercy, are
   hardened thereby to fly from God." And adds, "Can that man be good,
   whom God's grace makes worse?" Again. Part II. p. 167. "When men fly to
   Christ in times of peace, that so they may preserve their sins with
   greater peace of conscience; so that sin makes them fly to Christ, as
   well as misery; not that they may destroy and abolish sin, but they may
   be preserved in their sins with peace; then men may be said to
   apprehend Christ only by a seeming faith.--Many an heart secretly saith
   this. If I can have my sin, and peace, and conscience quiet for the
   present, and God merciful to pardon it afterward; hence he doth rely
   (as be saith) only on the mercy of God in Christ: and now this hardens
   and blinds him, and makes him secure, and his faith is sermon proof,
   nothing stirs him--And were it not for their faith they should despair,
   but this keeps them up. And now they think if they have any trouble of
   mind, the devil troubles them; and so make Christ and faith protectors
   of sin, not purifiers from sin: which is most dreadful; turning grace
   to wantonness. as they did sacrifice. So these would sin under the
   shadow of Christ, because the shadow is good and sweet, Mic. iii. 11.
   They had subtle sly ends in good duties; for therein may lie a man's
   sin: yet they lean upon the Lord.-- When money-changers came into the
   temple. You have made it a den of thieves. Thieves when hunted fly to
   their den or cave, and there they are secure against all searchers, and
   hue and cries: so here. But Christ whipped them out. So when men are
   pursued with cries and fears of conscience, away to Christ they go as
   to their den: not as saints, to pray and lament out the life of their
   sin there; but to preserve their sins. This is vile; will the Lord
   receive such?"

   [512] Dr. Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, Book III. chap. iv. speaks
   of a holy modesty in the worship of God, is one sign of true humility.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. X.

   Another thing wherein those affections that are truly gracious and
   holy, differ from those that are false, is beautiful symmetry and
   proportion.

   Not that the symmetry of the virtues and gracious affections of the
   saints, in this life, is perfect: it oftentimes is in many things
   defective, through the imperfection of grace, want of proper
   instructions, errors in judgment, some particular unhappiness of
   natural temper, defects in education, and many other disadvantages that
   might be mentioned. But yet there is in no wise that monstrous
   disproportion in gracious affections, and the various parts of true
   religion in the saints, that is very commonly to be observed in the
   false religion and counterfeit graces of hypocrites.

   In the truly holy affections of the saints is found that proportion,
   which is the natural consequence of the universality of their
   sanctification. They have the whole image of Christ upon them: they
   have put off the old man, and have put on the new man entire in all his
   parts and members. It hath pleased the Father that in Christ all
   fulness should dwell: there is in him every grace; he is full of grace
   and truth: and they that are Christ's of his fulness receive, and grace
   for grace; (John i. 14, 16.) There is every grace in them which is in
   Christ: grace for grace; that is, grace answerable to grace: there is
   no grace in Christ, but there is its image in believers to answer it.
   The image is a true image; and there is something of the same beautiful
   proportion in the image, which is in the original; there is feature for
   feature, and member for member. There is symmetry and beauty in God's
   workmanship. The natural body which God hath made, consists of many
   members; and all are in a beautiful proportion: so the new man consists
   of various graces and affections. The body of one that was born a
   perfect child, may fail of exact proportion through distemper,
   weakness, or injury of some of its members; yet the disproportion is in
   no measure like that of those who are born monsters.

   It is with hypocrites, as it was with Ephraim of old, at a time when
   God greatly complains of their hypocrisy; Hos. vii. 8. "Ephraim is a
   cake not turned," half roasted and half raw: there is commonly no
   manner of uniformity in their affections. There is in many of them a
   great partiality, with regard to the several kinds of religious
   affections; great affections in some things, and no proportion in
   others. A holy hope and holy fear go together in the saints, Psal.
   xxxiii. 18. and cxlvii. 11. But in some of these there is the most
   confident hope, while they are void of reverence, self-jealousy, and
   caution, and while they to a great degree cast off fear. In the saints,
   joy and holy fear go together, though the joy be never so great: as it
   was with the disciples, in that joyful morning of Christ's
   resurrection, Matt. xxviii. 8. "And they departed quickly from the
   sepulchre, with fear and great joy." [513] But many of these rejoice
   without trembling: their joy is truly opposite to godly fear.

   But particularly, one great difference between saints and hypocrites is
   this, that the joy and comfort of the former is attended with godly
   sorrow and mourning for sin. They have not only sorrow to prepare them
   for their first comfort, but after they are comforted, and their joy is
   established. As it is foretold of the church of God, that they should
   mourn and loathe themselves for their sins, after they were returned
   from the captivity, and were settled in the land of Canaan, the land of
   rest, the land flowing with milk and honey, Ezek. xx. 42, 43. "And ye
   shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land of
   Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it
   to your fathers. And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your
   doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loathe yourselves in
   your own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed;" (also Ezek.
   xvi. 61-63.) A true saint is like a little child in this respect: he
   never had any godly sorrow before he was born again; but since, has it
   often in exercise. A little child, before it is born, and while it
   remains in darkness, never cries; but as soon as ever it sees the
   light, it begins to cry; and thenceforward is often crying. Although
   Christ hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, so that we are
   freed from the sorrow of punishment, and may now sweetly feed upon the
   comforts Christ hath purchased for us; yet that hinders not but that
   our feeding on these comforts should be attended with the sorrow of
   repentance. Thus of old, the children of Israel were commanded evermore
   to feed upon the paschal lamb with bitter herbs. [514] True saints are
   spoken of in Scripture, not only as those that have mourned for sin,
   but as those that do mourn, whose manner it is still to mourn; Matt. v.
   4. "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted."

   Not only is there often in hypocrites, an essential deficiency, as to
   the various kinds of religious affections; but also a strange
   partiality and disproportion, in the same affections, with regard to
   different objects.--Thus as to the affection of love, some make high
   pretences, and a great show of love to God and Christ, and it may be
   have been greatly affected with what they have heard or thought
   concerning them: but they have not a spirit of love and benevolence
   towards men, but are disposed to contention, envy, revenge, and
   evil-speaking; and will, it may be, suffer an old grudge to rest in
   their bosoms towards a neighbour for seven years together, if not twice
   seven years; living in real ill-will and bitterness of spirit towards
   him. And it may be in their dealings with their neighbours, they are
   not very strict and conscientious in observing the rule of doing to
   others, as they would that they should do to them: 1 John iv. 20. "If a
   man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that
   loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he
   hath not seen?" On the other hand, there are others who appear as if
   they had a great deal of benevolence to men, who are very good-natured
   and generous in their way; but have no love to God.

   And as to love to men, there are some who have flowing affections to
   some; but their love is far from being of so extensive and universal a
   nature, as a truly christian love is.--They are full of dear affections
   to some, and full of bitterness towards others. They are knit to their
   own party, those who approve, those who love, and admire them; but are
   fierce against those that oppose and dislike them. Matt. v. 45, 46. "Be
   like your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on
   the evil and on the good. For if ye love them which love you, what
   reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?" Some show a great
   affection to their neighbours, and pretend to be ravished with the
   company of the children of God abroad: but at the same time are
   uncomfortable and churlish towards their near relations at home, and
   are very negligent of relative duties. And as to the great love to
   sinners and opposers of religion, and the great concern for their
   souls, that some express, even to extreme agony --singling out a
   particular person from among a multitude for its object--while at the
   same time there is no general compassion to sinners in equally
   miserable circumstances, but what is in a monstrous disproportion; this
   seems not to be of the nature of a gracious affection. Not that I
   suppose it to be at all strange, that pity to the perishing souls of
   sinners should be to a degree of agony, if other things are answerable;
   or that a truly gracious compassion to souls should be exercised much
   more to some persons than others who are equally miserable, especially
   on some particular occasions. Many things may happen to fix the mind,
   and affect the heart, with respect to a particular person, at such a
   juncture; and without doubt some saints have been in great distress for
   the souls of particular persons, so as to be, as it were, in travail
   for them. But when persons appear, at particular times, in agonies for
   the soul of some single person, far beyond what has been usual in
   eminent saints, but appear to be far inferior to them in a spirit of
   meek and fervent love, charity, and compassion to mankind in general; I
   say, such agonies are greatly to be suspected, because the Spirit of
   God is wont to give graces and gracious affections in a beautiful
   symmetry and proportion.

   And as there is a monstrous disproportion in the love of some, in its
   exercises towards different persons, so there is in their seeming
   exercises of love towards the same persons. Some men show a love to
   others as to their outward man, they are liberal of their worldly
   substance, and often give to the poor; but have no love to or concern
   for the soul of men. Others pretend a great love to men's souls, but
   are not compassionate and charitable towards their bodies. To make a
   great show of love, pity, and distress for souls, costs them nothing;
   but in order to show mercy to men's bodies, they must part with money.
   But a true christian love to our brethren, extends both to their souls
   and bodies; and herein is like the love and compassion of Jesus Christ.
   He showed mercy to men's souls, by laboriously preaching the gospel to
   them; and to their bodies, in going about doing good, healing all
   manner of sickness and diseases among the people. We have a remarkable
   instance of Christ's compassion at once both to men's souls and bodies,
   in Mark vi. 34,. &c. "And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and
   was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not
   having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things." Here was
   his compassion to their souls. And in the sequel, we have an account of
   his compassion to their bodies; he fed five thousand of them with five
   loaves and two fishes, because they had been a long while having
   nothing to eat. And if the compassion of professing Christians towards
   others does not work in the same ways, it is a sign that it is no true
   christian compassion.

   And furthermore, it is a sign that affections are not of the right
   sort, if persons seem to be much affected with the bad qualities of
   their fellow-Christians, (as the coldness and lifeliness of other
   saints,) but are in no proportion affected with their own defects and
   corruptions. A true Christian may be affected with the coldness and
   unsavouriness of other saints, and may mourn much over it: but at the
   same time, he is not so apt to be affected with the badness of any
   body's heart, as his own; this is most in his view; this he is most
   quick-sighted to discern; to see its aggravations, and to condemn. A
   lesser degree of virtue will bring him to pity himself, and be
   concerned at his own calamities, than is needful rightly to be affected
   with those of others; and if men have not attained to the less, we may
   determine they never attained to the greater.

   And here by the way, I would observe, that it may be laid down as a
   general rule, That if persons pretend to high attainments in religion,
   who have never yet arrived to the lesser, it is a sign of a vain
   pretence. If persons pretend, that they have got beyond mere morality,
   to live a spiritual and divine life; but really have not come to be so
   much as moral persons: or pretend to be greatly affected with the
   wickedness of their hearts, and are not affected with the palpable
   violations of God's commands in their practice, which is a lesser
   attainment, their pretences are vain. If they pretend to be brought to
   be even willing to be damned for the glory of God, but have no
   forwardness to suffer a little in their estates and names, and worldly
   convenience, for the sake of their duty: or finally pretend that they
   are not afraid to venture their souls upon Christ, and commit their all
   to God, trusting to his bare word, and the faithfulness of his
   promises, for their eternal welfare; but at the same time, have not
   confidence enough in God, to dare to trust him with a little of their
   estates, bestowed to pious and charitable uses: I say, when it is thus
   with persons, their pretences are manifestly vain. He that is on a
   journey, and imagines he has got far beyond such a place in his road,
   and never yet came to it, must be mistaken. He has not yet arrived at
   the top of the hill, who never yet got half-way thither. But this by
   the way.

   What has been observed of the affections of love, is applicable also to
   other religious affections. Those that are true, extend in some
   proportion to their due and proper objects: but the false, are commonly
   strangely disproportionate. So it is with religious desires and
   longings; these in the saints, are toward those things that are
   spiritual and excellent in general, and in some proportion to their
   excellency, importance, or necessity, or the near concern they have in
   them: but in false longings, it is often far otherwise. They will
   strangely run, with impatient vehemence, after something of less
   importance, when other things of greater importance are neglected. Thus
   for instance, some persons are attended with a vehement inclination, an
   unaccountably violent pressure, to declare to others what they
   experience, and to exhort them; when there is at the same time no
   inclination, in any proportionable measure, to other things, to which
   true Christianity has as great, yea, a greater tendency; as pouring out
   the soul before God in secret, earnest prayer and praise to him, more
   conformity to him, living more to his glory, &c. We read in Scripture
   of groanings that cannot be uttered, and soul-breakings for the longing
   it hath; and longings, thirstings, and pantings, much more frequently
   to these latter things, than the former.

   And so as to hatred and zeal; when these are from right principles,
   they are against sin in general, in some proportion to the degree of
   sinfulness; "I hate every false way." [515] So ver. 128. But a false
   hatred and zeal against sin, is against some particular sin only. Thus
   some seem to be very zealous against profaneness, and pride in apparel,
   who themselves are notorious for covetousness, closeness, and it may be
   backbiting, envy towards superiors, turbulency of spirit towards
   rulers, and rooted ill-will to those who have injured them. False zeal
   is against the sins of others; while he that has true zeal, exercises
   it chiefly against his own sins; though he shows also a proper zeal
   against prevailing and dangerous iniquity in others. Some pretend to
   have a great abhorrence of their own inward corruption; and yet make
   light of sins in practice, and seem to commit them without much
   restraint or remorse; though these imply sin, both in heart and life.

   As there is a much greater disproportion in the exercises of false
   affections, than of true, as to different objects; so there is also, as
   to different times. For although true Christians are not always
   alike--yea, there is very great difference, at different times, and the
   best have reason to be greatly ashamed of their unsteadiness--yet there
   is in no wise the instability and inconstancy of the false-hearted, in
   those who are true virgins, that follow the Lamb whithersoever he
   goeth. The righteous man is truly said to be one whose heart is fixed,
   trusting in God, (Psal. cxii. 7.) and whose heart is established with
   grace; (Heb. xiii. 9.) Job xvii. 9. "The righteous shall hold on his
   way, and he that hath clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger." It
   is spoken of as a note of the hypocrisy of the Jewish church, that they
   were as a swift dromedary, traversing her ways.

   If therefore persons are religious only by fits and starts, if they now
   and then seem to be raised up to the clouds in their affections, and
   then suddenly fall down again, lose all, and become quite careless and
   carnal, and this is their manner of carrying on religion; if they
   appear greatly moved, and mightily engaged in religion, only in
   extraordinary seasons--as in the time of a remarkable out-pouring of
   the Spirit, or other uncommon dispensations of Providence, or upon the
   real or supposed receipt of some great mercy, &c.--but quickly return
   to such a frame, that their hearts are chiefly upon other things, and
   the prevailing stream of their affections is ordinarily towards the
   things of this world, they clearly evince their unsoundness. When they
   are like the children of Israel in the wilderness, who had their
   affections highly raised by what God had done for them at the Red sea,
   and sang his praises, and soon fell a lusting after the flesh-pots of
   Egypt; but then again when they came to mount Sinai, and saw the great
   manifestations God made of himself there, seemed to be greatly engaged
   again, and mightily forward to enter into covenant with God, saying,
   All that the Lord hath spoken will we do, and be obedient, but then
   quickly made them a golden calf; I say, when it is thus with persons,
   it is a sign of the unsoundness of affections. [516] They are like the
   waters in the time of a shower of rain, which, during the shower, and a
   little after, run like a brook, and flow abundantly; but are presently
   quite dry: and when another shower comes, then they will flow again.
   Whereas a true saint is like a stream from a living spring; which
   though it may be greatly increased by a shower of rain, and diminished
   in time of drought, yet constantly runs: (John iv. 14. "The water that
   I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up," &c.)
   or like a tree planted by such a stream, that has a constant supply at
   the root, and is always green, even in time of the greatest drought;
   Jer. xvii. 7, 8. "Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and
   whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree planted by the
   waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not
   see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be
   careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
   fruit." Many hypocrites are like comets, that appear for a while with a
   mighty blaze; but are very unsteady and irregular in their motion, (and
   are therefore called wandering stars, Jude 13.) their blaze soon
   disappears, and they appear but once in a great while. But true saints
   are like the fixed stars, which, though they rise and set, and are
   often clouded, yet are stedfast in their orb, and shine with a constant
   light. Hypocritical affections are like a violent motion; as that of
   the air moved with winds, (Jude 12.) But gracious affections are more a
   natural motion; like the stream of a river, which, though it has many
   turns, may meet with obstacles, and run more freely and swiftly in some
   places than others; yet in the general, with a steady and constant
   course, tends the same way, until it gets to the ocean.

   And as there is a strange unevenness and disproportion in false
   affections, at different times; so there often is in different places.
   Some are greatly affected when in company; but have nothing that bears
   any manner of proportion to it in secret, in close meditation, prayer
   and conversing with God when alone, and separated from all the world.
   [517] A true Christian doubtless delights in religious fellowship and
   christian conversation, and finds much to affect his heart in it; but
   he also delights at times to retire from all mankind, to converse with
   God in solitude. And this also has its peculiar advantages for fixing
   his heart, and engaging his affections. True religion disposes persons
   to be much alone in solitary places, for holy meditation and prayer. So
   it wrought in Isaac, Gen. xxiv. 63. And which is much more, so it
   wrought in Jesus Christ. How often do we read of his retiring into
   mountains and solitary places, for holy converse with his Father! It is
   difficult to conceal great affections, but yet gracious affections are
   of a much more silent and secret nature, than those that are
   counterfeit. So it is with the gracious sorrow of the saints for their
   own sins. [518] Thus the future gracious mourning of true penitents, at
   the beginning of the latter-day glory, is represented as being so
   secret, as to be hidden from the companions of their bosom; Zech. xii.
   12, 13, 14. "And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family
   of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the
   house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house
   of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and
   their wives apart; all the families that remain, every family apart,
   and their wives apart." So it is with their sorrow for the sins of
   others. The saints' pains and travail for the souls of sinners is
   chiefly in secret places; Jer. xiii. 17. "If ye will not hear it, my
   soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eye shall
   weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lord's flock is carried
   away captive." So it is with gracious joys: they are hidden manna, in
   this respect, as well as others, Rev. ii. 17.. The psalmist seems to
   speak of his sweetest comforts, as those which he had in secret; Psal.
   lxiii. 5, 6. "My soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and fatness;
   and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: when I remember thee
   upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches." Christ calls
   forth his spouse away from the world into retired places, that he may
   give her his sweetest love; Cant. vii. 11, 12. "Come, my beloved, let
   us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the villages;--there will I
   give thee my loves." The most eminent divine favours which the saints
   obtained, that we read of in Scripture, were in their retirement. The
   principal manifestations that God made of himself, and his
   covenant-mercy to Abraham, were when he was alone, apart from his
   numerous family; as any one will judge that carefully reads his
   history. Isaac received that special gift of God, Rebekah, who was so
   great a comfort to him, and by whom he obtained the promised seed,
   walking alone, meditating in the field. Jacob was retired for secret
   prayer, when Christ came to him; and he wrestled with him, and obtained
   the blessing. God revealed himself to Moses in the bush, when he was in
   a solitary place in the desert, in mount Horeb, Exod. iii. And
   afterwards, when God showed him his glory, and he was admitted to the
   highest degree of communion with God that ever he enjoyed; he was
   alone, in the same mountain, and continued there forty days and forty
   nights, and then came down with his face shining. God came to those
   great prophets, Elijah and Elisha, and conversed freely with them,
   chiefly in their retirement. Elijah conversed alone with God at mount
   Sinai, as Moses did. And when Jesus Christ had his greatest prelibation
   of his future glory when he was transfigured; it was not when he was
   with the multitude, or with the twelve disciples, but retired into a
   solitary place in a mountain, with only three select disciples, whom he
   charged that they should tell no man, until he was risen from the dead.
   When the angel Gabriel came to the blessed virgin, and when the Holy
   Ghost came upon her, and the power of the Highest overshadowed her, she
   seems to have been alone, in this matter hid from the world; her
   nearest and dearest earthly friend Joseph, who had betrothed her, knew
   nothing of the matter. And she that first partook of the joy of
   Christ's resurrection, was alone with Christ at the sepulchre, John xx.
   And when the beloved disciple was favoured with those wonderful visions
   of Christ, and his future dispensations towards the church and the
   world, he was alone in the isle of Patmos. Not but that we have also
   instances of great privileges that the saints have received when with
   others; there is much in christian conversation, and social and public
   worship, tending greatly to refresh and rejoice the hearts of the
   saints. But this is all that I aim at by what has been said, to show
   that it is the nature of true grace, however it loves christian society
   in its place, in a peculiar manner to delight in retirement, and secret
   converse with God. So that if persons appear greatly engaged in social
   religion, and but little in the religion of the closet, and are often
   highly affected when with others, and but little moved when they have
   none but God and Christ to converse with, it looks very darkly upon
   their religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [513] "Renewed care and diligence follow the sealings of the Spirit.
   Now is the soul at the foot of Christ, as Mary was at the sepulchre,
   with fear and great joy. He that travels the road with a rich treasure
   about him, is afraid of a thief in every bush." Flavel's Sacramental
   Meditation, Med. 4.

   [514] "If repentance accompanies faith, it is no presumption to
   believe. Many know the sin, and hence believe in Christ, trust in
   Christ, and there is an end of their faith. But what confession and
   sorrow for sin? what more love to Christ follows this faith? Truly
   none. Nay, their faith is the cause why they have none. For they think,
   if I trust in Christ to forgive me, he will do it; and there is an end
   of the business. Verily this hedge faith, this bramble-faith, that
   catches hold on Christ, and pricks and scratches Christ, by more
   impenitency, more contempt of him, is mere presumption; which shall one
   day be burnt up and destroyed by the fire of God's Jealousy. Fye upon
   that faith, that serves only to keep a man from being tormented before
   his time! Your sins would be your sorrows, but that your faith quiets
   you. But if faith be accompanied with repentance, mourning for sin,
   more esteem of God's grace in Christ; so that nothing breaks thy heart
   more than the thoughts of Christ's unchangeable love to one so vile,
   and this love makes thee love much, and love him the more; as thy sin
   increaseth, so thou desirest thy love's increase; and now the stream of
   thy thoughts run, how thou mayst live to him that died for thee: this
   was Mary's faith, who sat at Christ's feet weeping, washing them with
   her tears, and loving much, because much was forgiven."--Shepard's
   Sound Believer, p. 128.129. "You shall know godly sorrow (says Dr.
   Preston, in his discourse on Paul's conversion) by the continuance of
   it; it is constant: but worldly sorrow is but a passion of the mind; it
   changes, it lasts not. Though for the present it may be violent and
   strong, and work much outwardly: yet it comes but by fits, and
   continues not: like a land-flood, which violently, for the present,
   overflows the banks; but it will away again; it is not always thus. But
   godly sorrow is like a spring, that still keeps running both winter and
   summer, wet and dry, in heat and cold, early and late. So this godly
   sorrow is the same in a regenerate man still; take him when you will,
   he is still sorrowing for sin. This godly sorrow stands like the centre
   of the earth, which removes not, but still remains." "I am persuaded,
   many a man's heart is kept from breaking and mourning, because of this.
   He saith (it may be) that he is a vile sinner; but I trust in Christ,
   &c. If they do go to Christ to destroy their sin, this makes them more
   secure in their sin. For (say they) I cannot help it, and Christ must
   do all. Whereas faith makes the soul mourn after the Lord the more."
   Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part II. p. 168.

   [515] Psal. cxix. 104.

   [516] Dr. Owen (on the Spirit, Book III. chap. ii. § 18.) speaking of a
   common work of the Spirit, says, "This work operates greatly on the
   affections: we have given instances, in fear, sorrow, joy, and delight,
   about spiritual things, that are stirred up and acted thereby: but yet
   it comes short in two things, of a thorough work upon the affections
   themselves. For, 1st, It doth not fix them. And, 2dly, It doth not fill
   them. 1. It is required that our affections be fixed on heavenly and
   spiritual things and true grace will effect it; Col. iii. 1, 2. "If ye
   be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
   sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above."
   The joys, the fears, the hopes, the sorrows, with reference to
   spiritual and eternal things, which the work before mentioned doth
   produce, are evanid, uncertain, unstable, not only as to the degrees,
   but as to the very being of them. Sometimes they are as a river ready
   to overflow its banks, men cannot but be pouring them out on all
   occasions; and sometimes as waters that fail, no drop comes from them.
   Sometimes they are hot, and sometimes cold; sometimes up, and sometimes
   down; sometimes all heaven, and sometimes all world; without equality,
   without stability. But true grace fixeth the affections on spiritual
   things. As to the degrees of their exercise, there may be and is in
   them a great variety, according as they may be excited, aided, assisted
   by grace and the means of it; or obstructed and impeded, by the
   interposition of temptations and diversions. But the constant bent and
   inclination of renewed affections, is unto spiritual things; as the
   Scripture every where testifieth, and as experience doth confirm.
   "There is (says Dr. Preston) a certain love, by fits, which God accepts
   not; when men come and offer to God great promises, like the waves of
   the sea, as big as mountains: Oh, they think, they will do much for
   God! But their minds change; and they become as those high waves, which
   at last fall level with the other waters. If a man should proffer thee
   great kindnessesminds change; and they become as those high waves,
   which at last fall level with the other waters. If a man should proffer
   thee great kindnesses; and thou shouldst afterwards come to him to make
   use of him, and he should look strangely upon thee, as if he were never
   acquainted with thee; how wouldst thou esteem of such love? If we are
   now on, now off, in our love. God will not esteem of such love."
   Discourse on the Divine Love of Christ. Mr. Flavel, speaking of these
   changeable professors, says, " These professors have more of the moon
   than of the sun; little light, less beat, and many changes. They
   deceive many, yea, they deceive themselves, but cannot deceive God.
   They want that ballast and establishment in themselves, that would have
   kept them tight and steady." Touchstone of Sincerity, chap. ii. § 2.

   [517] "The Lord is neglected secretly, yet honoured openly; because
   there is no wind in their chambers to blow their sails; and therefore
   there they stand still. Hence many men keep their profession, when they
   lose their affection. They have by the one a name to live, (and that is
   enough,) though their hearts be dead. And hence so long as you love and
   commend them, so long they love you; but if not, they will forsake you.
   They were warm only by another's fire, and hence having no principle of
   life within, soon grow dead. This is the water that turns a Pharisee's
   mill." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 180. " The hypocrite (says Mr.
   Flavel) is not for the closet, but the synagogue. Matt vi. 5, 6. It is
   not his meat and drink to retire from the clamour of the world, to
   enjoy God in secret" Touchstone of Sincerity, chap. vii. § 2. Dr. Ames,
   in his Cases of Conscience, Lib. III. chap. v. speaks of it as a thing
   by which sincerity may be known, "That persons be obedient in the
   absence, as well as in the presence, of lookers on; in secret, as well,
   yea more, than in public;" alleging Phil. ii. 12. andMatt vi. 6.

   [518] Mr. Flavel, in reckoning up those things, wherein the sorrow of
   saints is distinguished from the sorrow of hypocrites, about their
   sins, says, "Their troubles for sin are more private and silent
   troubles than others are; their sore runs in the night" Touchstone of
   Sincerity, chap. vi. § 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XI.

   Another great and very distinguishing difference is, that the higher
   gracious affections are raised, the more is a spiritual appetite and
   longing of soul after spiritual attainments increased: on the contrary,
   false affections rest satisfied in themselves.

   The more a true saint loves God with a gracious love, the more he
   desires to love him, and the more uneasy is he at his want of love to
   him: the more he hates sin, the more he desires to hate it, and laments
   that he has so much remaining love to it. The more he mourns for sin,
   the more he longs to mourn; the more his heart is broken, the more he
   desires it should be broken. The more he thirsts and longs after God
   and holiness, the more he longs to long, and breathe out his very soul
   in longings after God. The kindling and raising of gracious affections
   is like kindling a flame; the higher it is raised, the more ardent it
   is; and the more it burns, the more vehemently does it tend and seek to
   burn. So that the spiritual appetite after holiness, and an increase of
   holy affections, is much more lively and keen in those that are eminent
   in holiness, than others; and more when grace and holy affections are
   in their most lively exercise, than at other times. It is as much the
   nature of one that is spiritually new-born, to thirst after growth in
   holiness, as it is the nature of a new-born babe to thirst after the
   mother's breast; who has the sharpest appetite, when best in health; 1
   Pet. ii. 2, 3. "As new-born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word,
   that ye may grow thereby: if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is
   gracious." The most that the saints have in this world, is but a taste,
   a prelibation of that future glory which is their proper fulness; it is
   only an earnest of their future inheritance; (2 Cor. i. 22. and v. 5.
   and Eph. i. 14.) The most eminent saints in this state are but
   children, compared with their future, which is their proper, state of
   maturity and perfection; as the apostle observes, 1 Cor. xiii. 10, 11.
   The greatest eminence and perfection that the saints arrive at in this
   world, has no tendency to satiety, or to abate their desires after
   more; but, on the contrary, makes them more eager to press forwards; as
   is evident by the apostle's words, Phil. iii. 13-15. "Forgetting those
   things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
   before, I press toward the mark. Let us therefore, as many as be
   perfect, be thus minded."

   The reasons of it are, that the more persons have of holy affections,
   the more they have of that spiritual taste which I have spoken of
   elsewhere; whereby they perceive the excellency, and relish the divine
   sweetness, of holiness. And the more grace they have, while in this
   state of imperfection, the more they see their imperfection and
   emptiness, and distance from what ought to be; and so the more do they
   see their need of grace; as I showed at large before, when speaking of
   the nature of evangelical humiliation. And besides, grace, as long as
   it is imperfect, is of a growing nature, and in a growing state. And we
   see it to be so with all living things, that while they are in a state
   of imperfection, and in their growing state, their nature seeks after
   growth; and so much the more, as they are more healthy and prosperous.
   Therefore the cry of every true grace, is like that cry of true faith,
   Mark ix. 24. "Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief." And the greater
   spiritual discoveries and affections the true Christian has, the more
   does he become an earnest supplicant for grace, and spiritual food,
   that he may grow; and the more earnestly does he pursue after it, in
   the use of proper means and endeavours; for true and gracious longings
   after holiness, are no idle ineffectual desires.

   But here some may object, How is this consistent with what all allow,
   that spiritual enjoyments are of a soul-satisfying nature?

   I answer, Its being so will appear to be not at all inconsistent with
   what has been said, if it be considered in what manner spiritual
   enjoyments are said to be of a soul-satisfying nature. Certainly they
   are not of a cloying nature, so that he who has any thing of them,
   though but in a very imperfect degree, desires no more. But spiritual
   enjoyments are of a soul-satisfying nature in the following respects.
   1. They in their kind and nature, are fully adapted to the nature,
   capacity, and need of the soul of man. So that those who find them,
   desire no other kind of enjoyments; they sit down fully contented with
   that kind of happiness which they have, desiring no change, nor
   inclining to wander about any more, saying, Who will show us any good?
   the soul is never closed, never weary; but perpetually giving up
   itself, with all its powers, to this happiness. But not that those who
   have something of this happiness, desire no more of the same. 2. They
   are satisfying also in this respect, that they answer the expectation
   of the appetite. When the appetite is high to any thing, the
   expectation is consequently so. Appetite to a particular object,
   implies expectation in its nature. This expectation is not satisfied by
   worldly enjoyments; the man expected to have a great accession of
   happiness, but he is disappointed. But it is not so with spiritual
   enjoyments; they fully answer and satisfy the expectation. 3. The
   gratification and pleasure of spiritual enjoyments is permanent. It is
   not so with worldly enjoyments. They in a sense satisfy particular
   appetites; but the appetite in being satisfied, is glutted, and then
   the pleasure is over: and as soon as that is over, the general appetite
   of human nature after happiness returns; but is empty, and without any
   thing to satisfy it. So that the glutting of a particular appetite,
   does but take away from. and leave empty, the general thirst of nature.
   4. Spiritual good is satisfying, as there is enough in it to satisfy
   the soul, as to the degree, if obstacles were but removed, and the
   enjoying faculty duly applied. There is room enough here for the soul
   to extend itself; here is an infinite ocean. If men be not satisfied
   here, as to degree of happiness, the cause is with themselves; it is
   because they do not open their mouths wide enough.

   But these things do not argue that a soul has no appetite excited after
   more of the same, when it has tasted a little; or that the appetite
   will not increase, until it comes to fulness of enjoyment: as bodies
   attracted to the earth, tend to it more strongly, the nearer they come
   to the attracting body, and are not at rest out of the centre.
   Spiritual good is of a satisfying nature; and for that very reason, the
   soul that tastes, and knows its nature, will thirst after it, and a
   fulness of it, that it may be satisfied. And the more one experiences
   and knows this excellent, unparalleled, exquisite, and satisfying
   sweetness, the more earnestly will he hunger and thirst for more, until
   he comes to perfection. And therefore this is the nature of spiritual
   affections, that the greater they be, the greater the appetite and
   longing is, after grace and holiness.

   But with those joys, and other religious affections, that are false and
   counterfeit, it is otherwise. If before there was a great desire, of
   some sort, after grace; as these affections rise, that desire ceases,
   or is abated. It may be before, while the man was under legal
   convictions, and much afraid of hell, he earnestly longed that he might
   obtain spiritual light in his understanding, faith in Christ, and love
   to God: but now, when these false affections deceive him, and make him
   confident that he is converted, and his state good, there are no more
   earnest longings after light and grace; for his end is answered; he is
   confident. that his sins are forgiven him, and that he shall go to
   heaven; and so he is satisfied. And especially when false affections
   are raised very high, do they put an end to longings after grace and
   holiness. The man now is far from appearing to himself a poor empty
   creature; on the contrary, he is rich, and increased with goods, and
   hardly conceives of any thing more excellent, than what he has already
   attained.

   Hence there is an end to many persons' earnestness in seeking, after
   they have once obtained that which they call their conversion; or at
   least, after they have had those high affections, that make them fully
   confident of it. Before, while they looked upon themselves as in a
   state of nature, they were engaged in seeking after God and Christ, and
   cried earnestly for grace, and strove in the use of means: but now they
   act as though they thought their work was done; they live upon their
   first work, or some high past experiences; and there is an end to their
   crying, and striving after God and grace. [519] Whereas the holy
   principles that actuate a true saint, have a far more powerful
   influence to stir him up to earnestness in seeking God and holiness,
   than servile fear. Hence seeking God is spoken of as one of the
   distinguishing characters of the saints; and those that seek God, is
   one of the names by which the godly are called in Scripture: Ps. xxiv.
   6. "This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O
   Jacob." Ps. lxix. 6. "Let not those that seek thee, be confounded for
   my sake." Ver. 32. "The humble shall see this, and be glad; and your
   heart shall live that seek God." And 4. "Let all those that seek thee,
   rejoice, and be glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation say
   continually, The Lord be magnified." And the Scriptures every where
   represent the seeking, striving, and labour of a Christian, as being
   chiefly after his conversion, and his conversion as being but the
   beginning of his work. And almost all that is said in the New
   Testament, of men's watching, giving earnest heed to themselves,
   running the race that is set before them, striving and agonizing,
   wrestling not with flesh and blood, but principalities and powers,
   fighting, putting on the whole armour of God, and standing, having one
   all to stand, pressing forward, reaching forth, continuing instant in
   prayer, crying to God day and night; I say, almost all that is said in
   the New Testament of these things, is spoken of and directed to the
   saints. Where these things are applied to sinners' seeking conversion
   once, they are spoken of the saints' prosecution of the great business
   of their high calling ten times. But many in these days have got into a
   strange anti-scriptural way, of having all their striving and wrestling
   over before they are converted; and so having an easy time of it
   afterwards, to sit down and enjoy their sloth and indolence; as those
   that now have a supply of their wants, and are become rich and full.
   But when the Lord fills the hungry with good things, these rich are
   like to be sent away empty, Luke i. 53.

   But doubtless there are some hypocrites, that have only false
   affections, who will think they are able to stand this trial; and will
   readily say, that they desire not to rest satisfied with past
   attainments, but to be pressing forward; they desire more, they long
   after God and Christ, desire more holiness, and seek it. But the truth
   is, their desires are not properly the desires of appetite after
   holiness, for its own sake, or for its moral excellency and holy
   sweetness; but only for by-ends. They long after clearer discoveries,
   that they may be better satisfied about the state of their souls; or
   because in great discoveries self is gratified, in being made so much
   of by God, and so exalted above others; they long to taste the love of
   God, (as they call it,) rather than to have more love to God. Or, it
   may be, they have a kind of forced, fancied, or made longings; because
   they think they must long for more grace, otherwise it will be a dark
   sign upon them. But such things as these are far different from the
   natural, and as it were necessary, appetite and thirsting of the new
   man after God and holiness. There is an inward burning desire that a
   saint has after holiness, as natural to the new creature, as vital heat
   is to the body. There is a holy breathing and panting after the Spirit
   of God to increase holiness, as natural to a holy nature, as breathing
   is to a living body. And holiness or sanctification is more directly
   the object of it, than any manifestation of God's love and favour. This
   is the meat and drink that is the object of the spiritual appetite;
   John iv. 34. "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
   finish His work." Where we read in Scripture of the desires, longings,
   and thirstings of the saints, righteousness and God's laws are much
   more frequently mentioned, as the object of them, than any thing else.
   The saints desire the sincere milk of the word, not so much to testify
   God's love to them, as that they may grow thereby in holiness. I have
   shown before, that holiness is that good which is the immediate object
   of a spiritual taste. But undoubtedly the same sweetness that is the
   chief object of a spiritual taste, is also the chief object of a
   spiritual appetite. Grace is the godly man's treasure; Isa. xxxiii. 6.
   "The fear of the Lord is his treasure." Godliness is the gain of which
   he is covetous, 1 Tim. vi. 6. Hypocrites long for discoveries, more for
   the present comfort of the discovery, and the high manifestation of
   God's love in it, than for any sanctifying influence of it. But neither
   a longing after great discoveries, or after great tastes of the love of
   God, nor longing to be in heaven, nor longing to die, are in any
   measure so distinguishing marks of true saints, as longing after a more
   holy heart, and living a more holy life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [519] "It is usual to see a false heart most diligent in seeking the
   Lord, when he has been worst, and most careless when it is best. Hence
   many at first conversion, sought the Lord earnestly: afterwards
   affections and endeavours die; that now they are good as the word can
   make them.--An hypocrite's last end is to satisfy himself: hence he has
   enough. A saint's is to satisfy Christ: hence he never has enough."
   Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 157. Many a man, it may be, may say, I
   have nothing in myself, and all is in Christ; and comfort himself
   there; and so falls asleep. Hands off! and touch not this ark, lest the
   Lord slay thee: a Christ of clouts would serve your turn as well."
   Ibid. p. 71. "An hypocrite's light goes out, and grows not. Hence many
   ancient slanders take all their comfort from their first work, and
   droop when in old age." Ibid. p. 77. And p. 93, 94. Mr. Shepard,
   mentioning the characters of those that have a dead hope, says, "They
   that content themselves with any measure of holiness and grace, they
   look not for Christ's coming and company. For saints that do look for
   him, though they have not that holiness and grace they would have, yet
   they rest not satisfied with any measure; 1 John iii. 3. "He that hath
   this hope, purifieth himself as he is pure."--That saints content not
   themselves with any dressings, until made glorious, and so fit for
   fellowship with that spouse.--When a man leaves not, until he gets such
   a measure of faith and grace, and now when he has got this, contents
   himself with this, as a good sign that he shall be saved, he looks not
   for Christ. Or when men are heavily laden with sin; then close with
   Christ; and then are comforted, sealed, and have joy that fills them;
   and now the work is done. --And when men shall not content themselves
   with any measure; but wish they had more, if grace would grow, while
   they tell clocks and sit idle; and so God must do all: but do not purge
   themselves, and make work of it." Again, p. 109. "There is never a
   hypocrite living, but closeth with Christ for his own ends: for he
   cannot work beyond his principle. Now when men have served their own
   turns out of another man, away they go, and keep that which they have.
   An hypocrite closeth with Christ, as a man with a rich shop; he will
   not be at cost to buy all the shop, but so much as serves his turn.
   Commonly men in horror, seek so much of Christ as will ease them; and
   hence profess, and hence seek for so much of Christ as will credit
   them; and hence their desires after Christ are soon satisfied.
   Appetitus finis est infinitus." Woe to thee that canst paint such a
   Christ in thy head, and receive such a Christ into thy heart, as must
   be a pander to your sloth. The Lord will revenge this wrong done to his
   glory, with greater sorrows than ever any felt: to make Christ not only
   meat and drink to feed, but clothes to cover your sloth--Why what can
   we do? what can we do?--Why as the first Adam conveys not only guilt,
   but power; so the second conveys both righteousness and strength."
   Ibid. p. 158. "When the Lord hath given some light and affection, and
   some comfort and some reformation, now a man grows full here. Saints do
   for God; and carnal hearts do something too; but a little fills them,
   and quiets them, and so damns them. And hence men at the first work
   upon them, are very diligent in the use of means; but after that, they
   be brought to neglect prayer, sleep out sermons, and to be careless,
   sapless, lifeless." Ibid. p. 210. "It is an argument of want of grace,
   when a man saith to himself, as the glutton said to his soul, "Take thy
   rest, for thou hast goods laid up for many years." So thou hast
   repentance and grace, and peace enough for many years: and hence the
   soul takes its rest, grows sluggish and negligent. Oh, if you die in
   this case, this night thy soul will be taken away to hell." Ibid. p.
   227.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XII.

   Gracious and holy affections have their exercise and fruit in christian
   practice.

   I mean, they have that influence and power upon him who is the subject
   of them, that they cause that a practice, which is universally
   conformed to, and directed by christian rules, should be the practice
   and business of his life.

   This implies three things; 1. That his behaviour or practice in the
   world, be universally conformed to and directed by christian rules. 2.
   That he makes a business of such a holy practice above all things; that
   it be a business which he is chiefly engaged in, and devoted to, and
   pursues with highest earnestness and diligence; so that he may be said
   to make this practice of religion eminently his work and
   business.--And, 3. That he persists in it to the end of life: so that
   it may be said, not only to be his business at certain seasons, the
   business of Sabbath-days, or certain extraordinary times, or the
   business of a month, or a year, or of seven years, or his business
   under certain circumstances; but the business of his life; it being
   that business which he perseveres in through all changes, and under all
   trials, as long as he lives. The necessity of each of these, in all
   true Christians, is most clearly and fully taught in the word of God.

   1. It is necessary that men should be universally obedient: [520] 1
   John iii. 3,. &c. "Every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth
   himself, even as he is pure.--And ye know that he was manifested to
   take away our sins; and in him is no sin. Whosoever abideth in him,
   sinneth not: whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, neither known
   him.--He that doth righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
   righteous: he that committeth sin, is of the devil." 1 John v. 18.
   Chap. v. 18. "We know that whosoever is born of God, sinneth not, but
   he that is begotten of God, keepeth himself, and that wicked one
   toucheth him not." John xv. 14. "Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever
   I command you." James ii. 10. "Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and
   yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." 1 Cor. vi. 9. "Know ye
   not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
   deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, &c. shall inherit the
   kingdom of God." Gal. v. 19, 20. "Now the works of the flesh are
   manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
   lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,
   wrath, strife, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such
   like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
   past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
   God." Which is as much as to say, they that do any sort of wickedness.
   Job xxxi. 3-7. "Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange
   punishment to the workers of iniquity? Doth not he see my ways, and
   count all my steps? Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may
   know mine integrity. If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine
   heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to my
   hands," &c. Ezek. xxxiii. 15. "If he walk in the statutes of life,
   without committing iniquity, he shall surely live." "If one member only
   be corrupt, and we do not cut it off, it will carry the whole body to
   hell,". Matt. v. 29, 30. Saul was commanded to slay all God's enemies,
   the Amalekites; and he slew all but Agag, and the saving him alive
   proved his ruin. Caleb and Joshua entered into God's promised rest,
   because they wholly followed the Lord, (Numb. xiv. 24. and Num. xxxii.
   11, 12. xxxii. 11, 12. Deut. i. 36. Josh. xiv. 6, 8, 9, 14.) Naaman's
   hypocrisy appeared in that--however he seemed to be greatly affected
   with gratitude to God for healing his leprosy, and engaged to serve
   him, yet--in one thing he desired to be excused. And Herod, though he
   feared John, observed him, heard him gladly, and did many things; yet
   was condemned, in that in one thing he would not hearken to him, even
   in parting with his beloved Herodias. So that it is necessary that men
   should part with their dearest iniquities, which are as their right
   hand and right eyes; sins that most easily beset them, and to which
   they are most exposed by their natural inclinations, evil customs, or
   particular circumstances, as well as others. As Joseph would not make
   known himself to his brethren who had sold him, until Benjamin the
   beloved child of the family was delivered up; no more will Christ
   reveal his love to us, until we part with our dearest lusts, and until
   we are brought to comply with the most difficult duties, and those to
   which we have the greatest aversion.

   And it is of importance to observe, that in order to a man's being
   universally obedient, his obedience must not only consist in negatives,
   or in universally avoiding wicked practices; but he must also be
   universal in the positives of religion. Sins of omission are as much
   breaches of God's commands, as sins of commission. Christ, in Matt.
   xxv. represents those on the left hand, as being condemned and cursed
   to everlasting fire, for sins of omission, I was an hungred, and ye
   save me no meat, &c. A man therefore cannot be said to be universally
   obedient, and of a christian conversation, only because he is no thief,
   oppressor, fraudulent person, drunkard, tavern-haunter, whore-master,
   rioter, night-walker, nor unclean, profane in his language, slanderer,
   liar, furious, malicious, nor reviler. He is falsely said to be of a
   conversation becoming the gospel, who goes thus far, and no farther;
   but, in order to this it is necessary that he should also be of a
   serious, religious, devout, humble, meek, forgiving, peaceful,
   respectful, condescending, benevolent, merciful, charitable, and
   beneficent walk and conversation. Without such things as these, he does
   not obey the laws of Christ, laws that he and his apostles abundantly
   insist on, as of greatest importance and necessity.

   2. In order to men's being true Christians, it is necessary that they
   prosecute the business of religion, and the service of God, with great
   earnestness and diligence, as the work to which they devote themselves,
   and make the main business of their lives. All Christ's peculiar
   people, not only do good works, but are zealous of good works, Tit. ii.
   14. No man can do the service of two masters at once. They who are
   God's true servants, give up themselves to his service, and make it as
   it were their whole work, therein employing their whole hearts, and the
   chief of their strength; Phil. iii. 13. "This one thing I do."
   Christians in their effectual calling, are not called to idleness, but
   to labour in God's vineyard, and spend their day in doing a great and
   laborious service. All true Christians comply with this call, (as is
   implied in its being an effectual call,) and do the work of Christians;
   which is every where in the New Testament compared to those exercises,
   wherein men are wont to exert their strength with the greatest
   earnestness, as running, wrestling, fighting. All true Christians are
   good and faithful soldiers of Jesus Christ, and fight the good fight of
   faith: for none but those who do so, ever lay hold on eternal life.
   Those who fight at those who beat the air, never win the crown of
   victory. They that run in a race, run all; but one wins the prize: and
   they that are slack and negligent in their course, do not so run, as
   that they may obtain. The kingdom of heaven is not to be taken but by
   violence. Without earnestness there is no getting along in that narrow
   way that leads to life; and so no arriving at that state of glorious
   life and happiness to which it leads. Without earnest labour, there is
   no ascending the steep and high hill of Zion; and so no arriving at the
   heavenly city on the top of it. Without a constant laboriousness, there
   is no stemming the swift stream in which we swim, so as ever to come to
   that fountain of water of life, that is at the head of it. There is
   need that we should watch and pray always, in order to our escaping
   those dreadful things that are coming on the ungodly, and our being
   counted worthy to stand before the Son of man. There is need of our
   putting on the whole armour of God, and doing all to stand, in order to
   our avoiding a total overthrow, and being utterly destroyed by the
   fiery darts of the devil. There is need that we should forget the
   things that are behind, and be reaching forth to the things that are
   before, and pressing towards the mark, for the prize of the high
   calling of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord, in order to our obtaining
   that prize. Slothful-ness in the service of God, in his professed
   servants, is as damning as open rebellion: for the slothful servant is
   a wicked servant, and shall be cast into outer darkness, among God's
   open enemies. Matt. xxv. 26, 30. They that are slothful, are not
   followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises;
   Heb. vi. 11, 12. "And we desire that every one of you do show the same
   diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end: that ye be not
   slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit
   the promises." And all they who follow that cloud of witnesses who are
   gone before to heaven, do lay aside every weight, and the sin that
   easily besets them, and run with patience the race that is set before
   them, Heb. xii. 1. That true faith by which persons rely on the
   righteousness of Christ and the work he hath done for them, and truly
   feed and live upon him, is evermore accompanied with a spirit of
   earnestness in the christian work and course. Which was typified of
   old, by the manner of the children of Israel's feeding on the paschal
   lamb; Exod. xii. 11. "And thus shall ye eat it, with your loins girded,
   your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand: and ye shall eat
   it in haste; it is the Lord's passover."

   3. Every true Christian perseveres in this way of universal obedience,
   diligent and earnest service of God, through all the various kinds of
   trials that he meets with, to the end of life. That all true saints,
   all who obtain eternal life, do thus persevere in the practice of
   religion, and the service of God, is a doctrine so abundantly taught in
   the Scripture, that particularly to rehearse all the texts which imply
   it would be endless. I shall content myself with referring to some in
   the margin. [521]

   But that in persevering obedience, which is chiefly insisted on in the
   Scripture, as a special note of the truth of grace, is the continuance
   of professors in the practice of their duty, and being stedfast in a
   holy walk, through the various trials that they meet with.

   By trials here I mean, those things which a professor meets with in his
   course, that especially render his continuance in duty, and
   faithfulness to God, difficult to nature. These things are called in
   Scripture by the name of trials, or temptations, which are words of the
   same signification. These are of various kinds: there are many things
   that render continuance in the way of duty difficult, by their tendency
   to cherish and foment, or to stir up and provoke, lusts and
   corruptions. Many things make it hard to continue in the way of duty,
   by their being of an alluring nature, and having a tendency to entice
   persons to sin; or by their tendency to take off restraints, and
   embolden them in iniquity. Other things are trials of the soundness and
   stedfastness of professors, by their tendency to make their duty appear
   terrible to them, and so to drive them from it: such as the sufferings
   to which their duty will expose them; pain, ill-will, contempt, and
   reproach, or loss of outward possessions and comforts. If persons,
   after they have made a profession of religion, live any considerable
   time in this world, which is so full of changes, and so full of evil,
   it cannot be otherwise, than that they should meet with many trials of
   their sincerity and stedfastness. And besides, it is God's providential
   manner, to bring trials on his professing friends and servants
   designedly, that he may manifest them; and may exhibit sufficient
   matter of conviction of the state in which they are to their own
   consciences; and oftentimes, to the world. This appears by innumerable
   scriptures; some are referred to in the margin. [522]

   True saints may be guilty of some kinds and degrees of backsliding, may
   be foiled by particular temptations, and fell into sin, yea, great
   sins: but they can never fall away so as to grow weary of religion and
   the service of God, and habitually to dislike and neglect it, either on
   its own account, or on account of the difficulties that attend it; as
   is evident by Gal. vi. 9. Rom. ii. 7. Heb. x. 36. Isa. xliii. 22. Mal.
   i. 13. They can never backslide so as to continue no longer in a way of
   universal obedience; or so, that it shall cease to be their manner to
   observe all the rules of Christianity, and do all duties required, even
   the most difficult, and in the most difficult circumstances. [523] This
   is abundantly manifest by the things observed already. Nor can they
   ever fall away, so as habitually to be more engaged in other things
   than in the business of religion: or so that it should become their way
   and manner to serve something else more than God; or so as statedly to
   cease to serve God, with such earnestness and diligence, as still to be
   habitually devoted and given up to the business of religion; unless
   those words of Christ can fall to the ground, Ye cannot serve two
   masters; and those of the apostle, He that will be a friend of the
   world, is the enemy of God; and unless a saint can change his God, and
   yet be a true saint. Nor can a true saint ever fall away so, that
   ordinarily there shall be no remarkable difference in his walk and
   behaviour since his conversion, from what was before. They who are
   truly converted are new men, new creatures; new, not only within, but
   without; they are sanctified throughout, in spirit, soul, and body; old
   things are passed away, all things are become new. They have new
   hearts, new eyes, new ears, new tongues, new hands, new feet; i. e. a
   new conversation and practice; they walk in newness of life, and
   continue to do so to the end of life. And they that (all away, show
   visibly that they never were risen with Christ. [524] And especially
   when men's opinion of their being converted, and so in a safe estate,
   is the very cause of their failure, it is a most evident sign of their
   hypocrisy. [525] And this is the case, whether their falling away be
   into their former sins, or into some new kind of wickedness, having the
   corruption of nature only turned into a new channel, instead of its
   being mortified. As when persons that think themselves converted,
   though they do not return to former profaneness and lewdness; yet from
   the high opinion they have of their experiences, graces, and
   privileges, gradually settle more and more in a self-righteous and
   spiritually proud temper of mind, and in such a manner of behaviour and
   conversation, as naturally arises therefrom. When it is thus with men,
   however far they may seem to be from their former evil practices, this
   alone is enough to condemn them, and may render their last state far
   worse than the first. For this seems to be the very case of the Jews of
   that generation of whom Christ speaks, Matt. xii. 43-45. They had been
   awakened by John the Baptist's preaching, and brought to a reformation
   of their former licentious courses, whereby the unclean spirit was as
   it were turned out, and the house swept and garnished; yet being empty
   of God and of grace, full of themselves, and exalted in an exceeding
   high opinion of their own righteousness and eminent holiness, they
   became habituated to an answerably self-exalting behaviour. They
   changed the sins, of publicans and harlots, for those of the Pharisees;
   and in the issue, had seven devils worse than the first.

   Thus I have explained what exercise and fruit I mean, when I say, that
   gracious affections have their exercise and fruit in christian
   practice. The reason why gracious affections have such a tendency and
   effect, appears from many things that have already been observed in the
   preceding parts of this discourse.

   The reason of it appears particularly from this, that gracious
   affections arise from those operations and influences which are
   spiritual, and that the inward principle from whence they flow, is
   something divine, a communication of God, a participation of the divine
   nature, Christ living in the heart, the Holy Spirit dwelling there, in
   union with the faculties of the soul, as an internal vital principle,
   exerting his own proper nature in the exercise of those faculties. This
   is sufficient to show us why true grace should have such activity,
   power, and efficacy. No wonder that what is divine, is powerful and
   effectual; for it has omnipotence on its side. If God dwells in the
   heart, and be vitally united to it, he will show that he is a God by
   the efficacy of his operation. Christ is not in the heart of a saint as
   in a sepulchre, as a dead saviour that does nothing; but as in his
   temple, one that is alive from the dead. For in the heart where Christ
   savingly is, there he lives, and exerts himself after the power of that
   endless life, that he received at his resurrection. Thus every saint
   who is the subject of the benefit of Christ's sufferings, is made to
   know and experience the power, of his resurrection. The Spirit of
   Christ, which is the immediate spring of grace in the heart, is all
   life, all power all act; 2 Cor. ii. 4.--"In demonstration of the
   Spirit, and of power." 1 Thess. i. 5. "Our gospel came not unto you in
   word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost."--1 Cor. iv. 20.
   "The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power." Hence saving
   affections, though oftentimes they do not make so great a noise and
   show as others; yet have in them a secret solidity, life, and strength,
   whereby they take hold of and carry away the heart, leading it into a
   kind of captivity, 2 Cor. x. 5. gaining a full and stedfast
   determination of the will for God and holiness; Psal. cx. 3. "Thy
   people shall be willing in the day of thy power." And thus it is that
   holy affections have a governing power in the course of a man's life. A
   statue may look very much like a real man, and a beautiful man; yea it
   may have, in its appearance to the eye, the resemblance of a very
   lively, strong, and active man: but yet an inward principle of life and
   strength is wanting; and therefore it does nothing, it brings nothing
   to pass, there is no action or operation to answer the show. False
   discoveries and affections do not go deep enough, to reach and govern
   the spring of men's actions and practice. The seed in the stony ground
   had not deepness of earth; the root did not go deep enough to bring
   forth fruit. But gracious affections go to the very bottom of the
   heart, and take hold of the very inmost springs of life and activity.
   Herein chiefly appears the power of true godliness, viz. in its being
   effectual in practice. And the efficacy of godliness in this respect,
   is what the apostle respects, when he speaks of the power of godliness,
   2 Tim. iii. 5. for he there is particularly declaring, how some
   professors of religion would notoriously fail in the practice of if,
   and then the 5th verse observes, that in being thus of an unholy
   practice, they deny the power of godliness, though they have the form
   of it. Indeed the power of godliness is exerted in the first place
   within the soul; in the sensible, lively exercise of gracious
   affections there. Yet the principal evidence of this power is in those
   exercises of holy affections that are practical; conquering the will,
   the lusts, and corruptions of men, and carrying them on in the way of
   holiness, through all temptation, difficulty, and opposition.

   Again, the reason why gracious affections have their exercise and
   effect in christian practice, appears from this, that the first
   objective ground of gracious affections, is the transcendently
   excellent and amiable nature of divine things, as they are in
   themselves, and not any conceived relation they bear to self, or
   self-interest. This shows why holy affections will cause men to be holy
   in their practice universally. What makes men partial in religion is,
   that they seek themselves, and not God, in their religion, and close
   with religion, not for its own excellent nature, but only to serve a
   turn. He that closes with religion only to serve a turn, will close
   with no more of it than he imagines serves that turn: but he that
   closes with religion for its own excellent and lovely nature, closes
   with all that has that nature: he that embraces religion for its own
   sake, embraces the whole of religion. This also shows why gracious
   affections will cause men to practise religion perseveringly, and at
   all times. Religion may alter greatly in process of time, as to its
   consistence with men's private interest, in many respects; and
   therefore he that complies with it only from selfish views, is liable,
   in the changes of time, to forsake it: but the excellent nature of
   religion, as it is in itself, is invariable; it is always the same, at
   all times, and through all changes; it never alters in any respect.

   The reason why gracious affections issue in holy practice, also further
   appears from the kind of excellency which is the foundation of all holy
   affections, viz. their moral excellency, or the beauty of their
   holiness. No wonder that. a love to holiness, for holiness' sake,
   inclines persons to practise holiness, and to practise every thing that
   is holy. Seeing holiness is the main thing that excites, draws, and
   governs all gracious affections, no wonder that all such affections
   tend to holiness. That which men love, they desire to have, to be
   united to, and possessed of. That beauty which men delight in, they
   desire to be adorned with. Those acts which men delight in, they
   necessarily incline to do.

   And what has been observed of divine teaching and leading of the Spirit
   of God, shows the reason of this tendency of gracious affections to an
   universally holy practice. For as has been observed, the Spirit of God
   in this his divine teaching and leading, gives the soul a natural
   relish of the sweetness of that which is holy, and of every thing that
   is holy, so far as it comes in view, and excites a disrelish and
   disgust of every thing that is unholy.

   The same also appears from what has been observed of the nature of that
   spiritual knowledge, which is the foundation of all holy affection, as
   consisting in a sense and view of that excellency in divine things,
   which in supreme and transcendent. For hereby these things appear above
   all others, worthy to be chosen and adhered to. By the sight of the
   transcendent glory of Christ, true Christians see him worthy to be
   followed; and so are powerfully drawn after him; they see him worthy
   that they should forsake all for him. By the sight of that superlative
   amiableness, they are thoroughly disposed to be subject to him, and
   engaged to labour with earnestness and activity in his service, and
   made willing to go through all difficulties for his sake. And it is the
   discovery of this divine excellency of Christ, that makes them constant
   to him: for it makes so deep an impression upon their minds, that they
   cannot forget him; they will follow him whithersoever he goes, and it
   is in vain for any to endeavour to draw them away from him.

   The reason of this practical tendency and issue of gracious affections,
   further appears, from what has been observed of such affections being
   attended with a thorough conviction of the reality and certainty of
   divine things. No wonder that they who were never thoroughly convinced
   that there is any reality in religion, will never be at the labour and
   trouble of such an earnest, universal, and persevering practice of
   religion, through all difficulties, self-denials and sufferings, in a
   dependence on that, of which they are not convinced. But on the other
   hand, they who are thoroughly convinced of the certain truth of those
   things, must needs be governed by them in their practice; for the
   things revealed in the word of God are so great, and so infinitely more
   important than all others, that it is inconsistent with human nature,
   that a man should fully believe their truth, and not be influenced by
   them above all things in his practice.

   Again, the reason of this expression and effect of holy affections in
   the practice, appears from what has been observed of a change of
   nature, accompanying such affections. Without a change of nature, men's
   practice will not be thoroughly changed. Until the tree be made good,
   the fruit will not be good. Men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor
   figs of thistles. The swine may be washed, and appear clean for a
   little while, but yet, without a change of nature, he will still wallow
   in the mire. Nature is a more powerful principle of action, than any
   thing that opposes it: though it may be violently restrained for a
   while, it will finally overcome that which restrains it. It is like the
   stream of a river, it may be stopped a while with a dam, but if nothing
   be done to dry the fountain, it will not be slopped always; it will
   have a course, either in its old channel, or a new one. Nature is a
   thing more constant and permanent, than any of those things that are
   the foundation of carnal men's reformation and righteousness. When a
   natural man denies his lust, lives a strict, religious life, and seems
   humble, painful, and earnest in religion; it is not natural, it is all
   a force against nature; as when a stone is violently thrown upwards.
   But that force will he gradually spent; nature will remain in its full
   strength, and so prevails again, and the stone returns downwards. As
   long as corrupt nature is not mortified, but the principle left whole
   in a man, it is a vain thing to expect that it should not govern. But
   if the old nature be indeed mortified, and a new heavenly nature
   infused; then may it well be expected, that men will walk in newness of
   life, and continue to do so to the end of their days.

   The reason of this practical exercise and effect of holy affections,
   may also be partly seen, from what has been said of that spirit of
   humility, which attends them. Humility is that wherein a spirit of
   obedience much consists. A proud spirit is rebellious, but an humble
   spirit is a submissive, obediential spirit. We see among men, that the
   servant who is of a haughty spirit, is not apt in every thing to be
   submissive and obedient to the will of his master; but it is otherwise
   with the servant who is of a lowly spirit.

   That lamb-like, dove-like spirit, that has been spoken of, which
   accompanies all gracious affections, fulfils (as the apostle observes,
   Rom. xiii. 8, 9, 10. and Gal. v. 14.) all the duties of the second
   table of the law; wherein christian practice very much consists, and
   the external practice of Christianity.

   And the reason why gracious affections are attended with strict,
   universal, and constant obedience, further appears, from what has been
   observed of that tenderness of spirit, which accompanies the affections
   of true saints, causing in them so quick and lively a sense of pain,
   through the presence of sin, and such a dread of the appearance of
   evil.

   One great reason why the christian practice which flows from gracious
   affections, is universal, constant, and persevering, appears from what
   has been observed of those affections themselves from whence this
   practice flows, being universal and constant, in all kinds of holy
   exercises, and towards all objects, in all circumstances, and at all
   seasons, in a beautiful symmetry and proportion.

   And much of the reason why holy affections are expressed and manifested
   in such an earnestness, activity, engagedness, and perseverance in holy
   practice, appears from what has been observed, of the spiritual
   appetite and longing after further attainments in religion, which
   evermore attends true affection, and does not decay, but increases as
   those affections increase. Thus we see how the tendency of holy
   affections to such a christian practice as has been explained, appears
   from each of those characteristics of holy affection, before spoken of.

   And this point may be further illustrated and confirmed, if it be
   considered, that the Holy Scriptures abundantly place sincerity and
   soundness in religion, in making a full choice of God as our only Lord
   and portion, forsaking all for him, and in a full determination of the
   will for God and Christ, on counting the cost; in our hearts closing
   and complying with the religion of Jesus Christ, with all that belongs
   to it, embracing it with all its difficulties, as it were hating our
   dearest earthly enjoyments, and even our own lives, for Christ; giving
   up ourselves with all that we have, wholly, and for ever unto Christ,
   without keeping back any thing, or making any reserve. In one word,
   sincerity consists in the great duty of self-denial for Christ; or in
   denying, i. e. as it were disowning and renouncing, ourselves for him,
   making ourselves nothing that he may be all. See the texts to this
   purpose referred to in the margin. [526] Now surely having a heart to
   forsake all for Christ, tends to actually forsaking all for him, so far
   as there is occasion, and we have the trial. Having a heart to deny
   ourselves for Christ, tends to denying ourselves in deed, when Christ
   and self-interest stand in competition. A giving up of ourselves, with
   all that we have, in our hearts, without making any reserve there,
   tends to our behaving ourselves universally as his, as subject to his
   will, and devoted to his ends. Our hearts entirely closing with the
   religion of Jesus, with all that belongs to it, and as attended with
   all its difficulties, upon a deliberate counting of the cost, tends to
   an universal closing with the same in act and deed, and actually going
   through all the difficulties we meet with in the way of religion, and
   so holding out with patience and perseverance.

   The tendency of grace in the heart to holy practice, is very direct,
   and the connexion most natural, close, and necessary. True grace is not
   an inactive thing; there is nothing in heaven or earth of a more active
   nature; for it is life itself, the most active kind, even spiritual and
   divine life. It is no barren thing; there is nothing in the universe
   that in its nature has a greater tendency to fruit. Godliness in the
   heart has as direct a relation to practice, as a fountain has to a
   stream, or as the luminous nature of the sun has to beams sent forth,
   or as life has to breathing, or the beating of the pulse, or any other
   vital act; or as a habit or principle of action has to action: for it
   is the very nature and notion of grace, that it is a principle of holy
   action or practice. Regeneration, which is that work of God in which
   grace is infused, has a direct relation to practice; for it is the very
   end of it, with a view to which the whole work is wrought. All is
   calculated and framed, in this mighty and manifold change wrought in
   the soul, so as directly to tend to this end; Eph. ii. 10. "For we are
   his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works." Yea it is
   the very end of the redemption of Christ; Tit. ii. 14. "Who gave
   himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
   unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works." 2 Cor. v. 15.
   "He died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
   themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again." Heb. ix.
   14. "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
   Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
   dead works to serve the living God?" scripture passage=" Col. i. 21,
   22. "And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by
   wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled, in the body of his flesh
   through death, to present you holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in
   his sight." 1 Pet. i. 18. "For as much as ye know that ye were not
   redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
   conversation." Luke i. 74, 75. "That he would grant unto us, that we
   being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
   without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of
   our life." God often speaks of holy practice, as the end of that great
   typical redemption, the redemption from Egyptian bondage; as Exod. iv.
   23. "Let my son go, that he may serve me." (So chap. iv. 23. and vii.
   16. and viii. 1, 20. and ix. 1, 13. and x. 3.) And this is also
   declared to be the end of election; John xv. 16. "Ye have not chosen
   me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and
   bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain." Eph. i. 4.
   "According as he hath chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
   world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love."
   Chap. ii. 10. "Created unto good works, which God hath fore-ordained
   that we should walk in them." Holy practice is as much the end of all
   that God does about his saints, as fruit is the end of all the
   husbandman does about the growth of his field or vineyard: as the
   matter is often represented in Scripture; (Matt. iii. 10. chap. xiii.
   8, 23-30, 38. chap. xxi. 19, 33, 34. Luke xiii. 6. John xv. 1, 2, 4, 5,
   6, 8. 1 Cor. iii. 9. Heb. vi. 7, 8. Isa. v. 1-8. Cant. viii. 11, 12.
   Isa. xxvii. 2, 3.) [527] And therefore every thing in a true Christian
   is calculated to reach this end. This fruit of holy practice, is that
   to which every grace, every discovery, and every individual thing which
   belongs to christian experience, has a direct tendency. [528]

   The constant and indissoluble connexion there is between a christian
   principle and profession in the true saints, and the fruit of holy
   practice in their lives, was typified of old in the frame of the golden
   candlestick in the temple. It is beyond doubt that the golden
   candlestick, with its seven branches and seven lamps, was a type of the
   church of Christ. The Holy Ghost himself has been pleased to put that
   matter out of doubt, by representing his church by such a golden
   candlestick with seven lamps, in the fourth chapter of Zechariah, and
   representing the seven churches of Asia by seven golden candlesticks,
   in the first chapter of the Revelation. That golden candlestick in the
   temple was every where, throughout its whole frame, made with knops and
   flowers, Exod. xxv. 31., to the end, and chap. xxxvii. 17-24. The word
   translated knop, in the original signifies apple or pomegranate. There
   was a knop and a flower, a knop and a flower; wherever there was a
   flower, there was an apple or pomegranate with it; the flower and the
   fruit were constantly connected, without fail. The flower contained the
   principles of the fruit, and a beautiful promising appearance of it;
   and it never was a deceitful appearance; the principle or show of
   fruit, had evermore real fruit attending it, or succeeding it. So it is
   in the church of Christ: there is the gracious principle of fruit in
   the heart; and there is an amiable profession, signified by the open
   flowers of the candlestick; and there is answerable fruit, in holy
   practice, constantly attending this principle and profession. Every
   branch of the golden candlestick, thus composed of golden apples and
   flowers, was crowned with a burning, shining lamp on the top of it. For
   it is by this means that the saints shine as lights in the world, by
   making a fair and good profession of religion, and having their
   profession evermore joined with answerable fruit in practice: agreeable
   to that of our Saviour, Matt. v. 15, 16. "Neither do men light a
   candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it giveth
   light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before
   men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
   is in heaven." A fair and beautiful profession, and golden fruits
   accompanying one another, are the amiable ornaments of the true church
   of Christ. Therefore we find that apples and flowers were not only the
   ornaments of the candlestick in the temple, but of the temple itself,
   which is a type of the church; which the apostle tells us, is the
   temple of the living God. See 1 Kings vi. 18. "And the cedar of the
   house within was carved with knops, and open flowers." The ornaments
   and crown of the pillars, at the entrance of the temple, were of the
   same sort: they were lilies and pomegranates, or flowers and fruits,
   mixed together, 1 Kings vii. 18, 19. So it is with all those that are
   as pillars in the temple of God, who shall go no more out, or never be
   ejected as intruders; as it is with all true saints; Rev. iii. 12. "Him
   that overcometh, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
   shall go no more out."

   Much the same thing seems to be signified by the ornaments on the skirt
   of the ephod, the garment of Aaron the high priest; which were golden
   bells and pomegranates. That these skirts of Aaron's garment represent
   the church, or the saints, (that are as it were the garment of Christ,)
   is manifest; for they are evidently so spoken of, Psal. cxxxiii. 1, 2.
   "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
   together in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that
   ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
   skirts of his garments." That ephod of Aaron signified the same with
   the seamless coat of Christ our great High Priest. As Christ's coat had
   no seam, but was woven from the top throughout, so was the ephod, Exod.
   xxxix. 22. As God took care in his providence, that Christ's coat
   should not be rent; so God took special care that the ephod should not
   be rent; (Exod. xxviii. 32. and chap. xxxix. 23.) The golden bells on
   this ephod, by their precious matter and pleasant sound, well represent
   the good profession that the saints make; and the pomegranates, the
   fruit they bring forth. And as in the hem of the ephod, bells and
   pomegranates were constantly connected, as is once and again observed,
   there was "a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a
   pomegranate," (Exod. xxviii. 34. and chap. xxxix 26.) so it is in the
   true saints; their good profession and their good fruit, constantly
   accompany one another: the fruit they bring forth in life, evermore
   answers the pleasant sound of their profession.

   Again, the very same thing is represented by Christ, in his description
   of his spouse, Cant. vii. 2. "Thy belly is like an heap of wheat, set
   about with lilies." Here again are beautiful flowers, and good fruit,
   accompanying one another. The lilies were fair and beautiful flowers,
   and the wheat was good fruit.

   As this fruit of christian practice is evermore found in true saints,
   according as they have opportunity and trial, so it is found in them
   only; none but true Christians do live such an obedient life, so
   universally devoted to their duty, and given up to the business of a
   Christian, as has been explained. All unsanctified men are workers of
   iniquity: they are of their father the devil, and the lusts of their
   father they will do.--There is no hypocrite that will go through with
   the business of religion, will both begin and finish the tour. They
   will not endure the trials God is wont to bring on the professors of
   religion, but will turn aside to their crooked ways; they will not be
   thoroughly faithful to Christ in their practice, and follow him
   whithersoever he goes. Whatever lengths they may go in religion in some
   instances, though they may appear exceeding strict, and mightily
   engaged in the service of God for a season; yet they are servants to
   sin; the chains of their old task-masters are not broken. Their lusts
   yet have a reigning power in their hearts; and therefore to these
   masters they will bow down again. [529] Dan. xii. 10. "Many shall be
   purified, and made white, and tried: but the wicked will do wickedly:
   and none of the wicked shall understand." Isa. xxvi. 10. "Let favour be
   showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land
   of uprightness will he deal unjustly." Isa. xxxv. 8. "And an high-way
   shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness;
   the unclean shall not pass over it." Hos. xiv. 9. "The ways of the Lord
   are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall
   fell therein." Job xxvii. 8, 9, 10. "What is the hope of the
   hypocrite?--Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always
   call upon God?" An unsanctified man may hide his sin, and may in many
   things and for a season refrain from sin; but he will not be brought
   finally to renounce, and give it a bill of divorce: sin is too dear to
   him, for him to be willing for that; "Wickedness is sweet in his mouth:
   and therefore he hides it under his tongue; he spares it, and forsakes
   it not; but keeps it still within his mouth,". Job xx. 12, 13. Herein
   chiefly consists the straitness of the gate, and the narrowness of the
   way that leads to life; on account of which, carnal men will not go in
   thereat, viz. that it is a way of utterly denying and finally
   renouncing all ungodliness, and so a way of self-denial or
   self-renunciation.

   Many natural men, under the means used, and God's strivings with them,
   do by their sins as Pharaoh did by his pride and covetousness; these he
   gratified by their keeping the children of Israel in bondage, when God
   strove with him to let the people go. When God's hand pressed Pharaoh
   sore, and he was exercised with fears of God's future wrath, he
   entertained some thoughts of letting the people go, and promised he
   would do it: but from time to time he broke his promises, when he saw
   there was respite. When God filled Egypt with thunder and lightning,
   and the fire ran along the ground, then Pharaoh is brought to confess
   his sin with seeming humility, and to have a great resolution to let
   the people go, Exod. ix. 27, 28. "And Pharaoh sent, and called for
   Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the Lord
   is righteous, and I and my people are wicked: entreat the Lord (for it
   is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I
   will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer." So sinners are sometimes
   by thunders and lightnings, and great terrors of the law, brought to a
   seeming work of humiliation, and to an .appearance of parting with
   their sins; but are no more thoroughly brought to a disposition to
   dismiss them, than Pharaoh was to let the people go. Pharaoh in the
   struggle between his conscience and his lusts, was for contriving that
   God might be served, and he to enjoy his lusts, that were gratified by
   the slavery of the people. Moses insisted that Israel's God should be
   served: Pharaoh was willing to consent to that; but would have it done
   without his parting with the people; Go sacrifice to your God in the
   land," says he, .Exod. viii. 25". So, many sinners are for contriving
   to serve God, and enjoy their lusts too. Moses objected against
   complying with Pharaoh's proposal, because serving God, and yet
   continuing in Egypt under their task-masters, did not agree together,
   and were inconsistent. After this Pharaoh consented to let the people
   go, provided they would not go far away: he was not willing to part
   with them finally, and therefore would have them within reach. So do
   many hypocrites with respect to their sins. Afterwards Pharaoh
   consented to let the men go, if they would leave the women and
   children, Exod. x. 8-10. And then after that, when God's hand was yet
   harder upon him, he consented that they should go, even women and
   children, as well as men, provided they would leave their cattle
   behind: but he was not willing to let them go, and all that they had,
   Exod. x. 24. So it oftentimes is with sinners; they are willing to part
   with some of their sins, but not all; they are brought to part with the
   more gross acts of sin, but not to part with their lusts, in lesser
   indulgencies of them. Whereas we must part with all our sins, little
   and great; and all that belongs to them, men, women, children, and
   cattle: they must all be let go, with their young, and with their old,
   with their sons, and with their daughters, with their flocks, and with
   their herds, there must not be an hoof left behind: as Moses told
   Pharaoh, with respect to the children of Israel. At last, when it came
   to extremity, Pharaoh consented to let the people all go, and all that
   they had; but he was not stedfastly of that mind; he soon repented, and
   pursued after them again. The reason was, that those lusts of pride and
   covetousness, which were gratified by Pharaoh's dominion over the
   people, and the gains of their service, were never really mortified in
   him, but only violently restrained. And thus, he being guilty of
   backsliding, after his seeming compliance with God s commands, was
   destroyed without remedy. Thus there may be a forcing parting with ways
   of disobedience to the commands of God, that may seem to be universal,
   as to what appears for a little season: but because it is a mere force,
   without the mortification of the inward principle of sin, they will not
   persevere in it; but will return as the dog to his vomit; and so bring
   on themselves dreadful and remediless destruction. There were many
   false disciples in Christ's time, that followed him for a while; but
   none of them followed him to the end; some on one occasion, and some on
   another, went back and walked no more with him. [530]

   From what has been said, it is manifest, that christian practice, or a
   holy life, is a great and distinguishing sign of true and saving grace.
   But I may go further, and assert, that it is the chief of all the signs
   of grace, both as an evidence of the sincerity of professors unto
   others, and also to their own consciences.

   But then it is necessary that this be rightly taken, and that it be
   well understood and observed, in what sense and manner christian
   practice is the greatest sign of grace. Therefore, to set this matter
   in a clear light, I will endeavour particularly and distinctly to
   prove, that christian practice is the principal sign by which
   Christians are to judge, both of their own and others' sincerity of
   godliness; withal observing some things that are needful to be
   particularly noted, in order to a right understanding of this matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [520] "He that pretends to godliness, and turns aside to crooked ways,
   is an hypocrite: for those that are really godly, do live in a way of
   obedience; Psal. cxix. 1, 2, 3. "Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
   that walk in the law of the Lord.--They also do iniquity." Luke i. 6.
   "They were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments
   of the Lord blameless." But such as live in ways of sin, are
   dissemblers: for all such will be rejected in the day of judgment;
   Matth. vii. 23. "Depart from me ye that work iniquity". The like we
   have Luke xiii. 27. If men live in a way of disobedience, they do not
   love God; for love will make men keep God's commandments: 1 John v. 3.
   "Herein is love, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments
   are not grievous." If men live in a way of disobedience, they have not
   a spirit of faith; for faith sanctifies men; Acts xxvi. 18. "Sanctified
   by faith that is in me." If men live in a way of disobedience, they are
   not Christ's sheep; for his sheep hear his voice; John x. 27. Men that
   live in a way of disobedience are not born of God; 1 John iii. 9. "He
   that is born of God, sinneth not" Men that live in a way of
   disobedience are the servants of sin; John viii. 34. "He that
   committeth sin, is the servant of sin."--A course of external sin is an
   evidence of hypocrisy; whether it be a sin of omission or
   commission.--If men live in the neglect of known duties, or in the
   practice of known evils, that will be their condemnation; let the sin
   be what it will; let it be profaneness, uncleanness, lying, or
   injustice.--If men allow themselves in malice, envy, wanton thoughts,
   profane thoughts, that will condemn them; though those corruptions do
   not break out in any scandalous way. These thoughts are an evidence of
   a rotten heart; Tit. iii. 3. "We ourselves were sometimes foolish,
   disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in
   malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another." If a man allows
   himself, though he thinks he doth not, in malice and envy, he is an
   hypocrite: though his conscience disallows it, yet if his heart allows
   it, he is no saint-- Some make pretences to godliness, whereby they do
   not only deceive others, but (which is a great deal worse) deceive
   themselves also: but this will condemn them, that they live in a course
   of sin. and so must go with ungodly men;. Ps. xxv. 5. "As for such as
   turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord will lead them forth with
   the workers of iniquity." If there be a great change in a man's
   carriage, and he be reformed in several particulars, yet if there be
   one evil way, the man is an ungodly man; where there is piety there is
   universal obedience. A man may have great infirmities, yet be a godly
   man. So it was with Lot, David, and Peter: but if he lives in a way of
   sin, he does not render his godliness only suspicious, but it is full
   evidence against him. Men that are godly have respect to all God's
   commandments, Psal. cxix. 6. There be a great many commands, and if
   there be one of them that a man has not respect unto, he will be put to
   shame another day. If a man lives in one evil way. he is not subject to
   God's authority: but then he lives in rebellion; and that will take off
   all his pleas, and at once cut off all his pretences; and he will be
   condemned in the day of judgment.--One way of sin is exception enough
   against the man's salvation. Though the sin that he lives in be but
   small: such persons will not be guilty of perjury. stealing,
   drunkenness, fornication; they look upon them to be heinous things, and
   they are afraid of them; but they do not much matter it, if they
   oppress a little in a bargain, if they commend a thing too much when
   they are about to sell it, if they break a promise, if they spend the
   Sabbath unprofitably, if they neglect secret prayer, if they talk
   rudely and reproach others; they think these are but small things, if
   they can keep clear of great transgressions, they hope that God will
   not insist upon small things.--But indeed all the commands of God are
   established by divine authority: a small shot may kill a man, as well
   as a cannon bullet: a small leak may sink a ship. If a man lives in
   small sins, that shows he has no love to God, no sincere care to please
   and honour God. Little sins are of a damning nature, as well as great:
   if they do not deserve so much punishment as greater. yet they do
   deserve damnation. There is contempt of God in all sins; Matt. v. 19.
   "He that, shall break one of the least of these commands, and shall
   teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of God." Prov.
   xix. 16. "He that keepeth the commandment, keepeth his own soul; but he
   that despiseth his way, shall die." If a man says, this is a great
   command, and so lays weight on it and another is a little commandment,
   and so does not regard it, but will allow himself to break it, he is in
   a perishing condition."--Stoddard's Way to Know Sincerity and
   Hypocrisy.

   [521] Deut. v. 29. Deut. xxxii. 18, 19, 20. 1 Chron. xxviii. 9. Psal.
   lxxviii. 7, 8. 10, 11, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 56, &c. Psal. cvi. 3, 12-15.
   Psal. cxxv. 4, 5. Prov. xxvi. 11. Isa. lxiv. 5. Jer. xvii. 13. Ezek.
   iii. 20. and xviii. 24. and xxxiii. 12, 13. Matt. x. 22. and xiii. 4-8.
   with verses 19-23. and xxv. 8. and xxiv. 12, 13. Luke ix. 62. and xii.
   35. &c. and xxii. 28. and xvii. 32. John viii 30, 31. and xv. 6, 7, 8,
   10, 16. Rom. ii. 7. and xi. 22. Col. i. 22, 23. Heb. iii. 6, 12,14. and
   11,12. and x 35, &c. James i. 25. Rev. ii. 13, 26. and Rev. 10. 1 Tim.
   ii. 15. 2 Tim. iv. 4-8.

   [522] Gen. xxii. 1. Exod. xv. 25. and xvi. 4. Deut viii. 2, 15, 16. and
   xiii. 3. Jude. ii 22. and iii. 1, 4. Job xxiii. 10. Psal. lxvi. 10. 11.
   Ezek. iii. 20. Dan. xii. 10. Zech. xiii. 9. Matt. viii. 19, 20. and
   xviii. 21, 22. Luke i. 35. 1 Cor. xi. 19. 2 Cor. viii. 8. Jam. i. 12. 1
   Pet. iv. 12. 1 John ii.19. Heb. xi. 17. Rev. iii. 10.

   [523] "One way of sin is exception enough against men's salvation,
   though their temptations be great. Some persons delight in iniquity;
   they take pleasure in rudeness, and intemperate practices: but there be
   others, that do not delight in sin; when they can handsomely avoid it,
   they do not choose it; except they be under some great necessity, they
   will not do it They are afraid to sin; they think it is dangerous, and
   have some care to avoid it: but sometimes they force themselves to sin;
   they are reduced to difficulties, and cannot tell how well to avoid it:
   it is a dangerous thing not to do it. If Naaman do not bow himself in
   the house of Rimmon, the king will be in a rage with him, take away his
   office, it may be take away his life, and so he complies; 2 Kings v.
   18.--So Jeroboam forced himself to set up the calves at Dan and Bethel:
   he thought that if the people went up to Jerusalem to worship, they
   would return to Rehoboam, and kill him; therefore he must think of some
   expedient to deliver himself in this strait; 1 Kings xii. 27, 28. He
   was driven by appearing necessity to take this wicked course.-- So the
   stony-ground hearers were willing to retain the profession of the true
   religion; but the case was such, that they thought they could not well
   do it; Matt. xiii. 21. "When tribulation or persecution ariseth because
   of the word, by and by he is offended." So Achan and Gehazi had
   singular opportunities to get an estate; if they live twenty years they
   are not like to have such an advantage; and they force themselves to
   borrow a point, and break the law of God. They lay a necessity on
   estate, and liberty, and life, but not upon obedience. If a man be
   willing to serve God in ordinary cases, but excuse himself when there
   be great difficulties, he is not godly. It is a small matter to serve
   God when men have no temptation; but Lot was holy in Sodom, Noah was
   righteous in the old world. Temptations try men, but they do not force
   men to sin: and grace will establish the heart in a day of
   temptation.--They are blessed that do endure temptation, James i. 12.
   But they are cursed that fall away in a day of temptation." Stoddard's
   Way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy.

   [524] "Hence we learn what verdict to pass and give in concerning those
   men that decay and fall off from the Lord. They never had oil in the
   vessel; never had a dram of grace in their heart. Thus 1 John ii. 19.
   "If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us."
   It seems they were such men, which were so eminent and excellent, as
   that there were no brands nor marks upon them, to give notice to the
   churches, that they were marked out for apostacy; but were only
   discovered to be unsound, by their apostacy; and this was argument good
   enough." Shepard's Parable. Part I. p. 226.

   [525] "When a man's rising is the cause of his fall, or seals a man up
   in his fall, or at least the cause through his corruption. Ex. Gr. Time
   was, a man lived a loose, careless, carnal life; by the ministry of
   some word, or reading of some book, or speaking with some friend, he
   comes to be convinced of his misery and woful condition, and sees no
   good nor grace in himself; he hath been even hitherto deceived: at last
   he comes to get some light, some taste, some sorrows, some heart to use
   the means, some comfort and mercy, and hope of life: and when it is
   thus with him, now he falls; he grows full and falls; and this rising
   is the cause of his fall; his light is darkness and death to him; and
   grows to a form of knowledge; his rising makes him fall to formality,
   and then to profaneness; and so his tasting satisfies him; his sorrows
   empty his heart of sorrows for sin; and his sorrows for his falls
   harden his heart in his falls; and all the means of recovering him
   harden him.--Look as it is in diseases; if the physic and meat turn to
   be poison, then there is no hope of recovery; a man is sick to death
   now. The saint's little measure makes him forget what is behind."
   Shepard's Parable. Part I. p. 226.

   [526] Matt v. 29, 30. Chap. vi. 24. Chap. viii. 19-22. Chap. iv. 18-22.
   Chap. x. 37, 38, 39. Chap. xiii. 44. 45. 46. Chap. xvi. 24. 25, 26.
   Chap. xviii. 8, 9. Chap. xix. 21, 27. 28, 29. Luke v. 27, 28. Chap. x.
   42. Chap. xii. 33, 34. Chap. xiv. 16-20, 25-33. Chap. xvi. 13. Acts iv.
   34, 35. with Chap. v. 1-11. Rom. vi. 3-8. Gal. ii. 20. Chap. vi. 14.
   Philip. iii. 7-10. Jam. i. 8. 9.10. Chap. iv. 4. 1 John ii. 15. Rev.
   xiv. 4. Gen. xii. 1-4. with Heb. xi. 8, 9, 10. Gen. xxii. 12. and Heb.
   xi. 17. Chap. xi. 24-27. Deut xiii. 6. and Chap. xxxiii. 9. Ruth. i.
   6-16. with Psal. xlv. 10, 11. and 2 Sam. xv. 19-22. Psal. lxxxiii. 25.
   Psal. xvi. 5, 6. Lam. iii. 24. Jer. x. 16.

   [527] "To profess to know much is easy; but to bring your affections
   into subjection, to wrestle with lusts, to cross your wills and
   yourselves, upon every occasion, this is hard. The Lord looketh that in
   our lives we should be serviceable to him, and useful to men. That
   which is within, the Lord and our brethren are never the better for it:
   but the outward obedience, flowing thence, glorifieth God, and does
   good to men. The Lord will have this done. What else is the end of our
   planting and watering, but that the trees may be filled with sap? And
   what is the end of that sap, but that the trees may bring forth fruit?
   What careth the husbandman for leaves and barren trees?"--Dr. Preston
   of the Church's Carriage.

   [528] "What is the end of every grace, but to mollify the heart, and
   make it pliable to some command or other? Look, how many commandments,
   so many graces there are in virtue and efficacy, although not so many
   several names are given them. The end of every such grace is to make us
   obedient; as the end of temperance is chastity, to bow the heart to
   these commands. Be ye sober, &c. not in chambering and wantonness, &c.
   When the Lord commandeth us not to be angry with our brother, the end
   of meekness, and why the Lord infuseth it, is to keep us from unadvised
   rash anger. So faith, the end of it is to take Jesus Christ, to make us
   obedient to the command of the gospel, which commands us to believe in
   him. So as all graces do join together, but to frame and fashion the
   soul to obedience; then so much obedience as is in your lives, so much
   grace in your hearts, and no more. Therefore ask your hearts, how
   subject you are to the Lord in your lives? It was the counsel that
   Francis Spira gave to them about him, saith he, Learn all of me to take
   heed of severing faith and obedience: I taught justification by faith,
   but neglected obedience; and therefore is this befallen me. I have
   known some godly men, whose comfort on their death-beds hath been not
   from the inward acts of their minds, which apart considered, might be
   subject to misapprehensions, but from the course of obedience in their
   lives, issuing thence. Let Christians look to it, that in all their
   conversation, as they stand in every relation, as scholars, tradesmen,
   husbands, wives, look to this, that when they come to die, they have
   been subject in all things. This will yield comfort." Dr. Preston's
   Church's Carriage.

   [529] "No unregenerate man, though he go never so far, let him do never
   so much, but he lives in some one sin or other, secret or open, little
   or great Judas went far, but he was covetous: Herod went far, but he
   loved his Herodias. Every dog hath his kennel; every swine hath his
   swill; and every wicked man his lust." Shepard's Sincere Convert, 1st
   edition, p. 96. "There is never an unsound heart in the world, but as
   they say of witches, they have some familiar that sucks them, so they
   have some lust that is beloved of them, some beloved there is they have
   given a promise to never to forsake." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 15.
   "No man that is married to the law, but his fig-leaves cover some
   nakedness. All his duties ever brood some lust. There is some one sin
   or other the man lives in; which either the Lord discovers, and he will
   not part with, as the young; man; or else is so spiritual, he cannot
   see all his life-time. Read through the strictest of all, and see this,
   Matt xxiii. Painted sepulchres. Paul that was blameless, yet (Eph. ii.
   3. Tit. iii. 3.) served divers lusts and pleasures. And the reason is,
   the law is not the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 8. 9. which
   breaks off from every sin. There is no law that can give life. Gal.
   iii. 21. and hence many men have strong resolutions, and break all
   again. Hence men sin and sorrow, and pray again, and then go with more
   ease in their sin. Examine thyself; is there any living lust with thy
   righteousness? It is sure, it is a righteousness thou art married to,
   and never wert yet matched to Christ." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p.
   19, 20. "No hypocrite, though he closeth with Christ, and for a time
   grow up in knowledge of and communion with Christ, but he hath at that
   time hidden lusts and thorns that overgrow his growings, and choke all
   at last, and in conclusion meditates a league between Christ and his
   lusts, and seeks to reconcile them together." Shepard's Parable, Part
   I. p. 109. "-- Their faith is in such a party, as never was yet
   thoroughly rent from sin. And here is the great wound of the most
   cunning hypocrites living. Let a man be cast down as low as hell with
   sorrow, and lie under chains, quaking; in apprehension of terror to
   come; let a man then be raised up to heaven in joy, not able to live:
   let a man reform and shine like an earthly angel: yet if not rent from
   lust, that either you did never see it, or if so, you have not followed
   the Lord to remove it, but proud, dogged, worldly, sluggish still,
   false in your dealings, cunning in your tradings, devils in your
   families, images in your churches; you are objects of pity now, and
   shall be of terror at the great day. For where sin remains in power, it
   will bring faith, and Christ, and joy into bondage and service of
   itself." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 125. "Methinks it is with the
   best hypocrites, as it is with divers old merchants: they prize and
   desire the gain of merchandise; but to be at the trouble to prepare the
   ship, to put themselves upon the hazard and dangers of the ship, to go
   and fetch the treasure that they prize, this they will never do. So
   many prize and desire earnestly the treasures of heaven; but to be at
   the trouble of a heaven-voyage to fetch this treasure, to pass through
   the valley of Baca, tears, temptations, the powers of darkness, the
   breaches. opposition, and contradictions of a sinful unbelieving heart,
   good and evil report, to pass from one depth and wave to another, this
   the best hypocrite fails in; and hence loses all at last. And this I
   conceive to be one of the great differences between the strong desires
   and esteems of hypocrites and saints.-- Look, as it is with men that
   have two trades, or two shops; one is as much as ever they can follow
   or tend: they are forced at last to put off one, and they must neglect
   one; so here. That spirit of sloth and slumber, which the Lord ever
   leaves the best hypocrite to, so mightily oppresseth all their senses,
   that they cannot use effectually all means to accomplish their ends.
   And hence a man desires the end, but has it not; Prov. xiii. 4."
   Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 150, 151. "Read through all the
   Scripture; constantly, never any hypocrites but they had this brand.
   Matt vii. 23. you workers of iniquity. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p.
   195. "A carnal man may hit upon some good duty that God commands, and
   refrain from some sin that God forbids; but to go through, he cannot:
   to take up reproach and disgrace, to lose his credit, to forsake his
   friends, to lose honour, and riches, and pleasures; this he will not
   do, until he be humbled." Dr. Preston on Paul's Conversion. "So it is
   with men, because they want humiliation. Therefore their profession and
   they do not continue, but part willingly one from another. They will do
   some things, but not all things: and they will forego some things, but
   not all things.--And therefore our Saviour saith, Luke xiv. "He that
   will not forsake all for my sake, is not worthy of me." He is not worth
   the saying, that prizes not me above all things whatsoever. And a man
   will not prize Christ, nor forsake all things for Christ, until he be
   humbled." Ibid.

   [530] "The counterfeit and common grace of foolish virgins, after some
   time of glorious profession, will certainly go out and be quite spent.
   It consumes in the using, and shining, and burning.--Men that have been
   most forward, decay; their gifts decay, life decays.--It is so, after
   some time of profession: for at first, it rather grows than decays and
   withers: but afterward they have enough of it, it withers and
   dies.--The Spirit of God comes upon many hypocrites, in abundant and
   plentiful measure of awakening grace; it comes upon them, as it did
   upon Balaam, and as it is in overflowing waters, which spread far, and
   grow very deep, and fill many empty places.--Though it doth come upon
   them so, yet it doth never rest within, so as to dwell there, to take
   up an eternal mansion for himself.--Hence it doth decay by little and
   little; until at last it is quite gone. As ponds filled with
   rain-water, which comes upon them; not spring water, that riseth up
   within them: it drys up by little and little, until quite dry."
   Shepard's Parable, Part II. p. 58, 59. "Some men may apprehend Christ,
   neither out of fear of misery nor only to preserve some sin; but God
   lets in light and heat of the blessed beams of the glorious gospel of
   the Son of God: and therefore there is mercy, rich, free, sweet, for
   damned, great, vile sinners: Good Lord, saith the soul, what a sweet
   ministry, word, God, and gospel is this! and there rests. This was the
   frame of the stony-ground; which heard the word, and received it with
   joy, and for a time believed. And this is the case of thousands, that
   are much affected with the promise and mercy of Christ, and hang upon
   free grace for a time: but as it is with sweet smells in a room, they
   continue not long: or as flowers, they grow old and withered, and then
   fall. In time of temptation, lust, and world, and sloth, is more sweet
   than Christ, and all his gospel is." Shepard's Parable, Part II. p.
   168. "Never any carnal heart, but some root of bitterness did grow up
   at last in this soil." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 195. " We shall
   see in experience: take the best professors living; though they may
   come, as they and others judged, to the Lord, and follow the Lord; yet
   they will in time depart. The Spirit never was given effectually to
   draw them, nor yet to keep them." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 205.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIII.

   Christian practice or holy life, is a manifestation and sign of the
   sincerity of a professing Christian, to the eye of his neighbours and
   brethren.

   And that this is the chief sign of grace in this respect, is very
   evident from the word of God. Christ, who knew best how to give us
   rules to judge of others, has repeated, and inculcated the rule, that
   we should know them by their fruits; Matt. vii. 16. "Ye shall know them
   by their fruits." And then after arguing the point, and giving clear
   reasons, why men's fruits must be the chief evidence of what sort they
   are, in the following verses, he closes by repeating the assertion;
   ver. 20. "Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." Again, chap.
   xii. 33. "Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make
   the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt."--As much as to say, it is a
   very absurd thing, for any to suppose that the tree is good, and yet
   the fruit bad; that the tree is of one sort, and the fruit of another;
   for the proper evidence of the nature of the tree is its fruit. Nothing
   else can be intended by that last clause in the verse, "For the tree is
   known by its fruit," than that the tree is chiefly known by its fruit,
   that this is the main and most proper diagnostic by which one tree is
   distinguished from another. So "Every tree is known by his own fruit."
   Christ no where says, Ye shall know the tree by its leaves or flowers;
   or ye shall know men by their talk, by the good story they tell of
   their experiences, by the manner and air of their speaking, or emphasis
   and pathos of expression; or ye shall know them by their speaking
   feelingly, or by abundance of talk, or by many tears and affectionate
   expressions, or by the affections ye feel in your hearts towards them:
   but by their fruits shall ye know them; the tree is known by its fruit;
   every tree is known by its own fruit. And as this is the evidence that
   Christ has directed us mainly to look at it in others, in judging of
   them, so it is the evidence that Christ has mainly directed us to give
   to others, whereby they may judge of us; Matt. v. 16. "Let your light
   so shine before men, that others seeing your good works, may glorify
   your Father which is in heaven." Here Christ directs us to manifest our
   godliness to others. Godliness is as it were a light that shines in the
   soul: Christ directs that this light should not only shine within, but
   that it should shine out before men, that they may see it. But which
   way shall this be? It is by our good works. Christ doth not say, that
   others hearing your good words, your good story, or your pathetical
   expressions; but that others seeing your good works, may glorify your
   Father which is in heaven. Doubtless when Christ gives us a rule how to
   make our light shine, that others may have evidence of it, his rule is
   the best. And the apostles mention a christian practice, as the
   principal ground of their esteem of persons as true Christians. As the
   apostle Paul, in the Hebrews vi.6th chapter of Hebrews. There the
   apostle, in the beginning of the chapter, speaks of persons who have
   great common illuminations, who have been enlightened, and have tasted
   of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
   have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
   who afterwards fall away, and are like barren ground, that is nigh unto
   cursing, whose end is to be burned: and then he immediately adds in the
   9th verse, (expressing his charity for the christian Hebrews, as having
   that saving grace, which is better than all these common
   illuminations,) "But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
   and things that accompany salvation: though we thus speak." And then in
   the next verse, he tells them what was the reason he had such good
   thoughts of them: he does not say, that it was because they had given
   him a good account of a work of God upon their souls, and talked very
   experimentally; but it was their work, and labour of love; "for God is
   not unrighteous, to forget your work, and labour of love, which ye have
   showed towards his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and
   do minister." [531] And the same apostle speaks of faithfully serving
   God in practice, as the proper proof to others of men's loving Christ
   above all, and preferring his honour to their private interest, Phil.
   ii. 21, 22. "For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
   Christ's: but ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the father,
   he hath served with me in the gospel." So the apostle John expresses
   the same, as the ground of his good opinion of Gaius, 3 John 3-6. "for
   I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified of the truth
   that is in thee." But how did the brethren testify of the truth that
   was in Gaius? and how did the apostle judge of the truth that was in
   him? it was not because they testified that he had given them a good
   account of the steps of his experiences, and talked like one that felt
   what he said, and had the very language of a Christian: but they
   testified, "that he walked in the truth:" as it follows, 3 John
   3-6.even as thou walkest in the truth. I have no greater joy than to
   hear that my children walk in the truth. Beloved, thou dost faithfully
   whatsoever thou dost to the brethren, and to strangers: which have
   borne witness of thy charity before the church." Thus the apostle
   explains what the brethren had borne witness of, when they came and
   testified of his walking in the truth. And the apostle seems in this
   same place, to give it as a rule to Gaius how he should judge of
   others. In verse 10. he mentions one Diotrephes, that did not conduct
   himself well, and led away others after him; and then in the 11th
   verse., he directs Gaius to beware of such, and not to follow them: and
   gives him a rule whereby he may know them, exactly agreeable to that
   rule Christ had given before, "by their fruits ye shall know them,"
   says the apostle, "Beloved, follow" not that which is evil, but that
   which is good. He that doth good, is of God: but he that doth evil,
   hath not seen God." And I would further observe, that the apostle
   James, expressly comparing that way of showing others our faith and
   Christianity by our practice or works, with other ways of showing our
   faith without works, or not by works, does plainly and abundantly
   prefer the former; Jam. ii. 18. "Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith,
   and I have works: show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show
   thee my faith by my works." A manifestation of our faith without works,
   or in a way diverse from works, is a manifestation of it in words,
   whereby a man professes faith. As the apostle says, ver. 14. "What doth
   it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith?"--Therefore
   here are two ways of manifesting to our neighbour what is in our
   hearts; one by what we say, and the other by what we do. But the
   apostle abundantly prefers the latter as the best evidence. Now
   certainly all accounts we give of ourselves in words, our saying that
   we have faith, and that we are converted; telling the manner how we
   came to have faith, the steps by which it was wrought, and the
   discoveries and experiences that accompanied it, are still but
   manifesting our faith by what we say; it is but showing our faith by
   our words; which the apostle speaks of as falling vastly short of
   manifesting of it by what we do, and showing our faith by our works.

   And as the Scripture plainly teaches, that practice is the best
   evidence of the sincerity of professing Christians; so reason teaches
   the same thing. Reason shows, that men's deeds are better and more
   faithful interpreters of their minds, than their words. The common
   sense of all mankind, through all ages and nations, teaches them to
   judge of men's hearts chiefly by their practice, in other matters: as,
   whether a man be a loyal subject, a true lover, a dutiful child, or a
   faithful servant. If a man professes a great deal of love and
   friendship to another, reason teaches all men, that such a profession
   is not so great an evidence of his being a real and hearty friend, as
   his appearing a friend in deeds; being faithful and constant to his
   friend, in prosperity and adversity, ready to lay out himself, and deny
   himself, and suffer in his personal interest, to do him a kindness. A
   wise man will trust to such evidences of the sincerity of friendship,
   further than a thousand earnest professions and solemn declarations,
   and most affectionate expressions of friendship in words. And there is
   equal reason, why practice should also be looked upon as the best
   evidence of friendship towards Christ. Reason says the same that Christ
   said, in John xiv. 21. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them,
   he it is that loveth me." Thus if we see a man, who in the course of
   his life seems to follow and imitate Christ, and greatly to exert and
   deny himself for his honour, and to promote his kingdom and interest in
   the world; reason teaches, that this is an evidence of love to Christ,
   more to be depended on, than if a man only says he has love to him, and
   tells of his inward experiences, what strong love he felt, and how his
   heart was drawn out in love at such and such a time; when it may be
   there appears but little imitation of Christ in his behaviour. He seems
   backward to do any great matter for him, or to put himself out of his
   way for the promoting of his kingdom, but seems to be apt to excuse
   himself whenever he is called to deny himself for Christ. So if a man,
   in declaring his experiences, tells how he found his heart weaned from
   the world, and saw the vanity of it, so that all looked as nothing to
   him at such and such times, and professes that he gives up all to God,
   and calls heaven and earth to witness to it: but yet in his practice is
   violent in pursuing the world, what he gets he keeps close, is
   exceeding loth to part with much of it to charitable and pious uses, it
   comes from him almost like his heart's blood. But there is another
   professing Christian, that says not a great deal, yet in his behaviour
   appears ready at all times to forsake the world, whenever it stands in
   the way of his duty, and is free to part with it at any time, to
   promote religion and the good of his fellow-creatures. Reason teaches,
   that the latter gives far the most credible manifestation of a heart
   weaned from the world. And if a man appears to walk humbly before God
   and men, and to be of a conversation that savours of a broken heart,
   appearing patient and resigned to God under affliction, and meek in his
   behaviour amongst men; this is a better evidence of humiliation, than
   if a person only tells how great a sense he had of his own
   unworthiness--how he was brought to lie in the dust, quite emptied of
   himself, and to see himself all over filthy and abominable, &c.
   &c.--but yet acts as if he looked upon himself one of the first and
   best of saints, and by just right the head of all the Christians in the
   town. He is assuming, self-willed, and impatient of the least
   contradiction or opposition; we may be assured in such a case, that a
   man's practice comes from a lower place in his heart, than his
   profession. So (to mention no more instances) if a professor of
   Christianity manifest in his behaviour a tender spirit towards others
   in calamity, ready to bear their burdens with them, willing to spend
   his substance for them, and to suffer many inconveniences in his
   worldly interest to promote the good of others' souls and bodies; is
   not this a more credible manifestation of a spirit of love to men, than
   only a man's telling what love he felt to others at certain times--how
   he pitied their souls, how his soul was in travail for them, and how he
   felt a hearty love and pity to his enemies--when in his behaviour he
   seems to be of a very selfish spirit, close and niggardly, all for
   himself, and none for his neighbours, and perhaps envious and
   contentious? Persons in a pang of affection may think they have a
   willingness of heart for great things, to do much and to suffer much,
   and so may profess it very earnestly and confidently, when really their
   hearts are far from it. Thus many in their affectionate pangs have
   thought themselves willing to be damned eternally for the glory of God.
   Passing affections easily produce words; and words are cheap; and
   godliness is more easily feigned in words than in actions. Christian
   practice is a costly laborious thing. The self-denial that is required
   of Christians, the narrowness of the way that leads to life, does not
   consist in words, but in practice. Hypocrites may much more easily be
   brought to talk like saints than to act like saints.

   Thus it is plain, that christian practice is the best sign or
   manifestation of the true godliness of a professing Christian, to the
   eye of his neighbours. But then, the following things should be well
   observed, that this matter may be rightly understood:

   First, It must be observed, that when the Scripture speaks of christian
   practice, as the best evidence to others of sincerity and truth of
   grace, a profession of Christ trinity is not excluded, but supposed.
   The rules mentioned, were rules given to the followers of Christ, to
   guide them in their thoughts of professing Christians, and those that
   offered themselves as some of their society, whereby they might judge
   of the truth of their pretences, and the sincerity of the profession
   they made; and not for the trial of heathens, or those who made no
   pretence to Christianity, and with whom Christians had nothing to do.
   This is as plain as possible in that great rule which Christ gives in
   the 7th of Matthew, "By their fruits ye shall know them." He there
   gives a rule how to judge of professed Christians, yea those who made a
   very high profession, false prophets, who come in sheep's clothing," as
   ver. 15. So that passage of the apostle James ii. 18. "Show me thy
   faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works." It
   is evident, that both these sorts of persons, offering to give these
   diverse evidences of their faith, are professors of faith; this is
   implied in each offering to give evidences of the faith professed. And
   it is evident by the preceding verses, that the apostle is speaking of
   professors of faith in Jesus Christ. So it is very plain that the
   apostle John, in those passages observed in his third epistle, is
   speaking of professing Christians. Though in these rules, the christian
   practice, of professors be spoken of as the greatest and most
   distinguishing sign of their sincerity, much more evidential than their
   profession itself; yet a profession of Christianity is plainly
   pre-supposed. It is not the main thing in the evidence, nor any thing
   distinguishing; yet it is a thing requisite and necessary in it. As
   having an animal body, is not any thing distinguishing of a man from
   other creatures, and is not the main thing in the evidence of human
   nature; yet it is a thing requisite and necessary in the evidence. So
   that if any man should say plainly that he was not a Christian, and did
   not believe that Jesus was the Son of God, or a person sent of God;
   these rules of Christ and his apostles do not at all oblige us to look
   upon him as a sincere Christian, let his visible practice and virtues
   be what they will. And not only do these rules take no place with
   respect to a man that explicitly denies Christianity, and is a
   professed deist, Jew, heathen, or open infidel; but also with respect
   to a man that only forbears to make a profession of Christianity:
   because these rules were given us only to judge of professing
   Christians; fruits must be joined with open flowers; bells and
   pomegranates go together.

   But here will naturally arise this inquiry, viz. When a man may be said
   to profess Christianity? or, what profession may properly be called a
   profession of Christianity? I answer in two things:

   1. In order to a man's being properly said to make a profession of
   Christianity, there must undoubtedly be a profession of all that is
   necessary to his being a Christian, or of so much as belongs to the
   essence of Christianity. Whatsoever is essential in Christianity
   itself, the profession of that is essential in the profession of
   Christianity. The profession must be of the thing professed. For a man
   to profess Christianity, is for him to declare that he has it. And
   therefore so much as belongs to the true denomination of a thing; so
   much is essential to a true declaration of that thing. If we take only
   a part of Christianity, and leave out a part which is essential to it,
   what we take is not Christianity; because something of the essence of
   it is wanting. So if we profess only a part, and leave out a part that
   is essential, that which we profess is not Christianity. Thus in order
   to a profession of Christianity, we must profess that we believe that
   Jesus is the Messiah; for this reason, because such a belief is
   essential to Christianity. And so we must profess, either expressly or
   implicitly, that Jesus satisfied for our sins, and other essential
   doctrines of the gospel, because a belief of these things also are
   essential to Christianity. But there are other things as essential to
   religion, as an orthodox belief; which it is therefore as necessary
   that we should profess, in order to our being truly said to profess
   Christianity. Thus it is essential to Christianity that we repent of
   our sins, that we be convinced of our own sinfulness, that we are
   sensible we have justly exposed ourselves to God's wrath; that our
   hearts renounce all sin, that we do with our whole hearts embrace
   Christ as our only Saviour, that we love him above all, are willing for
   his sake to forsake all, and that we give up ourselves to be entirely
   and for ever his, &c. Such things as these as much belong to the
   essence of Christianity, as the belief of any of the doctrines of the
   gospel; and therefore the profession of them as much belongs to a
   christian profession. Not that in order to persons being professing
   Christians, it is necessary that there should be an explicit profession
   of every individual thing that belongs to christian grace or virtue:
   but certainly, there must be a profession, either express or implicit,
   of what is of the essence of religion. And as to those things that
   Christians should express in their profession, we ought to be guided by
   the precepts of God's word, or by scripture-examples of public
   professions of religion, which God's people have made from time to
   time. Thus they ought to profess their repentance of sin: as of old,
   when persons were initiated as professors, they came, confessing their
   sins, manifesting their humiliation for sin, Matt. iii. 6. And the
   baptism they were baptized with, was called the baptism of repentance,
   Mark i. 3. And John, when he had baptized them, exhorted them to "bring
   forth fruits meet for repentance,". Matt. iii. 8. i. e. agreeable to
   that repentance which they had professed; ecouraging them, that if they
   did so, they should escape the wrath to come, and be gathered as wheat
   into God's garner, Matt. iii. 7, 8-10, 12. So the apostle Peter says to
   the Jews, Acts ii. 38. "Repent, and be baptized:" which shows, that
   repentance is a qualification that must be visible, in order to
   baptism; and therefore ought to be publicly professed. So when the Jews
   that returned from captivity, entered publicly into covenant, it was
   with confession, or public profession of repentance of their sins, Neh.
   ix. 2. This profession of repentance should include or imply a
   profession of conviction, that God would be just in our damnation: (see
   Neh. ix. 33-35. and chap. x.) They should profess their faith in Jesus
   Christ, that they embrace Christ, rely upon him as their Saviour with
   their whole hearts, and joyfully entertain his gospel. Thus Philip, in
   order to his baptizing the eunuch, required him to profess, that he
   believed with all his heart. They who were received as visible
   Christians, at that great out-pouring of the Spirit, which began at the
   day of Pentecost, appeared gladly to receive the gospel: Acts ii. 41.
   "Then they that gladly received the word, were baptized: and the same
   day there were added unto them about three thousand souls." They should
   profess that they rely only on Christ's righteousness and strength,
   that they are devoted to him as their only Lord and Saviour, and that
   they rejoice in him as their only righteousness and portion. It is
   foretold, that all nations should be brought publicly to make this
   profession, Isa. xlv. 22,. &c. "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the
   ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else. I have sworn
   by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall
   not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
   swear. Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and
   strength: even unto him shall men come, and all that are incensed
   against him shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
   be justified, and shall glory." They should profess to give up
   themselves entirely to Christ, and to God through him; as the children
   of Israel, when they publicly recognised their covenant with God; Deut.
   xxvi. 17. "Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to
   walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and
   his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice." They ought to profess a
   willingness of heart to embrace religion with all its difficulties, and
   to walk in a way of obedience to God universally and perseveringly;
   (Exod. xix. 8. and xxiv. 3, 7. Deut. xxvi. 16-18. 2 Kings xxiii. 3.
   Neh. x. 28, 29. Ps. cxix. 57, 106.) They ought to profess, that all
   their hearts and souls are in these engagements to be the Lord's, and
   for ever to serve him; 2 Chron. xv. 12-14. God's people swearing by his
   name, or to his name, as it might be rendered, (by which seems to be
   signified their solemnly giving up themselves to him in covenant, and
   vowing to receive him as their God, and to be entirely his, to obey and
   serve him,) is spoken of as a duty to be performed by all God's visible
   Israel; (Deut. vi. 13. and x. 20. Ps. lxiii. 11. Isa. xix. 18. chap.
   xlv. 23, 24. compared with Rom. xiv. 11. and Phil. ii. 10, 11. Isa.
   xlviii. 1, 2. and lxv. 15, 16. Jer. iv. 2. and and v. 7. xii. 16. Hos.
   iv. 15. and x. 4.) Therefore, in order to persons being entitled to
   full esteem and charity, with their neighbours, as being sincere
   professors of Christianity; by those fore-mentioned rules of Christ and
   his apostles, there must be a visibly holy life, with a profession,
   either expressing, or plainly implying, such things as those which have
   been now mentioned. We are to know them by their fruits: that is, we
   are by their fruits to know whether they be what they profess to be;
   not that we are to know by their fruits, that they have something in
   them, to which they do not so much as pretend. Moreover,

   2. That profession of these things, which is properly called a
   christian profession, and which must be joined with christian practice,
   in order to persons being entitled to the benefit of those rules, must
   be made (as to what appears) understandingly: that is, they must be
   persons that appear to have been so far instructed in the principles of
   religion, as to be in an ordinary capacity to understand the proper
   import of what is expressed in their profession. For sounds are no
   significations or declarations of any thing, any further than men
   understand the meaning of their own sounds.

   But in order to persons making a proper profession of Christianity,
   such as the Scripture directs, and such as the followers of Christ
   should require, in order to the acceptance of professors, with full
   charity, as of their society; it is not necessary they should give an
   account of the particular steps and method, by which the Holy Spirit,
   sensibly to them, wrought those great essentials of Christianity in
   their hearts. There is no footstep in the Scripture of any such way of
   the apostles, or primitive ministers and Christians, requiring any such
   relation, in order to their receiving and treating others as their
   christian brethren; or of their first examining them concerning the
   particular method and order of their experiences. They required of them
   a profession of the things wrought; but no account of the manner of
   working was required of them. Nor is there the least shadow in the
   Scripture of any such custom in the church of God, from Adam to the
   death of the apostle John.

   I am far from saying, that it is not requisite that persons should give
   any sort of account of their experiences to their brethren. For persons
   to profess those things wherein the essence of Christianity lies, is
   the same thing as to profess that they experience those things. Thus
   for persons solemnly to profess, that, in a sense and full conviction
   of their own utter sinfulness, misery, and impotence, and totally
   undone state as in themselves--their just desert of God's utter
   rejection and eternal wrath, without mercy, and the utter insufficiency
   of their own righteousness, or any thing in them, to satisfy divine
   justice, or recommend them to God's favour--they do only and entirely
   depend on the Lord Jesus Christ, and his satisfaction and
   righteousness; it is the same thing as to profess, that they experience
   those particulars. When any profess, that they do with all their hearts
   believe the truth of the gospel of Christ; and that, in a full
   conviction and sense of his sufficiency and perfect excellency as a
   Saviour, as exhibited in the gospel, they do with their whole souls
   cleave to him, and acquiesce in him, as the refuge and rest of their
   souls, and the fountain of their comfort; that they repent of their
   sins, and utterly renounce all sin, and give up themselves wholly to
   Christ, willingly subjecting themselves to him as their King; that they
   give him their hearts and their whole man; and are willing and resolved
   to have God for their whole and everlasting portion; what is it but
   saying, that they experience those things? Again, if any profess, in a
   dependence on God's promises of a future eternal enjoyment of him in
   heaven, to renounce all the enjoyments of this vain world, selling all
   for this great treasure and future inheritance, and to comply with
   every command of God, even the most difficult and self-denying, and
   devote their whole lives to God's service; what is it but a declaration
   of so much experience? Once more, when any profess, that, in the
   forgiveness of those who have injured them, and a general benevolence
   to mankind, their hearts are united to the people of Jesus Christ as
   their people, cleave to them and love them as their brethren, and
   worship and serve God, and follow Christ, in union and fellowship with
   them, being willing and resolved to perform all incumbent duties, as
   members of the same family of God and mystical body of Christ; I say,
   for persons solemnly to profess such things as these, as in the
   presence of God, is the same thing, as to profess that they are
   conscious to, or do experience, such things in their hearts.

   Nor do I suppose, that persons giving an account of their experience of
   particular exercises of grace, with the times and circumstances, gives
   no advantage to others in forming a judgment of their state; or that
   persons may not fitly be inquired of concerning these, especially in
   cases of great importance, where all possible satisfaction is to be
   desired and sought after, as in the case of ordination or approbation
   of a minister. It may give advantage in forming a judgment, in several
   respects; and among others in this, that hereby we may be better
   satisfied, that the professor speaks honestly and understandingly, in
   what he professes; and that he does not make the profession in mere
   formality. In order to a profession of Christianity being accepted to
   any purpose, there ought to be good reason, from the circumstances of
   the profession, to think, that the professor does not make such a
   profession out of a mere customary compliance with a prescribed form,
   using words without any distinct meaning, or in a very lax and
   ambiguous manner, as confessions of faith are often subscribed; but
   that the professor understandingly and honestly signifies what he is
   conscious of in his own heart; otherwise his profession can be of no
   significance, and no more to be regarded than the sound of things
   without life. But indeed (whatever advantage an account of particular
   exercises may give in judging of this) it must be owned, that the
   professor having been previously thoroughly instructed by his teachers,
   and giving good proof of his sufficient knowledge, together with a
   practice agreeable to his profession, is the best evidence of this.

   Nor do I suppose, but that, if a person--who is inquired of about
   particular passages, times, and circumstances of his christian
   experience--seems to be able to give a distinct account of the manner
   of his first conversion, in such a method as has been frequently
   observable in true conversion, so that things seem sensibly and
   distinctly to follow one another in the order of time, according to the
   order of nature: it is an illustrating circumstance which, among other
   things, adds lustre to the evidence he gives his brethren of the truth
   of his experiences.

   But what I speak of as unscriptural, is insisting on a particular
   account of the distinct method and steps, wherein the Spirit of God did
   sensibly proceed, in first bringing the soul into a state of salvation,
   as a thing requisite in order to receiving a professor into full
   charity as a real Christian; so as, for the want of such relation to
   disregard other things, in the evidence which persons give to their
   neighbours of their Christianity, that are vastly more important and
   essential.

   Secondly, That we may rightly understand how christian practice is the
   greatest evidence that others can have of the sincerity of a professing
   Christian, it is needful that what was said before, showing what
   christian practice is, should be borne in mind; and that it should be
   considered how far this may be visible to others. Merely that a
   professor of Christianity is, what is commonly called, an honest, moral
   man, (i. e. having no special transgression or iniquity that might
   bring a blot on his character,) is no great evidence of the sincerity
   of his profession. This is not making his light shine before men. This
   is not that work and labour of love showed towards Christ's name, which
   gave the apostle such persuasion of the sincerity of the professing
   Hebrews, (Heb. vi. 9, 10.) We may see nothing in a man, but that he may
   be a good man; there may appear nothing in his life and conversation
   inconsistent with his being godly, and yet neither any great positive
   evidence that he is so. But there may be great positive appearances of
   holiness in men's visible behaviour; their life devoted to the service
   of God. They may appear to follow the example of Jesus Christ, and come
   up in a great measure to those excellent rules in the 5th, 6th, and 7th
   chapters of Matthew, and 12th of Romans, and many other parts of the
   New Testament. There may be a great appearance of their being universal
   in their obedience to Christ's commands and the rules of the gospel; in
   the performance of the duties of the first table, manifesting the fear
   and love of God; and also universal in fulfilling rules of love to men,
   love to saints, and love to enemies; rules of meekness and forgiveness,
   rules of mercy and charity, and looking not only at our own things, but
   also at the things of others; rules of doing good to men's souls and
   bodies, to particular persons and to the public; rules of temperance
   and mortification, and of an humble conversation; rules of bridling the
   tongue, and improving it to glorify God and bless men, showing that in
   their tongues is the law of kindness. They may appear to walk as
   Christians, in all places, and at all seasons; in the house of God, and
   in their families, among their neighbours, on Sabbath-days, and every
   day, in business and in conversation, towards friends and enemies,
   towards superiors, inferiors, and equals. Persons in their visible walk
   may appear to be very earnestly engaged in the service of God and
   mankind, much to labour and lay out themselves in this work of a
   Christian, and to be very constant and stedfast in it, under all
   circumstances and temptations. There may be great manifestations of a
   spirit to deny themselves, and suffer for God and Christ, the interest
   of religion, and the benefit of their brethren. There may be great
   appearances in a man's walk, of a disposition to forsake any thing,
   rather than to forsake Christ, and to make every thing give place to
   his honour. There may be great manifestations in a man's behaviour of
   such religion as this being his element, and of his placing the delight
   and happiness of his life in it; and his conversation may be such, as
   to carry with him a sweet odour of christian graces and heavenly
   dispositions, wherever he goes. And when it is thus in the professors
   of Christianity, here is an evidence to others of their sincerity in
   their profession, to which all other manifestations are not worthy to
   be compared.

   There is doubtless a great variety in the degrees of evidence that
   professors exhibit of their sincerity, in their life and practice; as
   there is a variety in the fairness and clearness of accounts persons
   give of the manner and method of their experiences: but undoubtedly
   such a manifestation as has been described, of a christian spirit in
   practice, is vastly beyond the fairest and brightest story of
   particular steps and passages of experience, that ever was told. And in
   general, a manifestation of the sincerity of a christian profession in
   practice, is far better than a relation of experiences--But yet,

   Thirdly, It must be noted, agreeable to what was formerly observed,
   that no external appearances whatsoever, that are visible to the world,
   are infallible evidences of grace. The manifestations that have been
   mentioned, are the best that mankind can have; and they are such as
   oblige Christians entirely to embrace professors as saints, to love and
   rejoice in them as the children of God; and they are sufficient to give
   as great satisfaction concerning them as ever is needful to guide them
   in their conduct, or for any purpose that needs to be answered in this
   world. But nothing that appears to them in their neighbour, can be
   sufficient to beget an absolute certainty concerning the state of his
   soul. They see not his heart, nor can they see all his external
   behaviour; for much of it is in secret, and hid from the eye of the
   world: and it is impossible certainly to determine, how far a man may
   go in many external appearances and imitations of grace, from other
   principles. Though undoubtedly, if others could see so much of what
   belongs to men's practice, as their own consciences may know of it, it
   might be an infallible evidence of their state, as will appear from
   what follows.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [531] Heb. vi. 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIV.

   Christian practice is a distinguishing and sure evidence of grace to
   persons' own consciences.

   This is very plain in 1 John ii. 3. "Hereby we do know that we know
   him, if we keep his commandments." And the testimony of our
   consciences, with respect to our good deeds, is spoken of as that which
   may give us assurance of our own godliness; 1 John iii. 18, 19. "My
   little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in
   deed (in the original it is ERGO in work) and in truth. And hereby we
   know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him."
   And the apostle Paul, (Heb. vi.) speaks of the work find labour of love
   of the christian Hebrews, as that which both gave him a persuasion that
   they had something above the highest common illuminations, and also as
   that evidence which tended to give them the highest assurance of hope
   concealing themselves; .ver. 9, &c. "But, beloved, we are persuaded
   better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we
   thus speak. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labour
   of love, which ye have showed towards his name, in that ye have
   ministered to the saints, and do minister. And we desire that every one
   of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto
   the end." So the apostle directs the Galatians to examine their
   behaviour or practice, that they might have rejoicing in themselves, in
   their own happy state; Gal. vi. 4. "Let every man prove his own work,
   so shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another." And the
   psalmist says, Psal. cxix. 61. "Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
   have respect unto all thy commandments;" i. e. then shall I be bold,
   and assured, and stedfast in my hope. And in that of our Saviour, Matt.
   vii. 19, 20. "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn
   down and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know
   them." Though Christ gives this, first, as a rule by which we should
   judge of others, yet in the words that next follow, he plainly shows,
   that he intends it also as a rule by which we should judge ourselves;
   "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
   kingdom of heaven: but he that doth the will of my Father which is in
   heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, &c.--And then will
   I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work
   iniquity. Therefore, whosoever beareth these sayings of mine, and doth
   them, I will liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon a
   rock.--And every one that beareth these savings of mine, and doth them
   not, shall be likened unto a foolish man which built his house upon the
   sand." I shall have occasion to mention other texts that show the same
   thing, hereafter.

   But for the greater clearness in this matter, I would, .first, show how
   christian practice, doing good works, or keeping Christ's commandments,
   is to be taken, when the Scripture represents it as a sure sign to our
   own consciences, that we are real Christians. And. secondly, will
   prove, that this is the chief of all evidences that men can have of
   their own sincere godliness.

   First, I would show how christian practice, or keeping Christ's
   commandments, is to be taken, when the Scripture represents it as a
   sure evidence to our own consciences, that we are sincere Christians.

   And here I would observe, that we cannot reasonably suppose, when the
   Scripture in this case speaks of good works, good fruit, and keeping
   Christ's commandments, that it has respect merely to what is external,
   or the motion and action of the body, without including respect to any
   aim or intention of the agent, or any act of his understanding or will.
   For consider men's actions so, and they are no more good works or acts
   of obedience, than the regular motions of a clock; nor are they
   considered as any human actions at all. The actions of the body, taken
   thus, are neither acts of obedience, nor disobedience; any more than
   the motions of the body in a convulsion. But the obedience and fruit
   that is spoken of, is the obedience and fruit of the man; and therefore
   not only the acts of the body, but the obedience of the soul,
   consisting in the acts and practice of the soul. Not that I suppose,
   that when the Scripture speaks, in this case, of gracious works, fruit,
   and practice, that in these expressions is included all inward piety
   and holiness of heart, both principle and exercise, both spirit and
   practice: because then, in these things being given as signs of a
   gracious principle in the heart, the same thing would be given as a
   sign of itself, and there would be no distinction between root and
   fruit. But only the gracious exercise and holy act of the soul is
   meant, and given as the sign of the holy principle, and good estate.
   Neither is every kind of inward exercise of grace meant; but the
   practical exercise, that exercise of the soul, and exertion of inward
   holiness, which there is in an obediential act; or that exertion of the
   mind, and act of grace, which issues and terminates in what they call
   the imperate acts of the will; in which something is directed and
   commanded by the soul to be done, and brought to pass in practice.

   Here, for a clearer understanding, I would observe, that there are two
   kinds of exercises of grace. 1. There are what some call immanent acts;
   that is, those exercises of grace that remain within the soul, that
   begin and are terminated there, without any immediate relation to any
   thing to be done outwardly, or to be brought to pass in practice. Such
   are the exercises of grace, which the saints often have in
   contemplation; when the exercise in the heart does not directly proceed
   to, or terminate in, any thing beyond the thoughts of the mind: however
   they may tend to practice (as all exercises of grace do) more remotely.
   2. There are acts of grace, that are more strictly called practical, or
   effective exercises; because they immediately respect something to be
   done. They are the exertions of grace in the commanding acts of the
   will, directing the outward actions. As when a saint gives a cup of
   cold water to a disciple, in and from the exercise of the grace of
   charity; or voluntarily endures persecution, in the way of his duty,
   immediately from the exercise of a supreme love to Christ. Here is the
   exertion of grace producing its effect in outward actions. These
   exercises of grace are practical and productive of good works, not only
   because they are of a productive nature, (for so are all exercises of
   true grace,) but they are the producing acts. This is properly the
   exercise of grace in the act of the will; and this is properly the
   practice of the soul. And the soul is the immediate actor of no other
   practice but this: the motions of the body follow from the laws of
   union between the soul and body, which God, and not the soul, has
   fixed, and does maintain. The act of the soul, and the exercise of
   grace, exerted in the performance of a good work, is the good work
   itself, so far as the soul is concerned in it, or so far as it is the
   soul's good work. The determinations of the will, are indeed our very
   actions, so far as they are properly ours, as Dr. Doddridge observes.
   [532] In this practice of the soul, is included the aim and intention
   of the soul which is the agent. For not only should we not look on the
   motions of a statue, doing justice or distributing alms by clock-work,
   as any acts of obedience to Christ in that statue; but neither would
   any body call the voluntary actions of a man, externally and materially
   agreeable to a command of Christ, by the name of obedience to Christ,
   if he had never heard of Christ, or any of his commands, or had no
   thought of his commands in what he did.--If the acts of obedience and
   good fruits spoken of, be looked upon, not as mere motions of the body,
   but as acts of the soul; the whole exercise of the spirit of the mind,
   in the action, must be taken in, with the end acted for, and the
   respect the soul then has to God, &c. otherwise they are no acts of
   denial of ourselves, or obedience to God, or service done to him, but
   something else. Such effective exercises of grace as these, many of the
   martyrs have experienced in a high degree. And all true saints live a
   life of such acts of grace as these, as they all live a life of
   gracious works, of which these operative exertions of grace are the
   life and soul. And this is the obedience and fruit that God mainly
   looks at, as he looks at the soul, more than the body; as much as the
   soul, in the constitution of human nature, is the superior part. As God
   looks at the obedience and practice of the man, he looks at the
   practice of the soul; for the soul is the man in God's sight, "For the
   Lord seeth not as man seeth, for he looketh on the heart."

   And thus it is, that obedience, good works, and good fruit, are to be
   taken, when given in Scripture as a sure evidence to our own
   consciences of a true principle of grace; even as including the
   obedience and practice of the soul, as preceding and governing the
   actions of the body. When practice is given in Scripture as the main
   evidence of our true Christianity to others, then is meant that in our
   practice which is visible to them, even our outward actions: but when
   practice is given as a sure evidence of our real Christianity to our
   own consciences, then is meant that in our practice which is visible to
   our own consciences; which is not only the motion of our bodies, but
   the exertion and exercise of the soul, which directs and commands that
   motion; which is more directly and immediately under the view of our
   own consciences, than the act of the body. And that this is the intent
   of Scripture, not only does the nature and reason of the thing show,
   but it is plain by the Scripture itself. Thus it is evident that when
   Christ at the conclusion of his sermon on the mount, speaks of doing or
   practising those sayings of his, as the grand sign of professors being
   true disciples; without which he likens them to a man that built his
   house upon the sand; and with which, to a man that built his house upon
   a rock; he has respect, not only to the outward behaviour, but to the
   inward exercise of the mind in that behaviour. This is evident by
   observing what those preceding sayings of his are; "Blessed are the
   poor in spirit; blessed are they that mourn; blessed are the meek;
   blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; blessed
   are the merciful; blessed are the pure in heart; whosoever is angry
   with his brother without a cause, &c.; whosoever looketh on a woman to
   lust after her, &c.; love your enemies; take no thought for your life,"
   and others of the like nature, which imply inward exercises: and when
   Christ says, John xiv. 21. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth
   them, he it is that loveth me;" he has evidently a special respect to
   that command several times repeated in the same discourse, (which he
   calls, by way of eminence, his commandment,) that they should love one
   another, as he had loved them. (See chap. xiii. 34, 35.. and chap. xv.
   10, 12, 13, 14.) But this command respects chiefly an exercise of the
   mind or heart, though exerted in practice. So when the apostle John
   says, 1 John ii. 3. "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
   commandments;" he has plainly a principal respect to the same command,
   as appears by what follows, ver. 7-11. and ver. 5, 6.. and when we are
   told in Scripture that men shall at the last day be judged according to
   their works, and all shall receive according to the things done in the
   body; it is not to be understood only of outward acts; for if so, why
   is God so often spoken of as searching the hearts and trying the reins,
   that he may render to every one according to his works? as Rev. ii. 23.
   "And all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins
   and hearts: and I will give unto every one according to his works.".
   Jer. xvii. 10. "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to
   give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
   doings." But if by his ways, and the fruit of his doings, is meant only
   the actions of his body, what need of searching the heart and reins, in
   order to know them? Hezekiah in his sickness pleads his practice as an
   evidence of his title to God's favour, as including not only his
   outward actions, but what was in his heart, Isa. xxxviii. 3. "Remember
   now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
   and with a perfect heart."

   Though in this great evidence of sincerity that the Scripture gives us,
   what is inward is of greatest importance; yet what is outward is
   included and intended, as connected with the practical exertion of
   grace in the will, directing and commanding the actions of the body.
   And hereby are effectually cut off all pretensions that any man can
   have to evidences of godliness, who externally lives wickedly; because
   the great evidence lies in that inward exercise and practice of the
   soul, which consists in the act of the will, commanding outward acts.
   But it is known, that these commanding acts of the will are not one
   way, and the actions of the bodily organs another: for the unalterable
   law of nature is, that they should be united, as long as soul and body
   are united, and the organs are not so destroyed as to be incapable of
   those motions that the soul commands. Thus it would be ridiculous for a
   man to plead, that the commanding act of his will was to go to the
   public worship, while his feet carry him to a tavern or brothel-house;
   or that the commanding act of his will was to give such a piece of
   money he had in his hand to a poor beggar, while is hand at the same
   instant kept it back, and held it fast. Secondly, I proceed to show,
   that christian practice, taken in the sense explained, is the chief of
   all the evidences of a saving sincerity in religion, to the consciences
   of the professors of it; much to be preferred to the method of the
   first convictions, enlightenings, and comforts in conversion; or any
   immanent discoveries or exercises of grace whatsoever, that begin and
   end in contemplation. [533] The evidence of this appears by the
   following arguments.

   Argument I. Reason plainly shows, that those things which put it to the
   proof, what men will actually cleave to in their practice, when left to
   follow their own choice and inclinations, are the proper trial what
   they do really prefer in their hearts. Sincerity in religion, as
   observed already, consists in setting God highest in the heart, in
   choosing him before other things, in having a heart to sell all for
   Christ, &c.--But a man's actions are the proper trial what a man's
   heart prefers. As for instance, when God and other things come to stand
   in competition, God is as it were set before a man on one hand, and his
   worldly interest or pleasure on the other; his behaviour in such case,
   in actually cleaving to the one and forsaking the other, is the proper
   trial which he prefers. Sincerity consists in forsaking all for Christ
   in heart; but to forsake all for Christ in heart, is the very same
   thing as to have a heart to forsake all for Christ. The proper trial
   whether a man has a heart to forsake all for Christ, is his being
   actually put to it, Christ and other things coming in competition, that
   he must practically cleave to one and forsake the other. To forsake all
   for Christ in heart, is the same thing as to have a heart to forsake
   all for Christ when called to it: but the highest proof to ourselves
   and others, that we have a heart to forsake all for Christ when called
   to it, is actually doing it when or so far as called to it. To follow
   Christ in heart, is to have a heart to follow him. To deny ourselves in
   heart for Christ, is the same thing as to have a heart to deny
   ourselves for him in fact. The main and most proper proof of a man
   having a heart to any thing, concerning which he is at liberty to
   follow his own inclinations, is his doing it. When a man is at liberty
   whether to speak or keep silence, the most proper evidence of his
   having a heart to speak, is his speaking. When a man is at liberty
   whether to walk or sit still, the proper proof of his having a heart to
   walk, is his walking. Godliness consists not in a heart to intend to do
   the will of God, but in a heart to do it. The children of Israel in the
   wilderness had the former, of whom we read, Deut. v. 27-29. "Go thou
   near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say; and speak thou unto
   us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear
   it, and do it. And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye
   spake unto me; and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the
   words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well
   said all that they have spoken. O that there were such an heart in
   them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always,
   that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!" The
   people manifested that they had a heart to intend to keep God's
   commandments, and to be very forward in those intentions; but God
   manifests, that this was far from being the thing he desired, wherein
   true godliness consists, even a heart actually to keep them.

   It is therefore exceedingly absurd, and even ridiculous, for any to
   pretend that they have a good heart, while they live a wicked life, or
   do not bring forth the fruit of universal holiness in their practice.
   For it is proved in fact, that such men do not love God above all. It
   is foolish to dispute against plain fact and experience. Men that live
   in ways of sin, and yet flatter themselves that they shall go to
   heaven, or expect to be received hereafter as holy persons, without a
   holy life and practice, act as though they expected to make a fool of
   their Judge. Which is implied in what the apostle says, Gal. vi. 7. "Be
   not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that
   shall he also reap." As much as to say, "Do not deceive yourselves with
   an expectation of reaping life everlasting hereafter, if you sow not to
   the Spirit here; it is in vain to think that God will be made a fool of
   by you, that he will be imposed upon with shadows instead of substance,
   and with vain pretences, instead of that good fruit which he expects;
   when the contrary to what you pretend appears plainly in your life,
   before his face." In this manner the word mock is sometimes used in
   Scripture. Thus Delilah says to Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me,
   and told me lies, . Judges xvi. 10, 13. i. e. "Thou hast baffled me,
   intending to make a fool of me, as if I might be easily turned off with
   any vain pretence, instead of the truth." So it is said that Lot, when
   he told his sons-in-law that God would destroy that place, he seemed as
   one that mocked to his sons-in-law, Gen. xix. 14. i. e. he seemed as
   one that would make a game of them, as though they were credulous
   fools. But the great Judge, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, will not
   be mocked or baffled with any pretences, without a holy life. If in his
   name men have prophesied and wrought miracles, and have had faith so
   that they could remove mountains, and cast out devils, and however high
   their religious affections have been, however great resemblances they
   have had of grace, and though their hiding-place has been so dark and
   deep, that no human skill nor search could find them out; yet if they
   are workers or practisers of iniquity, they cannot hide their hypocrisy
   from their Judge; Job xxxiv. 22. "There is no darkness, nor shadow of
   death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves." Would a wise
   prince suffer himself to be mocked by a subject, who should pretend
   that he was loyal, and should tell his prince that he had an entire
   affection for him, and that at such and such a time he had experience
   of it, and felt his affections strongly working towards him, and should
   come expecting to be accepted and rewarded by his prince, as one of his
   best friends on that account, though he lived in rebellion against him,
   following some pretender to his crown, and from time to time stirring
   up sedition against him? Or, would a master suffer himself to be
   shammed and gulled by a servant, that should pretend to great
   experiences of love and honour towards him in his heart, and a great
   sense of his worthiness and kindness, when at the same time he refused
   to obey and serve him?

   Argument II. As reason shows, that those things which occur in the
   course of life, which put it to the proof whether men will prefer God
   to other things in practice, are the proper trial of the sincerity of
   their hearts; so the same are represented as the proper trial of the
   sincerity of professors, in the Scripture. There we find that such
   things are called by that very name, trials or temptations, both words
   of the same signification.--The things that put it to the proof,
   whether men will prefer God to other things in practice, are the
   difficulties of religion, or those things which occur that make the
   practice of duty difficult, and cross to other principles besides the
   love of God; because in them, God and other things are both set before
   men together, for their actual and practical choice; and it comes to
   this, that we cannot hold to both, but one or the other must be
   forsaken. And these things are all over the Scripture called by the
   name of trials or proofs.* And they are called by this name, because
   hereby professors are tried and proved of what sort they be, whether
   they be really what they profess and appear to be; and because in them
   the reality of the supreme love of God is brought to the test of
   experiment and fact; they are the proper proofs, in which it is truly
   determined by experience, whether men have a thorough disposition of
   heart to cleave to God or no; Deut. viii. 2. "And thou shalt remember
   all the way which the Lord God led thee these forty years in the
   wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, whether thou wouldst
   keep his commandments, or no." Judg. ii. 21, 22. "I also will not
   henceforth drive out any from before them, of the nations which Joshua
   left when he died: that through them I may prove Israel, whether they
   will keep the way of the Lord." So chap. iii. 1, 4. and Exod. xvi. 4.
   And the Scripture, when it calls these difficulties of religion by the
   name of temptations or trials, explains itself to mean thereby, the
   trial or experiment of their faith, James i. 2, 3. "My brethren, count
   it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations; knowing this, that the
   trying of your faith worketh patience." 1 Pet. i. 6, 70. "Now for a
   season--ye are in heaviness, through manifold temptations; that the
   trial of your faith being much more precious than of gold," &c. So the
   apostle Paul speaks of that expensive duty of parting with our
   substance to the poor, as the proof of the sincerity of the love of
   Christians, 2 Cor. viii. 8. And the difficulties of religion are often
   represented in Scripture as being the trial of professors, in the same
   manner that the furnace is the proper trial of gold and silver; Psal.
   lxvi. 10, 11. "Thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as
   silver is tried: thou broughtest us into the net, thou laidest
   affliction upon our loins." Zech. xii. 9. "And I will bring the third
   part of them through the fire; and I will refine them as silver is
   refined: and I will try them as gold is tried." That which has the
   colour and appearance of gold, is put into the furnace to try whether
   it be what it seems to be, real gold or no. So the difficulties of
   religion are called trials, because they try those that have the
   profession and appearance of saints, whether they are what they appear
   to be, real saints. If we put true gold into the furnace, we shall find
   its great value and preciousness; so the truth and inestimable value of
   the virtues of a true Christian appear, when under these trials; 1 Pet.
   i. 7. "That the trial of your faith being much more precious than of
   gold that perisheth, might be found unto praise, and honour, and
   glory." True and pure gold will come out of the furnace in full weight:
   so true saints when tried come forth as gold, Job xxiii. 10. Christ
   distinguishes true grace from counterfeit by this, that it is gold
   tried in the fire, Rev. iii. 17, 18. So that it is evident that these
   things are called trials in Scripture, principally as they try or prove
   the sincerity of professors. And from what has been now observed, it is
   evident that they are the most proper trial or proof of their
   sincerity; inasmuch as the very meaning of the word trial, as it is
   ordinarily used in Scripture, is the difficulty occurring in the way of
   a professor's duty, as an experiment of his sincerity. If trial of
   sincerity be the proper name of these difficulties of religion, then
   doubtless these difficulties of religion are properly and eminently the
   trial of sincerity; for they are doubtless eminently what they are
   called by the Holy Ghost: God gives things their name from that which
   is eminently their nature. And if it be so, that these things are the
   proper and eminent trial, proof, or experiment of the sincerity of
   professors; then certainly the result of the trial or experiment (that
   is, persons' behaviour or practice under such trials) is the proper and
   eminent evidence of their sincerity. For they are called trials or
   proofs only with regard to the result, and because the effect is
   eminently the proof, or evidence. And this is the most proper proof and
   evidence to the conscience of those that are the subjects of these
   trials. For when God is said by these things to try men, and prove
   them, to see what is in their hearts, and whether they will keep his
   commandments or no: we are not to understand, that it is for his own
   information, or that he may obtain evidence himself of their sincerity;
   (for he needs no trials for his information;) but chiefly for their
   conviction, and to exhibit evidence to their consciences. [534] Thus
   when God is said to prove Israel by the difficulties they met with in
   the wilderness, and by the difficulties they met with from their
   enemies in Canaan, to know what was in their hearts, whether they would
   keep his commandments, or no; it must be understood, that it was to
   discover them to themselves, that they might know what was in their own
   hearts. So when God tempted or tried Abraham with that difficult
   command of offering up his son, it was not for his satisfaction,
   whether he feared God or no, but for Abraham's own greater satisfaction
   and comfort, and the more clear manifestation of the favour of God to
   him. When Abraham had proved faithful under this trial, God says to
   him, Now 1 know that thou fearest God, seeing that thou hast not
   withheld thy son, thine only son from me. Which plainly implies, that
   in this practical exercise of Abraham's grace under this trial, was a
   clearer evidence of the truth of his grace, than ever was before; and
   the greatest evidence to Abraham's conscience; because God himself
   gives it to Abraham as such, for his comfort and rejoicing; and speaks
   of it to him, as what might be the greatest evidence to his conscience
   of his being upright in the sight of his Judge. Which proves what I
   say, that holy practice under trials, is the highest evidence of the
   sincerity of professors to their own consciences. And we find that
   Christ frequently took the same method to convince the consciences of
   those that pretended friendship to him, and to show them what they
   were. This was the method he took with the rich young man, Matt. xix.
   16,. &c. He seemed to show a great respect to Christ; he came kneeling
   to him, and called him good master, and made a great profession of
   obedience to the commandments; but Christ tried him by bidding him go
   and sell all that he had, and give to the poor, and come and take up
   his cross, and follow him; telling him, that then, he should have
   treasure in heaven. So he tried another, Matt. viii. 20. He made a
   great profession of respect to Christ: says he, Lord, I will follow
   thee whithersoever thou goest. Christ immediately puts his friendship
   to the proof, by telling him that the foxes had holes, and the birds of
   the air had nests, but that the Son of man had not where to lay his
   head. And thus Christ is wont still to try professed disciples in
   general, in the course of his providence. So the seed sown in every
   kind of ground, stony ground, thorny ground, and good ground, which in
   all appears alike, when it first springs up; yet is tried, and the
   difference is made to appear by the burning heat of the sun.

   Seeing therefore that these are the things which God employs to try us,
   it is undoubtedly the surest way, in order to pass a right judgment, to
   try ourselves by the same things. These trials are not for his
   information, but for ours; therefore we ought to receive our
   information from thence. The surest way to know our gold, is to examine
   it in God's furnace, where he tries it for that very end, that we may
   see what it is. If we have a mind to know whether a building stands
   strong or no, we must look upon it when the wind blows. If we would
   know whether that which appears in the form of wheat, has the real
   substance of wheat, or be only chaff, we must observe it when it is
   winnowed. If we would know whether a staff be strong, or a rotten
   broken reed, we must observe it when it is leaned on, when weight is
   borne upon it. If we would weigh ourselves justly, it must be in God's
   appointed scales. [535] These trials in the course of our practice, are
   as it were the balances in which our hearts are weighed, or in which
   Christ and the world, or Christ and his competitors, as to the esteem
   and regard they have in our hearts, are weighed, or are put into
   opposites scales, by which there is opportunity to see which
   preponderates. When a man is brought to the dividing of paths, the one
   of which leads to Christ, and the other to the objects of his lusts, to
   see which way he will go; when set as it were between Christ and the
   world, Christ on the right hand, and the world on the left, so that if
   he goes to one he must leave the other: this is just the same thing as
   laying Christ and the world in two opposite scales; and his going to
   the one, and leaving the other, is just the same thing, as the sinking
   of one scale, and rising of the other. A man's practice, therefore,
   under the trials of God's providence, is as much the proper experiment
   and evidence of the superior inclination of his heart, as the motion of
   the balance, with different weights in opposite scales, is the proper
   experiment of the superior weight. Argument III. Another argument, that
   holy practice, in the sense which has been explained, is the highest
   kind of evidence of the truth of grace to the consciences of
   Christians, is, that in practice, grace in scripture style is said to
   be made perfect, or to be finished. So the apostle James says, Jam. ii.
   22. "Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was
   faith made perfect," or finished? So the love of God is said to be made
   perfect, or finished, in keeping his commandments; 1 John ii. 4, 5. "He
   that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar;
   and the truth is not in him: but whoso keepeth his word, in him verily
   is the love of God perfected." The commandment of Christ which the
   apostle has a special respect to, is that which respects deeds of love
   to our brethren; as appears by the following verses. Again, the love of
   God is said to be perfected, in the same sense, chap. iv. 12. "If we
   love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us."
   Here doubtless the apostle has still respect to loving one another, in
   the same manner that he had explained in the preceding chapter,
   speaking of loving one another as a sign of the love of God, ver. 17,
   18. "Whoso hath this world's good, and shutteth up his bowels, &c. how
   dwelleth the love of God in him? My little children, let us not love in
   word, neither in tongue, but in deed, (or in work,) and in truth." By
   thus loving in work, the apostle says the love of God is perfected in
   us. Grace is said to be perfected or finished in holy practice, as
   therein it is brought to its proper effect, and to that exercise which
   is the end of the principle; the tendency and design of trace herein is
   reached, and its operation completed and crowned. The tree is not
   perfected in the seed being planted in the ground; in the first
   quickening of the seed, and in its putting forth root and sprout; nor
   is it perfected when it comes up out of the ground; in bringing forth
   leaves; nor yet in putting forth blossoms: but when it has brought
   forth good ripe fruit, then it is perfected, therein it reaches its
   end, the design is finished: all that belongs to the tree is completed
   and brought to its proper effect in the fruit. So is grace in its
   practical exercises. Grace is said to be made perfect or finished in
   its work or fruit, in the same manner as it is said of sin, Jam. i. 15.
   "When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin; and sin when it is
   finished, bringeth forth death." Here are three steps; first, sin in
   its principle or habit, the being of lust in the heart; and nextly,
   here is its conceiving, consisting in the immanent exercises of it in
   the mind; and lastly, here is the fruit that was conceived actually
   brought forth, in the wicked work and practice. And this the apostle
   calls the finishing or perfecting of sin: for the word in the original
   is the same that is translated perfected in those forementioned places.

   Now certainly, if grace be in this manner made perfect in its fruit, if
   these practical exercises of grace are those wherein grace is brought
   to its proper effect and end, and the exercises wherein whatsoever
   belongs to its design, tendency, and operation, is completed and
   crowned; then these exercises must be the highest evidences of grace,
   above all other exercises. Certainly the proper nature and tendency, of
   every principle, must appear best and most fully, in its most perfect
   exercises, or in those wherein its nature is most completely exerted,
   and its tendency most fully answered and crowned, in its proper effect
   and end. If we would see the proper nature of any thing whatsoever, and
   see it in its full distinction from other things, let us look upon it
   in the finishing of it. The apostle James says, by works it faith made
   perfect; and introduces this as an argument to prove that works are the
   chief evidence of faith, whereby the sincerity of the professors of
   faith is justified, Jam. ii. And the apostle John, after he had once
   and again told us, that love was made perfect in keeping Christ's
   commandments, observes, 1 John iv. 18. "That perfect love casteth out
   fear;" meaning (at least in part) love made perfect in this sense;
   agreeable to what he had said in the foregoing chapter, "That by love
   in deed, or work, we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure
   our hearts," ver. 18, 19.

   Argument IV. Another thing which makes it evident, that holy practice
   is the principal evidence that we ought to use in judging both of our
   own and others' sincerity, is, that this evidence is above all others
   insisted on in Scripture. A common acquaintance with the Scripture,
   together with a little attention and observation, will be sufficient to
   show to any one, that this is ten times more insisted on as a note of
   true piety, throughout the Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to
   the end of Revelations, than any thing else. And in the New Testament,
   where Christ and his apostles do expressly, and of declared purpose,
   lay down signs of true godliness, this is almost wholly insisted on. It
   may be observed, that Christ and his apostles do not only often say
   those things, in discoursing on the great doctrines of religion, which
   do show what the nature of true godliness must be, or from whence the
   nature and signs of it may be inferred by just consequence--and often
   occasionally mention many things which appertain to godliness--but they
   also often of set purpose give signs and marks for the trial of
   professors, putting them upon trying themselves by the signs they give,
   introducing what they say with such like expressions as these; "By this
   you shall know that you know God: By this are manifest the children of
   God, and the children of the devil: He that hath this, builds on a good
   foundation; he that hath it not, builds on the sand: Hereby we shall
   assure our hearts: He is the man that loveth Christ," &c. But I can
   find no place, where either Christ or his apostles in this manner give
   signs of godliness, (though the places are many) but where christian
   practice is almost the only thing insisted on. Indeed in many of these
   places, love to the brethren is spoken of as a sign of godliness: and
   (as I have observed before) there is no one virtuous affection or
   disposition so often expressly spoken of as a sign of true grace, as
   our having love one to another: but then the Scriptures explain
   themselves to intend chiefly this love as exercised and expressed in
   practice, or in deeds of love. So does the apostle John (who above all
   others insists on love to the brethren as a sign of godliness) most
   expressly explain himself, in that 1 John iii. 14-19. &c. "We know that
   we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren: he
   that loveth not his brother, abideth in death.--Whoso hath this world's
   good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of
   compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? My little
   children, let us love, not in word, neither in tongue, but in deed (i.
   e. in deeds of love) and in truth. And hereby we know that we are of
   the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him." So that when the
   Scripture so much insists on our loving one another, as a great sign of
   godliness, we are not thereby to understand the immanent workings of
   affection which men feel one to another, so much as the soul's
   practising all the duties of the second table of the law; all which the
   New Testament tells us again and again, a true love one to another
   comprehends; Rom. xiii. 8, 10. Gal. v. 14. Matt. xxii. 39, 40. So that
   really, there is no place in the New Testament, where the declared
   design is to give signs of godliness, but that holy practice, or
   keeping Christ's commandments, is the mark insisted on. Which is an
   invincible argument, that it is the chief of all the evidences of
   godliness: unless we suppose, that Christ and his apostles did not know
   how to choose signs so well as we could have chosen for them. But if we
   make the word of Christ our rule, then undoubtedly those marks which
   Christ and his apostles chiefly lay down, that we might try ourselves
   by them, those same marks we ought especially to receive, and chiefly
   to use, in the trial of ourselves. [536] And surely those things which
   Christ and his apostles chiefly insisted on in the rules they gave,
   ministers ought chiefly to insist on in the rules they give. To insist
   much on those things on which the Scripture insists little, and to
   insist very little on those things on which the Scripture insists much,
   is a dangerous thing; because it is going out of God's way, and is to
   judge ourselves, and guide others, in an unscriptural manner. God knew
   which way of leading and guiding souls was safest and best for them; he
   insisted so much on some things, because he knew it to be needful that
   they should be insisted on; and let other things more alone, as a wise
   God, because he knew it was not best for us, so much to lay the weight
   of the trial there. As the Sabbath was made for man, so the Scriptures
   were made for man; and they are by infinite wisdom fitted for our use
   and benefit. We should therefore make them our guide in all things, in
   our thoughts of religion, and of ourselves. And for us to make that
   great which the Scripture makes little, and that little which the
   Scripture makes great, tends to give us a monstrous idea of religion;
   and (at least indirectly and gradually) to lead us wholly away from the
   right rule, and from a right opinion of ourselves, and to establish
   delusion and hypocrisy.

   Argument V. Christian practice is plainly spoken of in the word of God,
   as the main evidence of the truth of grace, not only to others, but to
   men's own consciences. It is only more spoken of and insisted on than
   other signs, but in many places where it is spoken of, it is
   represented as the chief of all evidences. This is plain in the manner
   of expression from time to time. If God were now to speak from heaven
   to resolve our doubts concerning signs of godliness, and should give
   some particular sign, that by it all might know whether they were
   sincerely godly or not, with such emphatical expressions as these, The
   man who hath such a qualification or mark, that is the man who is a
   true saint; that is the very man; by this you may know; this is the
   thing by which it is manifest who are saints and who are sinners; such
   men as these are saints indeed: should not we look upon, it as a thing
   beyond doubt, that this was given as a special, and eminently
   distinguishing, note of true godliness? But this is the very case with
   respect to the sign of grace I am speaking of; God has again and again
   uttered himself in his word in this very manner, concerning christian
   practice, as John xiv. 21. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth
   them, he it is that loveth me." This Christ gives to the disciples, not
   so much to guide them in judging others, but to apply to themselves for
   their own comfort after his departure, as appears by every word of the
   context. And by the way I would observe, that not only the emphasis
   with which Christ utters himself is remarkable, but also his so much
   insisting on, and repeating the matter, as he does in the context; ver.
   15. "If ye love me, keep my commandments." Ver. 23. "If a man love me,
   he will keep my words." And ver.24. "He that loveth me not, keepeth not
   my sayings." And in the next chapter over and over; ver. 2. "Every
   branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh away; and every branch
   that beareth fruit, he purgeth it." Ver. 8. "Herein is my Father
   glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my disciples." Ver.
   14. "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." We have
   this mark laid down with the same emphasis again, John viii. 31. "If ye
   continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." And again, 1
   John ii. 3. "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
   commandments." And ver. 5. "Whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is
   the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him." And
   chap. iii. 18, 19. "Let us love in deed, and in truth: hereby we know
   that we are of the truth." What is translated hereby, would have been a
   little more emphatical, if it had been rendered more literally from the
   original, by this we do know.--And how evidently is holy practice
   spoken of as the grand note of distinction between the children of God
   and the children of the devil, in ver. 10. of the same chapter? "In
   this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil."
   Speaking of a holy and a wicked practice, as may be seen in all the
   context: as ver. 3. "Every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth
   himself, even as he is pure." Ver. 6-10. "Whosoever abideth in him,
   sinneth not: whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, neither known him.
   Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doth righteousness, is
   righteous, even as he is righteous: he that committeth sin is of the
   devil.--Whosoever is born of God sinneth not.--Whosoever doth not
   righteousness, is not of God." So we have the like emphasis, 2 John 6.
   "This is love, that we walk after his commandments:" that is, (as we
   must understand it,) This is the proper evidence of love. So 1 John v.
   3. "This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments." So the
   apostle James speaking of the proper evidences of true and pure
   religion, says, Jam. i. 27. "Pure religion and undefiled before God and
   the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
   affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." We have the
   like emphatical expressions used about the same thing in the Old
   Testament: Job xxviii. 28. "And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of
   the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding."
   Jer. xxii. 15, 16. "Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment
   and justice?--He judged the cause of the poor and needy; was not this
   to know me? saith the Lord." Psal. xxxiv. 11,. &c. "Come, ye children,
   unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord.--Keep thy tongue
   from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile: depart from evil, and do
   good: seek peace and pursue it." Psal. xv. at the beginning, "Who shall
   abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that
   walketh uprightly," &c. Psal. xxiv. 3, 4. "Who shall ascend into the
   hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath
   clean hands, and a pure heart," &c. Psal. cxix. 1. "Blessed are the
   undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord." Ver. 6. "Then
   shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments."
   Prov. viii. 13. "The fear of the Lord is to hate evil."

   The Scripture never uses such emphatical expressions concerning any
   other signs of hypocrisy, and unsoundness of heart, as concerning an
   unholy practice. So Gal. vi. 7. "Be not deceived; God is not mocked:
   for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." 1 Cor. vi. 9,
   10. "Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, &c. shall
   inherit the kingdom of God." Eph. v. 5, 6. "For this ye know, that no
   whoremonger, nor unclean person, &c. hath any inheritance in the
   kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words."
   1 John iii. 7, 8. "Little children, let no man deceive you: he that
   doth righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous: he that
   committeth sin, is of the devil." Chap. ii. 4. "He that saith, I know
   him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
   in him." And chap, i. 6. "If we say that we have fellowship with him,
   and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth." James i. 26. "If
   any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue,
   but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain." Chap. iii.
   14, 15. "If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory
   not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descendeth not from
   above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish." Psal. cxxv. 5. "As for such
   as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth
   with the workers of iniquity." Isa. xxxv. 8. "An high-way shall be
   there, and it shall be called the way of holiness: the unclean shall
   not pass over it." Rev. xxi. 27. "And there shall in no wise enter into
   it, whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie." And in many
   places, "Depart from me, I know you not, ye that work iniquity."

   Argument VI. Another thing which makes it evident, that holy practice
   is the chief of all the signs of the sincerity of professors, not only
   to the world, but to their own consciences, is, that this is the grand
   evidence which will hereafter be made use of, before the judgment-seat
   of God; according to which his judgment will be regulated, and the
   state of every professor of religion unalterably determined. In the
   future judgment, there will be an open trial of professors; and
   evidences will be made use of in the judgment. For God's future judging
   of men, in order to their eternal retribution, will not be his trying
   and finding out, and passing a judgment upon, the state of men's
   hearts, in his own mind; but it will be a declarative judgment: and the
   end of it will be, not God's forming a judgment within himself, but the
   manifestation of his judgment, and the righteousness of it, to men's
   own consciences and to the world. And therefore the day of judgment is
   called the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Rom.
   ii. 5. And the end of God's future trial and judgment of men, as to the
   part that each one in particular is to have in the judgment, will be
   especially the clear manifestation of God's righteous judgment to his
   conscience." [537] And therefore though God needs no medium, whereby to
   make the truth evident to himself, yet evidences will be exhibited in
   his future judging of men. And doubtless the evidences used in their
   trial, will be such as are best fitted to serve the ends of the
   judgment; viz. the manifestation of the righteous judgment of God, not
   only to the world, but to men's own consciences. But the Scriptures
   abundantly teach us, that the grand evidences which the Judge will make
   use of in the trial, for these ends, according to which the judgment of
   every one shall be regulated, and the irreversible sentence passed,
   will be men's works, or practice, in this world: Rev. xx. 12. "And I
   saw the dead, small and great, stand before God: and the books were
   opened: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written
   in the books, according to their works." So ver. 13. "And the sea gave
   up the dead which were in it; and death and hell gave up the dead which
   were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works."
   2 Cor. v. 10. "For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of
   Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, whether
   it be good or bad." So men's practice is the only evidence that Christ
   represents the future judgment as regulated by, in that most particular
   description of the day of judgment, which we have in the Holy Bible.
   [538] The Judge, then, will not examine men as to the method of their
   experiences, or set every man to tell his story of the manner of his
   conversion; but his works will be brought forth, as evidences of what
   he is, what he has done in darkness and in light; Eccl. xii. 14. "For
   God will bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
   whether it be good, or whether it be evil." In the trial of professors
   at the future judgment, God will call in the same evidences, to
   manifest them to themselves and to the world, which he makes use of to
   manifest them, in the temptations or trials of his providence here,
   viz. their practice, in cases wherein Christ and other things come into
   actual and immediate competition. God, then, for the manifestation of
   his righteous judgment, will weigh professors in a balance that is
   visible; the same that he weighs men in now; which has been already
   described.

   Hence we may undoubtedly infer, that men's works (taken in the sense
   explained) are the highest evidences by which they ought to try
   themselves. Certainly that which our Supreme Judge will chiefly use,
   when we come to stand before him, we should chiefly adopt, in order to
   judge ourselves by. [539] If it had not been revealed in what manner
   and by what evidence the Judge would proceed with us hereafter, how
   natural would it be for one to say, "O that I knew what token God will
   chiefly look for, and insist upon, in the last and decisive judgment;
   and which he expects that all should be able to produce, who would,
   then be accepted of him, and according to which sentence shall be
   passed; that I might know what evidence especially to seek after now,
   as I would be sure not to foil then." And seeing God has so plainly and
   abundantly revealed what this evidence is, surely, if we act wisely, we
   shall regard it as of the greatest importance.

   Now from all that has been said, I think it abundantly manifest, that
   christian practice is the most proper evidence of the gracious
   sincerity of professors, to themselves and others; and the chief of all
   the marks of grace, the sign of signs, and evidence of evidences, that
   which seals and crowns all other signs.--I had rather have the
   testimony of my conscience, that I have such a saying of my Supreme
   Judge on my side, as that, John xiv. 21. "He that hath my commandments,
   and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me;" than the judgment and
   fullest approbation of all the wise, sound, and experienced divines,
   that have lived this thousand years, on the most exact and critical
   examination of my experiences, as to the manner of my conversion. Not
   that there are no other good evidences of a state of grace but this.
   There may be other exercises of grace, besides these efficient
   exercises, which the saints may have in contemplation, that may be very
   satisfying to them: but yet this is the chief and most proper evidence.
   There may be several good evidences that a tree is a fig-tree; but the
   highest and most proper evidence of it is, that it actually bears figs.
   It is possible, that a man may have a good assurance of a state of
   grace, at his first conversion, before he has had opportunity to gain
   assurance by this great evidence I am speaking of.--If a man hears that
   a great treasure is offered him, in a distant place, on condition that
   he will prize it so much, as to be willing to leave what he possesses
   at home, and go a journey for it, over the rocks and mountains that are
   in the way, to the place where it is; it is possible the man may be
   well assured, that he values the treasure to the degree spoken of, as
   soon as the offer is made him; he may feel a willingness to go for the
   treasure, beyond all doubt: but yet, this does not hinder but that his
   actual going for it, is the highest and most proper evidence of his
   being willing, not only to others, but to himself. But then as an
   evidence to himself, his outward actions, and the motions of his body
   in his journey, are not considered alone, exclusive of the action of
   his mind, and a consciousness within himself, of the thing that moves
   him, and the end he goes for; otherwise his bodily motion is no
   evidence to him, of his prizing the treasure. In such a manner is
   christian practice the most proper evidence of a saving value of the
   pearl of great price, and treasure hid in the field.

   Christian practice is the sign of signs, in this sense, that it is the
   great evidence which confirms and crowns all other signs of godliness.
   There is no one grace of the Spirit of God, but that christian practice
   is the most proper evidence of the truth of it. As it is with the
   members of our bodies, and all our utensils, the proper proof of their
   soundness and goodness is in the use of them; so it is with our graces,
   (which are given to be used in practice, as much as our hands and feet,
   or the tools with which we work, the proper trial and proof of them is
   in their exercise in practice. Most of the things we use are
   serviceable to us, and so have their serviceableness proved, in some
   pressure, straining, agitation, or collision. So it is with a bow, a
   sword, an axe, a saw, a cord, a chain, a staff, a foot, a tooth, &c.
   And those which are so weak, as not to bear the strain or pressure we
   need, to which we put them, are good for nothing. So it is with all the
   virtues of the mind. The proper trial and proof of them, is in their
   being exercised under those temptations and trials that God brings us
   under, in the course of his providence, and in being put to such
   service as strains hard upon the principles of nature.

   Practice is the proper proof of the true and saving knowledge of God:
   as appears by that of the apostle already mentioned, "Hereby we know
   that we know him, that we keep his commandments." It is in vain for us
   to "profess that we know God, if in works we deny him,." Tit. i. 16.
   And if we "know God, but glorify him not as God;" our knowledge will
   only condemn, and not save us, .Rom. i. 21. The great note of that
   knowledge which saves and makes happy, is, that it is practical; John
   xiii. 17. "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." Job
   xxviii. 28. "To depart from evil is understanding."

   Holy practice is the proper evidence of repentance. When the Jews
   professed repentance, when they came confessing their sins to John,
   preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; he
   directed them to the right way of getting and exhibiting proper
   evidences of the truth of their repentance when he said to them, "Bring
   forth fruits meet for repentance,". Matt. iii. 8. Which was agreeable
   to the practice of the apostle Paul; see Acts xxvi. 20. Pardon and
   mercy are constantly promised to him who has this evidence of true
   repentance, that he forsakes his sin; Prov. xxviii. 13. and Isa. lv. 7.
   and many other places.

   Holy practice is the proper evidence of a saving faith. It is evident
   that the apostle James speaks of works, as what eminently justifies
   faith, or (which is the same thing) justifies the professors of faith,
   and vindicate and manifest the sincerity of their profession, not only
   to the world, but to their own consciences: as is evident by the
   instance he gives of Abraham, James ii. 21-24. And in ver. 20. and 26.
   he speaks of the practical and working nature of faith, as the very
   life and soul of it; in the same manner, that the active nature and
   substance, which is in the body of a man, is the life and soul of it.
   And if so, practice is the proper evidence of the life and soul of true
   faith, by which it is distinguished from a dead faith. For doubtless,
   practice is the most proper evidence of a practical nature, and
   operation the most proper evidence of an operative nature.

   Practice is the best evidence of a saving belief of the truth. That is
   spoken of as the proper evidence of the truth being in a professing
   Christian, that he walks in the truth, 3 John 3. "I rejoiced greatly
   when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even
   as thou walkest in the truth."

   Practice is the most proper evidence of a true coming to Christ, and
   accepting of and closing with him. A true and saving coming to Christ,
   is (as Christ often teaches) a coming so as to forsake all for him.
   And, as observed before, to forsake all for Christ in heart, is the
   same thing as to have a heart actually to forsake all; but the proper
   evidence of having a heart actually to forsake all, is indeed actually
   to forsake all when called to it. If a prince make suit to a woman in a
   far country, that she would forsake her own people, and father's house,
   and come to him, in order to be his bride; the proper evidence of the
   compliance of her heart with the king's suit, is her actually forsaking
   her own people, and father's house, and coming to him. By this, her
   compliance with the king's suit is made perfect, in the same sense that
   the apostle James says, by works is faith made perfect. [540] Christ
   promises eternal life, on condition of our coming to him: but it is
   such a coming as he directed the young man to, who came to inquire,
   "what he shall do, that he might have eternal life:" Christ bid him "go
   and sell all that he had, and come to him, and follow him." If he had
   consented in his heart to the proposal, (and had therein come to Christ
   in his heart,) the proper evidence of it would have been his doing of
   it: and therein his coming to Christ would have been made perfect. When
   Christ called Levi the publican, when sitting at the receipt of custom,
   and in the midst of his worldly gains; the closing of Levi's heart with
   this invitation of his Saviour to come to him, was manifested, and made
   perfect, by his actually rising up, leaving all, and following him,
   Luke v. 27, 28. Christ and other things are set before us together, for
   us practically to cleave to one, and forsake the other: in such a case,
   a practical cleaving to Christ, is a practical acceptance of Christ; as
   much as a beggar's reaching out his hand, and taking a gift offered, is
   his practical acceptance of the gift. Yea, that act of the soul which
   cleaves to Christ in practice, is itself the most perfect coming of the
   soul to Christ.

   Practice is the most proper evidence of trusting in Christ for
   salvation. The proper signification of the word trust, according to the
   more ordinary use of it, both in common speech and in the Holy
   Scriptures, is the emboldening and encouragement of a person's mind, to
   run some venture in practice, or in something that he does, on the
   credit of another's sufficiency and faithfulness. And therefore the
   proper evidence of his trusting, is the venture he runs in what he
   does. He is not properly said to run any venture in a dependence on any
   thing, who does nothing on that dependence, or whose practice is no
   otherwise than if he had no dependence. For a man to run a venture in
   dependence on another, is for him to do some thing from that
   dependence, by which he seems to expose himself, and which he would not
   do were it not for that dependence. And therefore it is in complying
   with the difficulties and seeming dangers of christian practice, in a
   dependence on Christ's sufficiency and faithfulness to bestow eternal
   life, that persons are said to venture themselves upon Christ, and
   trust in him for happiness and life. They depend on such promises as
   that, Matt. x. 39. "He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it."
   And so they part with all, and venture their all, in a dependence on
   Christ's sufficiency and truth. And this is the scripture notion of
   trusting in Christ, in the exercise of a saving faith in him. Thus
   Abraham, the father of believers, trusted in Christ, and by faith
   forsook his own country, in a reliance on the covenant of grace which
   God established with him, Heb. xi. 8, 9. Thus also "Moses, by faith
   refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to
   suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
   of sin for a season,". Heb. xi. 23, &c. So by faith others exposed
   themselves to be stoned, and sawn in sunder, or slain with the sword;
   endured the trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, bonds and
   imprisonments, and wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being
   destitute, afflicted, tormented. And in this sense the apostle Paul
   trusted in Christ, and committed himself to him, venturing himself, and
   his whole interest, in a dependence on the ability and faithfulness of
   his Redeemer, under great persecutions, and in suffering the loss of
   all things; 2 Tim. i. 12. "For the which cause I also suffer these
   things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed,
   and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
   unto him against that day."

   If a man should have word brought him from the king of a distant land,
   that he intended to make him his heir, if upon receiving the tidings he
   immediately leaves his native land and friends, and all he has in the
   world, to go to that country, in a dependence on what he hears; then he
   may be said to venture himself and all he has in the world upon it. But
   if he only sits still, and hopes for the promised benefit, inwardly
   pleasing himself with the thoughts of it; he cannot properly be said to
   venture himself upon it; he runs no venture in the case; he does
   nothing, otherwise than he would do, if he had received no such
   tidings, by which he would be exposed to any suffering, in case all
   should fail. So he that on the credit of what he hears of a future
   world, and in dependence on the report of the gospel, concerning life
   and immortality, forsakes all, or does so at least so far as there is
   occasion, making every thing entirely give place to his eternal
   interest; he, and he only, may properly be said to venture himself on
   the report of the gospel. And this is the proper evidence of a true
   trust in Christ for salvation.

   Practice is the proper evidence of a gracious love, both to God and
   men. The texts that plainly teach this, have been so often mentioned
   already, that it is needless to repeat them.

   Practice is the proper evidence of humility. That expression and
   manifestation of humility of heart which God insists on, we should
   regard as the proper expression and manifestation of it: but this is
   walking humbly: Micah vi. 8. "He hath showed thee, O man, what is good,
   and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love
   mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?"

   This is also the proper evidence of the true fear of God. Prov. viii.
   13. "The fear of the Lord is to hate evil." Psal. xxxiv. 11,. &c.
   "Come, ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of
   the Lord.--Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile:
   depart from evil, and do good; seek peace and pursue it." Prov. iii. 7.
   "Fear the Lord, and depart from evil." Prov. xvi. 6. "By the fear of
   the Lord, men depart from evil." Job i. 8. "Hast thou considered my
   servant Job,--a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and
   escheweth evil?" Chap. ii. 3. "Hast thou considered my servant Job,--a
   perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?
   and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me
   against him." Psal. xxxvi. 1. "The transgression of the wicked saith
   within my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes."

   So practice, in rendering again according to benefits received, is the
   proper evidence of true thankfulness. Psal. cxvi. 12. "What shall I
   render to the Lord, for all his benefits towards me?" 2 Chron. xxxii.
   25. "But Hezekiah rendered not again, according to the benefit done
   unto him." Paying our vows unto God, and ordering our conversation
   aright, seem to be spoken of, as the proper expression and evidence of
   true thankfulness in the 50th Psalm, ver. 14. "Offer unto God
   thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the Most High." Ver. 23. "Whoso
   offereth praise, glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his
   conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God."

   The proper evidence of gracious desires and longings, and what
   distinguishes them from those that are false and vain, is, that they
   are not idle wishes, like Balaam's; but effectual in practice, stirring
   up persons earnestly and thoroughly to seek the things they look for.
   Psal. xxvii.

   4. "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after. O
   God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for
   thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no
   water is, to see thy power and thy glory." [541] Ver. 8. "My soul
   followeth hard after thee." Cant. i. 4. "Draw me, we will run after
   thee." Practice is the proper evidence of a gracious hope. 1 John iii.
   3. "Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he
   is pure." Patient continuance in well-doing, through the difficulties
   and trials of the christian course, is often mentioned as the proper
   expression and fruit of a christian hope; 1 Thess. i. 3. "Remembering
   without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of
   hope." 1 Pet. i. 13, 14. "Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be
   sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto
   you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children," &c.
   Psal. cxix. 166. "Lord, I have hoped in thy salvation, and done thy
   commandments." Psal. lxxviii. 7. "That they might set their hope in
   God, and not forget the works of the Lord: but keep his commandments."

   A cheerful practice of our duty, or doing the will of God, is the
   proper evidence of a truly holy joy. Isa lxiv.

   5. [542] "Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and worketh righteousness.
   Thy testimonies have I taken for my heritage for ever; for they are the
   rejoicing of my heart. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy
   statutes alway, even unto the end." Ver. 14. "I have rejoiced in the
   way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches." 1 Cor. xiii. 6.
   "Charity rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth." 2 Cor.
   viii. 2. "The abundance of their joy, abounded unto the riches of their
   liberality."

   Practice also is the proper evidence of Christian fortitude. The trial
   of a good soldier is not in his chimney corner, but in the field of
   battle; 1 Cor. ix. 25 26. 2 Tim. ii. 3-5.

   And as the fruit of holy practice is the chief evidence of the truth of
   grace; so the degree in which experiences have influence on a person's
   practice, is the surest evidence of the degree of that which is
   spiritual and divine in his experiences. Whatever pretences persons may
   make to great discoveries, great love and joys, they are no further to
   be regarded, than they have influence on their practice. Not but that
   allowances must be made for the natural temper. But that does not
   hinder, but that the degree of grace is justly measured, by the degree
   of the effect in practice. For the effect of grace is as great, and the
   alteration as remarkable, in a person of a very ill natural temper, as
   another. Although a person of such a temper, will not behave himself so
   well, with the same degree of grace, as another; the diversity from
   what was before conversion, may be as great: because a person of a good
   natural temper did not behave himself so ill, before conversion.

   Thus I have endeavoured to represent the evidence there is, that
   christian practice is the chief of all the signs of saving grace. And
   before I conclude this discourse, I would say something briefly, in
   answer to two objections, that may possibly be made by some, against
   what has been said upon this head.

   Object. 1. Some may be ready to say, this seems to be contrary to an
   opinion much received among good people; that professors should judge
   of their state chiefly by their inward experience, and that spiritual
   experiences are the main evidences of true grace.

   I answer, It is doubtless a true opinion, and justly much received
   among good people, that professors should chiefly judge of their state
   by their experience. But it is a great mistake, that what has been said
   is at all contrary to that opinion. The chief sign of grace to the
   consciences of Christians being christian practice, in the sense
   explained, and according to what has been shown to be the true notion
   of christian practice, is not at all inconsistent with christian
   experience being the chief evidence of grace. Christian or holy
   practice is spiritual practice; and that is not the motion of a body,
   that knows not how, nor when, nor wherefore it moves: but spiritual
   practice in man, is the practice of a spirit and body jointly; or the
   practice of a spirit, animating, commanding, and actuating a body to
   which it is united, and over which it has power given it by the
   Creator. And therefore the main thing in this holy practice is the holy
   acts of the mind, directing and governing the motions of the body. And
   the motions of the body are to be looked upon as belonging to christian
   practice, only secondarily, and as they are dependent and consequent on
   the acts of the soul. The exercises of grace which Christians are
   conscious of, are what they experience within themselves; and herein
   therefore lies christian experience: and this christian experience
   consists as much in those operative exercises of grace in the will,
   immediately concerned in the management of the behaviour of the body,
   as in other exercises. These inward exercises are not the less a part
   of christian experience, because they have outward behaviour
   immediately connected with them. A strong act of love to God is not the
   less a part of spiritual experience, because it is the act that
   immediately produces and effects some self-denying and expensive
   outward action, which is much to the honour and glory of God.

   To speak of christian experience and practice, as if they were two
   things, properly and entirely distinct, is to make a distinction
   without consideration or reason. Indeed all christian experience is not
   properly called practice; but all christian practice is properly
   experience. And the distinction that is made between them, is not only
   an unreasonable, but an unscriptural distinction. Holy practice is one
   kind or part of christian experience; and both reason and Scripture
   represent it as the chief, and most important, and most distinguishing
   part of it. So it is represented in Jer. xxii. 15, 16. "Did not thy
   father eat and drink, and do justice and judgment?--He judged the cause
   of the poor and needy:--was not this to know me? saith the Lord." Our
   inward acquaintance with God, surely belongs to the head of
   experimental religion; but this God represents as consisting chiefly in
   that experience which there is in holy practice. So the exercises of
   those graces of the love of God, and the fear of God, are a part of
   experimental religion; but these the Scripture represents as consisting
   chiefly in practice, in those fore-mentioned texts.--1 John v. 3. "This
   is the love of God, that we keep his commandments." 2 John 6. "This is
   love, that we walk after his commandment." Psal. xxxiv. 11,. &c. "Come,
   ye children, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord:--Depart from
   evil, and do good." Such experiences as these Hezekiah took comfort in
   chiefly, on his sick-bed; when he said, [543] "Remember, O Lord, I
   beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
   perfect heart." And such experiences as these the psalmist chiefly
   insists upon, in the 119th Psalm, and elsewhere. Such experiences as
   these the apostle Paul mainly insists upon, as Rom. i. 9. "God is my
   witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son."

   2 Cor. i. 12. "For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
   conscience, that, by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
   the world. Chap. iv. 13. We having the same spirit of faith, according
   as it is written, I have believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also
   believe, and therefore speak. Chap. v. 7. We walk by faith, not by
   sight. Ver. 14. The love of Christ constraineth us. Chap. vi. 4-7. In
   all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much
   patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,--in labours,
   in watchings, in fastings. By pureness, by knowledge, by kindness, by
   the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,--by the power of God." Gal. ii. 20.
   "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ
   liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
   faith of the Son of God." Phil. iii. 7, 8. "But what things were gain
   to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all
   things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
   Lord, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ." Col. i. 29.
   "Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working, which
   worketh in me mightily." 1 Thess. ii. 2. "We were bold in our God, to
   speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention. Ver. 8-10.
   "Being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted
   unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because
   ye were dear unto us. For ye remember, brethren, our labour and
   travail, labouring night and day.--Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
   holily, and justly, and unblamably we behaved ourselves among you." And
   with such experiences as these this blessed apostle chiefly comforted
   himself, when he was going to martyrdom, 2 Tim. iv. 6, 7. "For I am now
   ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have
   fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith."

   And not only does the most important and distinguishing part of
   christian experience, lie in spiritual practice; but such is the nature
   of that sort of exercises of grace, wherein spiritual practice
   consists, that nothing is so properly called by the name of
   experimental religion. For that experience, which exercises of grace
   prove effectual at the very point of trial--wherein God proves which we
   will actually cleave to, Christ or our lusts--is the proper experiment
   of the truth and power of our godliness; wherein its victorious power
   and efficacy in producing its proper effect, and reaching its end, is
   found by experience. This is properly christian experience, wherein the
   saints have opportunity to see, by actual experience and trial, whether
   they have a heart to do the will of God, and to forsake other things
   for Christ, or no. As that is called experimental philosophy, which
   brings opinions and notions to the test of fact; so is that properly
   called experimental religion, which brings religious affections and
   intentions to the like test.

   There is a sort of external religious practice, without inward
   experience; which in the sight of God is esteemed good for nothing. And
   there is what is called experience, without practice, being neither
   accompanied nor followed with a christian behaviour; and this is worse
   than nothing. Many persons seem to have very wrong notions of christian
   experience, and spiritual discoveries. Whenever a person finds a heart
   to treat God as God, at the time he has the trial, and finds his
   disposition effectual in the experiment, that is the most proper and
   most distinguishing experience. And to have at such a time that sense
   of divine things, that apprehension of the truth, importance and
   excellency of the things of religion, which then sways and prevails,
   and governs his heart and hands; this is the most excellent spiritual
   light, and these are the most distinguishing discoveries. Religion
   consists much in holy affection; but those exercises of affection which
   are most distinguishing of true religion, are these practical
   exercises. Friendship between earthly friends consists much in
   affection; but yet those strong exercises of affection, that actually
   carry them through fire and water for each other, are the highest
   evidences of true friendship.

   There is nothing in what has been said, contrary to what is asserted by
   some sound divines; when they say, that there are no sure evidences of
   grace, but the acts of grace. For that doth not hinder but that these
   operative productive acts, those exercises of grace, which are
   effectual in practice, may be the highest evidences. Nor does it hinder
   but that, when there are many of these acts and exercises, following
   one another in a course, under various trials of every kind, the
   evidence is still heightened; as one act confirms another. A man by
   once seeing his neighbour, may have good evidence of his presence; but
   by seeing him from day to day, and conversing with him in a course, in
   various circumstances, the evidence is established. The disciples, when
   they first saw Christ after his resurrection, had good evidence that he
   was alive: but by conversing with him for forty days, and his showing
   himself to them alive, by many infallible proofs, they had yet higher
   evidence. [544]

   The witness or seal of the Spirit consists in the effect of the Spirit
   of God in the heart, in the implantation and exercises of grace there,
   and so consists in experience. And it is beyond doubt, that this seal
   of the Spirit is the highest kind of evidence of the saints' adoption,
   that ever they obtain. But in these exercises of grace in practice, God
   gives witness, and sets to his seal, in the most conspicuous, eminent,
   and evident manner. It has been abundantly found to be true in fact, by
   the experience of the christian church, that Christ commonly gives by
   his Spirit the greatest and most joyful evidences to his saints of
   their sonship, in those effectual exercises of grace under trials, of
   which we have spoken; as is manifest in the full assurance and
   unspeakable joys of many of the martyrs. Agreeable to 1 Pet. iv. 14.
   "If ye are reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
   Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you." And Rom. v. 2, 3. "We
   rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and glory in tribulations." And
   agreeable to what the apostle Paul often declares of what he
   experienced in his trials. When the apostle Peter, in my text, speaks
   of the joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which the Christians to whom
   he wrote experienced; He has respect to what they found under
   persecution, as appears by the context. Christ thus manifesting
   himself, as the mend and saviour of his saints cleaving to him under
   trials, seems to have been represented of old by his coming and
   manifesting himself to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the furnace.
   And when the apostle speaks of the witness of the Spirit, in Rom. viii.
   15-17. he has a more immediate respect to what the Christians
   experienced in their exercises of love to God, while suffering
   persecution; as is plain by the context. He is, in the foregoing
   verses, encouraging the christian Romans under their sufferings, that
   though their bodies be dead because of sin, yet they should be raised
   to life again. But it is more especially plain by the verse immediately
   following, ver. 18. "For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present
   time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
   revealed in us." So the apostle has evidently respect to their
   persecutions, in all that he says to the end of the chapter. So when
   the apostle speaks of the earnest of the Spirit, which God had given to
   him, 2 Cor. v. 5. the context shows plainly that he has respect to what
   was given him in his great trials and sufferings. And in that promise
   of "the white stone, and new name, to him that overcomes,". Rev. ii.
   17. it is evident Christ has a special respect to a benefit that
   Christians should obtain by overcoming, when tried, in that day of
   persecution. This appears by ver. 13. and many other passages in this
   epistle to the seven churches of Asia.

   Object. 2. Some also may be ready to object against what has been said
   of christian practice being the chief evidence of the truth of grace,
   that this is a legal doctrine; and that this making practice a thing of
   such great importance in religion, magnifies works, and tends to lead
   men to make too much of their own doings, to the diminution of the
   glory of free grace, and does not seem well to consist with that great
   gospel-doctrine of justification by faith alone.

   But this objection is altogether without reason. Which way is it
   inconsistent with the freeness of God's grace, that holy practice
   should be a sign of God's grace? It is our works being the price of
   God's favour, and not their being the sign of it, that is the thing
   which is inconsistent with the freeness of that favour. Surely the
   beggar's looking on the money he has in his hands, as a sign of the
   kindness of him who gave it to him, is in no respect inconsistent with
   the freeness of that kindness. It is his having money in his hand as
   the price of a benefit, that is the thing which is inconsistent with
   the free kindness of the giver. The notion of the freeness of the grace
   of God to sinners, as that is revealed and taught in the gospel, is
   not, that no holy and amiable qualifications or actions in us shall be
   a fruit, and so a sign, of that grace; but that it is not the
   worthiness or loveliness of any qualification or action of ours which
   recommends us to that grace. Free grace implies, that kindness is shown
   to the unworthy and unlovely; that there is great excellency in the
   benefit bestowed, and no excellency in the subject as the price of it;
   that goodness goes forth, and flows out, from the fulness of God's
   nature, the fulness of the fountain of good, without any amiableness in
   the object to draw it. And this is the notion of justification without
   works, (as this doctrine is taught in the Scripture,) that it is not
   the worthiness or loveliness of our works, or any thing in us, which is
   in any wise accepted with God, as a balance for the guilt of sin, or a
   recommendation of sinners to his acceptance as heirs of life. Thus we
   are justified only by the righteousness of Christ, and not by our
   righteousness. And when works are opposed to faith in this affair, and
   it is said that we are justified by faith and not by works; thereby is
   meant, that it is not the worthiness or amiableness of our works, or
   any thing in us, which recommends us to an interest in Christ and his
   benefits; but that we have this interest only by faith, or by our souls
   receiving Christ, or adhering to and closing with him. But that the
   worthiness or amiableness of nothing in us recommends and brings us to
   an interest in Christ, is no argument that nothing in us is a sign of
   an interest in Christ.

   If the doctrines of free grace and justification by faith alone, be
   inconsistent with the importance of holy practice as a sign of grace;
   then they are equally inconsistent with the importance of any thing
   whatsoever in us as a sign of grace; and holiness, or any grace in us,
   or any experiences; for it is as contrary to the doctrines of free
   grace and justification by faith alone, that any of these should be the
   righteousness which we are justified by, as that holy practice should
   be so. It is with holy works, as it is with holy qualifications: it is
   inconsistent with the freeness of gospel-grace, that a title to
   salvation should be given to men for the loveliness of any of their
   holy qualifications, as much as that it should be given for the
   holiness of their works. It is inconsistent with the gospel-doctrine of
   free grace, that an interest in Christ and his benefits should be given
   for the loveliness of a man's true holiness; the amiableness of his
   renewed, sanctified, heavenly heart; his love to God, his experience of
   joy in the Holy Ghost, self-emptiness, a spirit to exalt Christ above
   all, and to give all glory to him, and a heart devoted unto him. I say,
   it is inconsistent with the gospel-doctrine of free grace, that a title
   to Christ's benefits should be given out of regard to the loveliness of
   any of these, or that any of these should be our righteousness in the
   affair of justification. And yet this does not hinder the importance of
   these things as evidences of an interest in Christ. Just so it is with
   respect to holy actions and works. To make light of works because we
   are not justified by them, is the same thing in effect as to make light
   of all religion, all grace and holiness, yea, true evangelical
   holiness, and all gracious experience: for all is included, when the
   Scripture says, we are not justified by works. By works in this case is
   meant all our own righteousness, religion, or holiness, and every thing
   that is in us; all the good we do, and are conscious of; all external
   acts, all internal exercises of grace, all experiences, and all those
   holy and heavenly things wherein the life, power, and very essence of
   religion consist; all those great things which Christ and his apostles
   mainly insisted on in their preaching, and endeavoured to promote, as
   of the greatest consequence in the hearts and lives of men, and all
   good dispositions, exercises, and qualifications of every kind
   whatsoever; and even faith itself, considered as a part of our
   holiness. For we are justified by none of these things: if we were, we
   should, in a scripture sense, be justified by works. And therefore if
   it be not legal. and contrary to the evangelical doctrine of
   justification without works, to insist on any of these, as of great
   importance in evidence of an interest in Christ; then no more is it
   thus, to insist on the importance of holy practice. It would be legal
   to suppose, that holy practice justifies by entitling us to Christ's
   benefits; but it is not legal to suppose, that holy practice justifies
   the sincerity of a believer, as the proper evidence of it. The apostle
   James did not think it legal to say, that Abraham our father was
   justified by works, in this sense. The Spirit that indited the
   Scripture, did not think the great importance and absolute necessity of
   holy practice, in this respect, to be inconsistent with the freeness of
   grace; for it commonly teaches them both together; as in Rev. xxi. 6,
   7. God says, 'I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of
   the water of life freely;" and then adds in the very next words, "He
   that overcometh shall inherit all things;'' as though behaving well in
   the christian race and warfare, were the condition of the promise. So
   in the next chapter, the 14th and 15th verses, Christ says, "Blessed
   are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
   of life, and enter in through the gates into the city and then
   declares, 15th ver. how they that are of a wicked practice shall be
   excluded. Yet in the two following verses, with very great solemnity,
   Christ invites all to come, and take of the water of life freely; "I am
   the root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star.--And
   the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth, say,
   Come. And let him that is athirst, come: and whosoever will, let him
   come and take of the water of life freely." [545] So chap. iii. 20, 21.
   "Behold, I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and
   open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with
   me." But then it is added in the next words, "To him that overcometh
   will I grant to sit with me in my throne." And in that great
   invitation, Matt. xi. "Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy
   laden, and I will give you rest;" Christ adds in the next words, "Take
   my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart:
   and ye shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my
   burden is light:" as though taking the burden of Christ's service, and
   imitating his example, were necessary in order to the promised rest. So
   in that great invitation to sinners to accept of free grace; Isa. lv. 1
   "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath
   no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without
   money, and without price:" even there, in the continuation of the same
   invitation, the sinner's forsaking his wicked practice is spoken of as
   necessary to the obtaining of mercy; ver. 7. "Let the wicked forsake
   his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto
   the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
   abundantly pardon." So the riches of divine grace in the justification
   of sinners, is set forth with the necessity of holy practice, Isa. i.
   16,. &c. "Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
   from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
   judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
   widow. Come now, let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your
   sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
   like crimson, they shall be as wool." And in that most solemn
   invitation of wisdom, Prov. ix. after it is represented what great
   provision is made; and how all things were ready, the house built, the
   beasts killed, the wine mingled, the table furnished, and the
   messengers sent forth to invite the guests; then we have the free
   invitation, ver. 4-6. "Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for
   him that wanteth understanding, (i.e. has no righteousness,) she saith
   to him, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
   mingled." But then in the next breath it follows," Forsake the foolish,
   and live; and go in the way of understanding:" as though forsaking sin,
   and going in the way of holiness, were necessary in order to life. So
   that the freeness of grace, and the necessity of holy practice, which
   are thus joined together in Scripture, are not inconsistent. Nor does
   it at all diminish the honour and importance of faith, that its
   exercises and effects in practice should be esteemed its chief signs,
   any more than it lessens the importance of life, that action and motion
   are esteemed its chief signs.

   So that in what has been said of the importance of holy practice as the
   main sign of sincerity, there is nothing legal; nothing derogatory to
   the freedom and sovereignty of gospel-grace; nothing in the least
   clashing with the gospel-doctrine of justification by faith alone
   without the works of the law; nothing in the least tending to lessen
   the glory of the Mediator and our dependence on his righteousness;
   nothing infringing on the special prerogatives of faith in the affair
   of our salvation; nothing in any wise detracting from the glory of God
   and his mercy, exalting man, or diminishing his dependence and
   obligation. So that if any are against the importance of holy practice
   as explained, it must be only from a senseless aversion to the letters
   and sound of the word works; when there is no reason in the world to be
   given for it, but what may be given with equal force, why they should
   have an aversion to the words holiness, godliness, grace, religion,
   experience, and even faith itself: for to make a righteousness of any
   of these, is as legal. and as inconsistent with the way of the new
   covenant, as to make a righteousness of holy practice. [546]

   It is greatly to the hurt of religion, for persons to insist little on
   those things which the Scripture insists most upon, as of most
   importance in the evidence of our interest in Christ, under a notion
   that to lay weight on these things is legal. and an old covenant-way.
   To neglect the exercises and effectual operations of grace in practice,
   and insist almost wholly on discoveries, and the method of the immanent
   exercises of conscience and grace in contemplation--depending on an
   ability to make nice distinctions in these matters, and a faculty of
   accurate discerning in them, from philosophy or experience--is highly
   injurious. It is in vain to seek for any better or any further signs,
   than those which the Scriptures have most expressly mentioned, and most
   frequently insisted on, as signs of godliness. They who pretend to a
   greater accuracy in giving signs--or, by their extraordinary
   experience, or insight into the nature of things, to give more
   distinguishing marks, which shall more thoroughly search out and detect
   the hypocrite--are but subtle to darken their own minds, and the minds
   of others; their refinings, and nice discerning, are in God's sight but
   refined foolishness, and sagacious delusion. Here are applicable those
   words of Agur, Prov. xxx. 5, 6. "Every word of God is pure; he is a
   shield to them that put their trust in him: add thou not unto his
   words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar." Our wisdom and
   discerning, with regard to the hearts of men, is not much to be
   trusted. We can see but a little way into the nature of the soul, and
   the depths of man's heart. The ways are many whereby persons'
   affections may be moved without any supernatural influence; the natural
   springs of the affections are various and secret. Many things have
   oftentimes a joint influence on the affections; the imagination,
   natural temper, education, the common influences of the Spirit of God;
   a surprising concourse of affecting circumstances, an extraordinary
   coincidence of things in the course of men's thoughts, together with
   the subtle management of invisible malicious spirits. No philosophy or
   experience will ever be sufficient to guide us safely through this
   labyrinth and maze, without our closely following the clue which God
   has given us in his word. God knows his own reasons, why he insists on
   some things, and plainly sets them forth as what we should try
   ourselves by, rather than others. It may be it is because he knows that
   these things are attended with less perplexity, and that we are less
   liable to be deceived by them than others. He best knows our nature,
   and the nature and manner of his own operations; and he best knows the
   way of our safety. He knows what allowances to make for different
   states of his church, different tempers of particular persons, and
   varieties in the manner of his own operations; how far nature may
   resemble grace, and how far nature may be mixed with grace; what
   affections may rise from imagination, and how far imagination may be
   mixed with spiritual illumination. And therefore it is our wisdom not
   to take his work out of his hands; but to follow him, and lay the
   stress of the judgment of ourselves there, where he has directed us. If
   we do otherwise, no wonder if we are bewildered, confounded, and
   fatally deluded. But if we had got into the way of looking chiefly at
   those things which Christ, his apostles, and prophets chiefly insisted
   on--while judging of ourselves and others, chiefly regarding practical
   exercises and effects of grace, not neglecting other things--it would
   have been of manifold happy consequence. This would above all things
   tend to the conviction of deluded hypocrites, and to prevent the
   delusion of those whose hearts were never brought to a thorough
   compliance with the strait and narrow way which leads to life. It would
   tend to deliver us from innumerable perplexities, arising from various
   inconsistent schemes about methods and steps of experience; it would
   greatly tend to prevent professors neglecting strictness of life, and
   tend to promote their engagedness and earnestness in their christian
   walk; and it would become fashionable for men to show their
   Christianity, more by an amiable distinguished behaviour, than by an
   abundant and excessive declaring of their experiences. We should then
   get into the way of appearing lively in religion, more by being lively
   in the service of God and our generation, than by the forwardness of
   our tongues, and making a business of proclaiming on the house-tops the
   holy and eminent acts and exercises of our own hearts. Then Christians
   who are intimate friends, would talk together of their experiences and
   comforts, in a manner better becoming christian humility and modesty,
   and more to each other's profit; their tongues not running before their
   hands and feet, after the prudent example of the blessed apostle, 2
   Cor. xii. 6. Many occasions of spiritual pride would be cut off, and so
   a great door shut against the devil; and a great many of the main
   stumbling-blocks against experimental and powerful religion would be
   removed. Religion would be declared and manifested in such a way
   as--instead of hardening spectators, and exceedingly promoting
   infidelity and atheism--would above all things tend to convince men
   that there is a reality in religion, and greatly awaken them, and win
   them, by convincing their consciences of the importance and excellency
   of religion. Thus the light of professors would so shine before men,
   that others seeing their good works, would glorify their Father which
   is in heaven!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [532] Scripture-doctrine of Salvation, Sermon I. p. 11.

   [533] "Look upon John. Christ's beloved disciple and bosom companion;
   he had received the anointing to know him that is true, and he knew
   that he knew him, 1 John ii. 3. But how did he know that? He might be
   deceived; (as it is strange to see what a melancholy fancy will do, and
   the effects of it; as honest men are reputed to have weak brains, and
   never saw the depths of the secrets of God:) what is his last proof?
   Because we keep his commandments" Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 131. "A
   man may know his present union to the Lord Jesus, by a work; 1 John ii.
   4. He that saith, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
   liar.--Yes, that is true negatively; but may a man, ought a man, to see
   or know his union positively by this? Ans. ver. 5. Many said they did
   know and love the Lord, but he that keeps his words.--O they are sweet!
   It is heaven to cleave to him in every command: it is death to depart
   from any command: hereby know we that we are in him. If it were
   possible to ask of angels, how they know they are not devils, they
   would answer, the Lord's will is ours." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p.
   134. "If the question be, Whom doth the Lord Jesus love? you need not
   go to heaven for it, the word is nigh thee. Those that love Christ. Who
   are those? Those that keep his commandments." Shepard's Parable, Part
   I. p. 138. "Will you have Christ to sit in heaven, and not look that he
   subdue your lusts by the work of his grace, and so sway your hearts?
   You despise his kingdom then. Do you seek for pardon in the blood of
   Christ, and never look for the virtue and end of that blood to wash you
   and make you without spot, &c.? You despise his priesthood and blood
   then. Do you look for Christ to do work for you, and you not do
   Christ's work, and bring forth fruit to him? You despise his honour
   then. John xv. 8. If I were to discover a hypocrite, or a false heart,
   this I would say, It is he that shall set up Christ, but loathe his
   work." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 140.

   [534] "I am persuaded, as Calvin is, that all the several trials of
   men, are to show them to themselves, and to the world, that they be but
   counterfeits; and to make saints known to themselves the better.--Rom.
   v. 5. Tribulation works trial, and that hope. Prov. xvii. 3. If you
   will know whether it will hold weight, the trial will tell
   you.--Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 191.

   [535] Dr. Sibbs, in his Bruised Reed, says, "When Christ's will cometh
   in competition with any worldly loss or gain, yet if then, in that
   particular case, the heart will stoop to Christ, it is a true sign. For
   the truest trial of the power of grace, is in such particular cases as
   touch us nearest; for there our corruption maketh the greatest head.
   When Christ came home to the young man in the gospel, he lost a
   disciple of him." Mr. Flavel speaks of a holy practice under trials, as
   the greatest evidence of grace. "No man (says he) can say what he is,
   whether his grace be true or false, until they be tried, and examined
   by those things, which are to them as fire is to gold." Touchstone of
   Sincerity, chap. iv. sect. 1. Again, speaking of great difficulties and
   sufferings in the way of duty, wherein a person must actually part with
   what is dearest of a worldly nature, or with his duty; he says, "That
   such sufferings as these will discover the falseness and rottenness of
   men's hearts, cannot be doubted; if you consider, that this is the fire
   designed by God for this very use and purpose, to separate the gold
   from the dross. So you will find it, 1 Pet. iv. 12.--Beloved, think it
   not strange concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, i. e. The
   very design and aim of Providence in permitting and ordering them, is
   to try you. Upon this account you find the hour of persecution (in a
   suitable notion) called the hour of temptation or probation. Rev. iii.
   10. For then, professors are sifted to the very bran, searched to the
   very bottom principles. This is the day that burns as an oven; all that
   do wickedly shall be as stubble,' Mal. iv. i. For in that day the
   predominant interest must appear and be discovered, it can be concealed
   no longer. ' No man can serve two masters,' saith Christ, Luke xvi. 13.
   A man may serve many masters, if they all command the same thing, or
   things subordinate to each other: but he cannot serve two masters, if
   their commands clash and interfere with each other; and such are the
   commands of Christ and the flesh in a suffering hour:-thus the two
   interests come in full opposition. And now have but patience and wait a
   little, and you will discern which is predominant. A dog follows two
   men, while they both walk one way, and you know not which of the two is
   his master: stay but a little, until their path parts, and then you
   shall quickly see who is his master: so it is in this case." Ibid, chap
   viii. § 3. And in another chapter he says. "Great numbers of persons
   are deceived and destroyed by trusting to seeming untried grace. This
   was the miserable condition of the Laodicean professors; they reckoned
   themselves rich, but were really poor: all is not gold that glisters:
   their gold (as they accounted it) was never tried in the fire. If a
   man's whole estate lay in some precious stone, suppose a rich diamond,
   how is he concerned to have it thoroughly tried, to see whether it will
   bear a smart stroke with the hammer, or fly like a Bristol diamond!"
   ibid. chap. x. § 3. Again, in the same place, "The promises of
   salvation are made over to tried grace, and that only as will endure
   the trial." "The Lord will try you. God hath his trying times; and they
   were never sent, but to discover who were dross, who were gold. And the
   main end of all God's trials, is to discover this truth that I now am
   pressing upon you. Some have a thorough work; and now the trial
   discovers the truth, as in Abraham, Heb. xi. 17. Some have a
   superficial work, and they fall in trial, as in Saul; and it doth
   discover it was but an overly work. For this is the question God makes.
   Is it thorough, or no? Ay, saith the carnal heart; Yes. saith a
   gracious heart. Hence it is strange to see what men will do when a
   trial comes." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 219. "There is an hour of
   temptation which tries men, which will discover men indeed." Shepard's
   Parable, Part II. p. 60.

   [536] "It is a sure rule, (says Dr. Preston,) that what the Scriptures
   bestow much words on, we should have much thought on; and what the Holy
   Ghost urgeth most, we should prize most."--Church's Carriage.

   [537] As is manifest by Matt. xviii. 31. to the end. Chap. xx. 8-15.
   Chap. xxii. 11, 12, 13. Chap. xxv. 19-30. and ver. 35, to the end. Luke
   xix. 15-23.

   [538] Sec Matt. xxv. at the latter end. See also Rom. ii. 6-13. Jer.
   xvii. 10. Job xxxiv. 11. Prov. xxiv. 12. Jer. xxxii. 19. Rev. xxii. 12.
   Matt. xvi. 27. Rev. ii. 23. Ezek. xxxiii. 20. 1 Pet. i. 17.

   [539] "That which God maketh a rule of his own judgment, as that by
   which he judgeth of every man, that is a sure rule for every man to
   judge himself by. That which we shall be judged by at the last day is a
   sure rule to apply to ourselves for the present. Now by our obedience
   and works he judgeth us. He will give to every man according to his
   works." Dr. Preston's Church's Carriage.

   [540] "Our real taking of Christ, appears in our actions and works:
   Isa. i. 19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the
   land.' That is, If ye will consent to take JEHOVAH for your Lord and
   King: if ye give consent; there is the first thing; but that is not
   enough: but if ye also obey. The consent that standeth in the inward
   act of the mind, the truth of it will be seen in your obedience, in the
   acts of your lives. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good
   things of the land; that is, you shall take of all that he hath that is
   convenient for you: for then you are married to him in truth, and have
   an interest in all his goods." Dr. Preston's Church's Carriage.

   [541] Psal. lxiii. 1, 2.

   [542] Psal. cxix. 111, 112.

   [543] 2 King xx. 3.

   [544] "The more these visible exercises of grace are renewed, the more
   certain you will be. The more frequently these actings are renewed, the
   more abiding and confirmed your assurance will be. A man that has been
   assured of such visible exercises of grace, may quickly after be in
   doubt, whether he was not mistaken. But when such actings are renewed
   again and again, he grows more settled and established about his good
   estate. If a man see a thing once, that makes him sure; but if
   afterwards he fear he was deceived, when he comes to see it again, he
   is more sure he was not mistaken. If a man read such passages in a
   book, he is sure it is so. Some months after, some may bear him down,
   that he was mistaken, so as to make him question it himself: but when
   he looks, and reads it again, he is abundantly confirmed. The more
   men's grace is multiplied, the more their peace is multiplied; 2 Pet i.
   2. "Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of
   God and Jesus our Lord." Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and
   Hypocrisy.

   [545] Rev. xxii. 16, 17.

   [546] "You say you know Christ, and the love and good-will of Christ
   towards you, and that he is the propitiation for your sins. How do you
   know this? He that saith I know him, and keepeth not his commandments,
   is a liar,' 1 John ii. 4. True, might some reply, he that keeps not the
   commands of Christ, hath thereby a sure evidence that he knows him not,
   and that he is not united to him: but is this any evidence that we do
   know him, and that we are united to him, if we do keep his
   commandments? Yes, verily, saith the apostle, "Hereby we do know that
   we know him, if we keep his commandments." And again, ver. 5. "Hereby
   know we that we are in him." What can be more plain? What a vanity is
   it to say, that this is running upon a covenant of works?--O beloved,
   it is a sad thing to hear such questions and such cold answers also,
   that sanctification possibly may be an evidence. May be? Is it not
   certain? Assuredly, to deny it, is as bad as to affirm that God's own
   promises of favour are not sure evidences thereof, and consequently
   that they are lies and untruths.--Our Saviour, who was no legal
   preacher, pronounceth, and consequently evidenceth, blessedness, by
   eight or nine promises, expressly made to such persons, as had inherent
   graces, Matt. v. 3, 4, &c.''--Shepard's Sound Believer p. 221, 222,
   223.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  APPENDIX

    TO THE TREATISE OF THE AFFECTIONS, IN TWO LETTERS [547]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [547] These Letters were first printed in the "Quarterly Magazine."
   Edinb.
     __________________________________________________________________

      LETTER I.

   TO MR. GILLESPIE. IN ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS.

   Northampton, Sept. 4, 1747.

   Rev. And Dear Sir,

   I received your letter of Nov. 24, 1746, though very long after it was
   written. I thank you for it, and for your offering me a correspondence
   with you. Such an offer I shall gladly embrace, and esteem it a great
   privilege, more especially from the character I have received of you
   from Mr. Abercrombie, who I perceive was intimately acquainted with
   you.

   As to the objections you make against some things contained in my late
   book on Religious Affections, I am sorry you did not read the book
   through, before you made them; if you had, perhaps the difficulties
   would not have appeared quite so great. As to what is contained in the
   74th and 75th pages, I suppose there is not the least difference of
   opinion between you and me, unless it be concerning the signification
   and propriety of expressions. I am fully of your mind, and always was
   without the least doubt of it; "That every one, both saint and sinner,
   is indispensably bound, at all seasons, by the divine authority, to
   believe instantly on the Lord Jesus, and that the command of the Lord,
   1 John iii. 23. that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
   Christ, as it is a prescription of the moral law, no less binds the
   sinner to immediate performance, than the commandment not to kill, to
   keep the Sabbath-day, or any other duty, as to the present performance
   of which, in way of duty, all agree the sinner is bound; and that men
   are bound to trust the divine faithfulness, be their case with respect
   to light and darkness, sight, &c. what it will; and that no situation
   they can be in, looses them from obligation to glorify the Lord at all
   seasons, and expecting the fulfilment of his words; and that the sinner
   that is without spiritual light or sight is bound to believe, and that
   it is a duty at that very time incumbent on him to believe." But I
   conceive that there is a great deal of difference between these two
   things, viz. its being a man's duty that is without spiritual light or
   sight to believe, and its being his duty to believe without spiritual
   light or sight, or to believe while he yet remains without spiritual
   light or sight. Just the same difference that is between these two
   things, viz. its being his duty that has no faith to believe, and its
   being his duty to believe without faith, or to believe without
   believing. I trust there is none will assert the latter, because of the
   contradiction that it implies. As it is not proper to say, it is a
   man's duty to believe without faith, because it implies a
   contradiction, so I think it equally improper to say it is a man's duty
   to believe without these things that are essentially implied in faith,
   because that also implies a contradiction. But a spiritual sight of
   Christ or knowledge of Christ is essentially implied in the very nature
   and notion of faith, and therefore it is absurd to talk of believing on
   Christ without spiritual light or sight. It is the duty of a man that
   is without these things that essentially belong to faith, to believe,
   and it is the duty of a man that is without these things that
   essentially belong to love, to love God; because it is an indispensable
   obligation that lies on all men at all times, and in all circumstances,
   to love God: but yet it is not a duty to love God without loving him,
   or continuing without those things that essentially belong to his love.
   It is the duty of those that have no sense of the loveliness of God,
   and have no esteem of him, to love him, and they be not in the least
   excused by the want of this sense and esteem, in not loving him one
   moment; but yet it would be properly nonsense to say it is their duty
   to love him without any sense of his loveliness or any esteem of him.
   It is indeed their duty this moment to come out of their disesteem and
   stupid wicked insensibility of his loveliness, and to love him. I made
   the distinction (I thought) very plainly, in the midst of those
   sentences you quote as exceptionable. I say expressly, p. 74. "It is
   truly the duty of those who are in darkness to come out of darkness
   into light and believe; but, that they should confidently believe and
   trust, while they yet remain without spiritual light or sight, is an
   anti-scriptural and absurd doctrine." The misunderstanding between us,
   dear Sir, I suppose to be in the different application of the particle
   without, in my use of it, and your understanding of it, or what we
   understand as spoken of and supposed in the expression, without
   spiritual light or sight. As I use it, I apply it to the act of
   believing, and I suppose it to be very absurd to talk of an act of
   faith without spiritual light and sight, wherein I suppose you will
   allow me to be in the right. As you understand it, it is applied to
   duty or obligation, and you suppose it to be not at all absurd to talk
   of an obligation to believe without spiritual light or sight, but that
   the obligation remains full where there is no spiritual light or sight,
   wherein I allow you are in the right. I think, Sir, if you read what I
   have said in my book on this head again, it will be exceeding apparent
   to you, that it is thus that I apply the preposition without, and not
   as you before understood it. I thought I had very plainly manifested
   that what I meant by being in darkness was a being in spiritual
   blindness, and so in a dead, stupid, carnal, and unchristian frame and
   way, and not what is commonly called a being without the light of God's
   countenance, under the hidings of his face. We have a great number of
   people in these parts that go on that supposition in their notions and
   practice, that there really is such a thing as such a manner of
   believing, such a kind of faith as this, viz. a confident believing and
   firm trusting in God in the dark, in the sense mentioned, that is to be
   sought after, and is "the subject matter of divine prescription, and
   which many actually have; and indeed there are innumerable instances of
   such as are apparently in a most senseless, careless, negligent,
   apostate, and every way unchristian and wicked frame, that yet,
   encouraged by this principle, do retain an exceeding strong confidence
   of their good state, and count that herein they do their duty and give
   much glory to God, under the notion of trusting God in the dark, and
   hoping against hope, and not trusting on their own righteousness; and
   they suppose it would show a legal spirit to do otherwise. I thought it
   would be manifest to every reader that I was arguing against such a
   sort of people.

   You say, "It merits consideration whether the believer should ever
   doubt of his state, on any account whatever, because doubting, as
   opposed to believing, is absolutely sinful." Here, Sir, you seem to
   suppose that a person's doubting of his own good estate, is the proper
   opposite of faith, and these and some other expressions in your letter
   seem to suppose that doubting of one's good estate and unbelief is the
   same thing, and so, that being confident of one's good estate and faith
   are the same thing. This I acknowledge I don't understand; I don't take
   faith, and a person's believing that they have faith, to be the same
   thing. Nor do I take unbelief, or being without faith, and doubting
   whether they have it, to be the same thing, but entirely different. I
   should have been glad either that you had taken a little more notice of
   what. I say on this head, p. 76, 77. or that you had said something to
   convince me that I am wrong in this point. The exercise of faith is
   doubtless the way to be delivered from darkness, deadness, backsliding,
   &c. or rather is the deliverance; as forsaking sin is the way to
   deliverance from sin, and is the deliverance itself. The exercise of
   grace is doubtless the way to deliverance from a graceless frame, that
   consists in the want of the exercise of grace. But as to what you say,
   or seem to intimate, of a person's being confident of his own good
   estate, as being the way to be delivered from darkness, deadness,
   backsliding, and prevailing iniquity, I think, whoever supposes this to
   be God's method of delivering his saints, when sunk into an evil,
   careless, carnal, and unchristian frame, first to assure them of their
   good estate and his favour, while they yet remain in such a frame, and
   to make that the means of their deliverance, does surely mistake God's
   method of dealing with such persons. Among all the multitudes I have
   had opportunity to observe, I never knew one dealt with after this
   manner. I have known many brought back from great declension, that
   appeared to me to be true saints, but it was in a way very diverse from
   this. In the first place, conscience has been awakened, and they have
   been brought into great fear of the wrath of God, having his favour
   hid, and they have been the subjects of a kind of new work of
   humiliation, brought to a great sense of their deserving of God's
   wrath, even while they have yet feared it, before God has delivered
   them from the apprehension of it, and comforted them with a renewed
   sense of his favour.

   As to what I say of the necessity of universal obedience, or of one way
   of known sin, (i. e. so as properly to be said to be the way and manner
   of the man,) being exception enough against a man's salvation; I should
   have known better what to have said further about it, if you had
   briefly shown how the scriptures that I mention, and the arguments I
   deduce from them, are insufficient for the proof of this point. I
   confess they appear to me to prove it as fully as any thing concerning
   the necessary qualifications of a true saint can be proved from
   Scripture.

   You object against my saying, p. 276. "Nor can a true saint ever fall
   away, so that it shall come to this, that ordinarily there shall be no
   remarkable difference in his walk and behaviour since his conversion,
   from what was before." This, I think, implies no more than that his
   walk over the same ground, in like circumstances, and under like
   trials, will have a remarkable difference. As to the instance you
   mention of David and Solomon, I don't know that the Scripture gives us
   any where so much of a history of their walk and behaviour before their
   conversion, as to put us into any proper capacity of comparing their
   after walk with their former. These examples are uncertain. But I think
   those doctrines of the Scripture are not uncertain, which I mention in
   the place you cite, to confirm the point, which teach that converts are
   new men, new creatures, that they are renewed not only within but
   without, that old things are passed away, and all things become new,
   that they walk in newness of life, that the members of their bodies are
   new, that whereas they before were the servants of sin, and yielded
   their members servants of iniquity, now they yield them servants of
   righteousness unto holiness.

   As to those doubts and cases of difficulty you mention, I should think
   it very needless for a divine of your character, to apply yourself to
   me for a solution of difficulties, for whom it would be more proper to
   learn of you. However, since you are pleased to insist on my giving my
   mind upon them, I would observe, as to the first case you mention, of a
   person incessantly harassed by Satan, &c. you don't say of what nature
   the temptations are that he is harassed with. But I think it impossible
   to give proper advice and direction without knowing this. Satan is to
   be resisted in a very different manner, in different kinds of onsets.
   When persons are harassed with those strange, horrid injections, mat
   melancholic persons are often subject to, he is to be resisted in a
   very different manner, from what is proper in case of violent
   temptation to gratify some worldly lust. In the former case, I should
   by no means advise a person to resist the devil by entering the lists
   with him, and vehemently engaging their mind in an earnest dispute and
   violent struggle with the grand adversary, but rather by diverting the
   mind from his frightful suggestions, by going on stedfastly and
   diligently in the ordinary course of duty, without allowing themselves
   time and leisure to attend to the devil's sophistry, or viewing his
   frightful representations, committing themselves to God by prayer in
   this way, without anxiety about what had been suggested. That is the
   best way of resisting the devil, that crosses his design most; and he
   more effectually disappoints him in such cases, that treats him with
   neglect, than he that attends so much to him, as to engage in a direct
   conflict, and goes about to try his strength and skill with him, in a
   violent dispute or combat. The latter course rather gives him
   advantage, than any thing else. It is what he would; if he can get
   persons thus engaged in a violent struggle, he gains a great point. He
   knows that melancholic persons are not fit for it. By this he gains
   that point of diverting and taking off the person from the ordinary
   course of duty, which is one great thing he aims at; and by this,
   having gained the person's attention to what he says, he has
   opportunity to use all his craft and subtlety, and by this struggle he
   raises melancholic vapours to a greater degree, and further weakens the
   person's mind, and gets him faster and faster in his snares, deeper and
   deeper in the mire. He increases the person's anxiety of mind, which is
   the very thing by which mainly he fulfils all his purposes with such
   persons.

   Concerning the other difficulty you mention relating to the verifying
   of Rom. viii. 20. "All things shall work together for good," &c. in a
   saint that falls under backsliding and spiritual decays, &c. it seems
   to be a matter of some difficulty to understand exactly how this is to
   be taken, and how far it may from hence be inferred, that the
   temptations the saints meet with from Satan, and an evil world, and
   their own declensions and sins, shall surely work for their good.
   However, since you desire my thoughts, I would express them, such as
   they are, as follows.

   In order rightly to state this matter, there are two things may be laid
   down, as positions of certain and indubitable truth concerning this
   doctrine of the apostle.

   First, The meaning cannot be that God's dispensations and disposals
   towards each saint are the best for him, most tending to his happiness,
   of all that are possible: or that all things that are ordered for him,
   or done by God with respect to him, are in all respects better for him
   than any thing else that God could have ordered or done, issuing in the
   highest good and happiness, that it is possible he should be brought
   to; for that would be as much as to say, that God will bestow on every
   one of his elect, as much happiness as he can (confer,) in the utmost
   exercise of his omnipotence, and this sets aside all these different
   degrees of grace and holiness here, and glory hereafter, which he
   bestows according to his sovereign pleasure.

   All things may work together for good to the saints. All may be of
   benefit to them, and may have a concurring tendency to their happiness,
   and may all finally issue in it, and yet not tend to or issue in the
   highest degree of good and happiness possible. There is a certain
   measure of holiness and happiness, that each one of the elect is
   eternally appointed to, and all things that relate to him work together
   to bring to pass this appointed measure of good. The text and context
   speak of God's eternal purpose of good to the elect, predestinating
   them to a conformity to his Son in holiness and happiness; and the
   implicit reasoning of the apostle leads us to suppose that all things
   will purely concur to bring to effect God's eternal purpose. And
   therefore from his reasoning it may be inferred, that all things will
   tend to and work together to bring to pass, that degree of good that
   God has purposed to bestow upon them, and not any more. And indeed it
   would be in itself unreasonable to suppose any thing else but this;
   inasmuch as God is the supreme orderer of all things, doubtless all
   things shall be so ordered, that with one consent, they shall help to
   bring to pass his ends, aims, and purposes; but surely not to bring to
   pass what he does not aim at, and never intended. God in his government
   of the world is carrying on his own designs in every thing; but he is
   not carrying on that which is not his design, and therefore there is no
   need of supposing, that all the circumstances, means, and advantages of
   every saint, are the best in every respect that God could have ordered
   for him, or that there could have been no circumstances or means that
   he could have been the subject of, that would with God's usual blessing
   have issued in his greater good. Every saint is as it were a living
   stone, that in this present state of preparation, is fitting for the
   place appointed for him in the heavenly temple. And in this sense all
   things undoubtedly work together for good to every one that is called
   according to God's purpose. He is, all the while he lives in this
   world, by all the dispensations of Providence towards him, fitting for
   the particular mansion in glory, that is appointed and prepared for
   him, or hewing for his appointed place in the heavenly building.

   Secondly, Another thing which is no less certain and demonstrable than
   the position that has been already laid down, and indeed follows from
   it, is this, When it is said, "all things work together for good," &c.
   hereby cannot be intended that all things, both positive and negative,
   are best for them, or that it is so universally, that not only every
   positive thing that the saints are the subjects of, or are concerned
   in, will work for their good, but also that when any thing is absent or
   withheld from them by God in his providence, that absence or
   withholding is also for their good in that sense, or to be better for
   them than the presence or bestowment would have been; for this would
   have the same absurd consequence that was mentioned before, viz. That
   God makes every saint as happy as possibly he can. And besides, if so,
   it would follow that God's withholding greater degrees of the
   sanctifying influences of his Spirit is for the saints' good, and that
   it is best for them to live and die so low in grace as they do, which
   would be as much as to say that it is for their good to have no more
   good, or that it is for their happiness to have no more happiness here
   and hereafter. If we take good notice of the apostle's discourse in
   Rom. viii. it will be apparent that his words imply no such thing. All
   God's creatures, and all that God does in disposing of them, is for the
   good of the saint. But it will not thence follow, that all God's
   forbearing to do is also for his good, or that it is best for him that
   God does no more for him.

   Therefore, the following things I humbly conceive to be the truth,
   concerning the sins and temptations of the saints being for their good.

   1. That all things whatsoever are for the good of the saints, things
   negative as well as positive, in this sense, that God intends that some
   benefit to them shall arise from every thing, so that something of the
   grace and love of God will hereafter be seen to have been exercised
   towards them in every thing. At the same time, the sovereignty of God
   will also be seen, with regard to the measure of the good or benefit
   aimed at, in that some other things, if God had seen cause to order
   them, would have produced a higher benefit. And with regard to negative
   disposals, consisting not in God's doing, but forbearing to do, not in
   giving, but withholding, some benefit in some respect or other, will
   ever accrue to the saints, even from these; though sometimes the
   benefit will not be equal to the benefit withheld, if it had been
   bestowed. As for instance, when a saint lives and dies comparatively
   low in grace. There is some good improvement shall be made, even of
   this, in the eternal state of the saint, whereby he shall receive a
   real benefit, though the benefit shall not be equal to the benefit of a
   higher degree of holiness, if God had bestowed it.

   2. God carries on a design of love to his people, and to each
   individual saint, not only in all things that they are the subjects of
   while they live, but also in all his works and disposals, and in all
   his acts from eternity to eternity.

   3. That the sin, in general, of the saints, is for their good, and for
   the best in this respect, viz. that it is a thing that, through the
   sovereign grace of God, and his infinite wisdom, will issue in a high
   advancement of their eternal happiness, that they have been sinful,
   fallen creatures, and not from the beginning perfectly innocent and
   holy, as the elect angels; and that they shall obtain some additional
   good on occasion of all the sin they have been the subjects of, or have
   committed, beyond what they would have had, if they never had been
   fallen creatures.

   4. The sin of the saints in this sense cannot be for their good, that
   it should finally be best for them, that while they lived in this
   world, their restoration and recovery from the corruption they became
   subject to by the fall, was no greater, the mortification of sin, and
   spiritual vivification of their soul, carried on to no greater degree,
   that they remained so deficient, as to love to God, christian love to
   men, humility, heavenly-mindedness, and that they were so barren, and
   did so few good works, and consequently, that in general, they had so
   much sin, and of the exercises of it, and not more holiness, and of the
   exercises and fruits of that, for in proportion as one of these is
   more, the other will be less, as infallibly as darkness is more or less
   in proportion to the diminution or increase of light. It cannot finally
   be better for the saints, that in general, while they live, they had so
   much sin of heart and life, rather than more holiness of heart and
   life. Because the reward of all at last will be according to their
   works, and he that sowed sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that
   sowed bountifully shall reap bountifully, and he that builds wood, hay,
   and stubble, shall finally suffer loss, and have a less reward, than if
   he had built gold, silver, and precious stones though he himself shall
   be saved. But notwithstanding this,

   5. The sins and falls of the saints may be for their good, and for the
   better, in this respect, that the issue may be better than if the
   temptation had not happened, and so the occasion not given, either for
   the sin of yielding to the temptation, or the virtue of overcoming it:
   and yet not in the respect (with regard to their sins or falls in
   general) that it should be better for them in the issue, that they have
   yielded to the temptation offered, than if they had overcome. For the
   fewer victories they obtain over temptation, the fewer are their good
   works, and particularly of that kind of good works to which a
   distinguished reward is promised in Rev. ii. and iii. and in many other
   parts of Scripture. The word of God represents the work of a Christian
   in this world as a warfare, and it is evident in the Scripture that he
   who acquits himself as the best soldier shall win the greatest prize.
   Therefore, when the saints are brought into backslidings and decays, by
   being overcome by temptations, the issue of their backslidings may be
   some good to them. They may receive some benefit by occasion of it,
   beyond what they would have received if that temptation had never
   prevailed, and yet their backslidings in general may be a great loss to
   them in the following respect, viz. That they shall have much less
   reward, than if the temptations had been overcome, and they
   notwithstanding had persevered in spiritual vigour and diligence. But
   yet this don't hinder, but that,

   6. It may be so ordered by a sovereign and all-wise God, that the
   saints' falls and backslidings, through their being overcome by
   temptations in some particular instances, may prove best for them, not
   only in that the issue may be greater good to them, than they would
   have received if the temptation had not happened, but even greater in
   that instance, than if the temptation had been overcome. It may be so
   ordered that their being overcome by that temptation, shall be the
   occasion of their having greater strength, and on the whole, obtaining
   more and greater victories, than if they had not fallen in that
   instance. But this is no where promised, nor can it be so, that, in the
   general, it should prove better for them that they were foiled so much,
   and overcome so little, in the course of their lives, and that finally
   their decay is so great, or their progress so small. From these things
   it appears,

   7. That the saying of the apostle, all things work together for good to
   them that love God, though it be fulfilled in some respects to all
   saints, and at all times, and in all circumstances, yet it is fulfilled
   more especially and eminently to the saints continuing in the exercise
   of love to God, not falling from the exercises, or failing in the
   fruits, of divine love in times of trial. Then it is, that temptations,
   enemies, and suffering, will be best for them, working that which is
   most for their good every way, and they shall be more than conquerors
   over tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, and
   sword, Rom. viii. 35-37.

   8. As God is carrying on a design of love to each individual saint, in
   all his works and disposals whatsoever, as was observed before, so the
   particular design of love to them that he is carrying on, is to fit
   them for, and bring them to, their appointed place in the heavenly
   temple, or to that individual, precise happiness and glory in heaven,
   that his eternal love designed for them, and no other (for God's design
   of love or of happiness to them, is only just what it is, and is not
   different from itself). And to fulfil this particular design of love,
   every thing that God does, or in any respect disposes, whether it be
   positive, privative, or negative, contributes, because doubtless every
   thing that God does, or in any respect offers, tends to fulfil his aims
   and designs. Therefore, undoubtedly,

   9. All the while the saint lives in the world, he is fitting for his
   appointed mansion in glory, and hewing for his place in the heavenly
   building. And all his temptations, though they may occasion, for the
   present, great spiritual wounds, yet at last, they shall be an occasion
   of his being more fitted for his place in glory. And therefore we may
   determine, that however the true saint may die, in some respects, under
   decays, under the decay of comfort, and of the exercise of some
   religious affections, yet every saint dies at that time when his
   habitual fitness for his place in the heavenly temple is most complete,
   because otherwise, all things that happen to him while he lives, would
   not work together to fit him for that place.

   10. God brings his saints at the end of their lives to this greatest
   fitness for their place in heaven, not by diminishing grace in their
   hearts, but by increasing it, and carrying on the work of grace in
   their souls. If it be not so, that cannot be true, that where God has
   begun a good work he will perform it, or carry it on to the day of
   Christ, for if they die with a less degree of grace than they had
   before, then it ceases to be carried on before the day of Christ comes.
   If grace is finally diminished, then Satan so far finally obtains the
   victory. He finally prevails to diminish the fire in the smoking flax,
   and then how is that promise verified, that God will not quench the
   smoking flax, till he bring forth judgment unto victory? So that it
   must needs be, that although saints may die under decay in some
   respects, yet they never die under a real habitual decay of the work of
   grace in general. If they fall, they shall rise again before they die,
   and rise higher than before, if not in joy, and some other affections,
   yet in greater degrees of spiritual knowledge, self-emptiness, trust in
   God, and solidity and ripeness of grace.

   If these things that have been observed are true, then we may infer
   from them these corollaries.

   1st, That notwithstanding the truth of that saying of the apostle, Rom.
   viii. 28. the saints have cause to lament their leanness and
   barrenness, and that they are guilty of so much sin, not only as it is
   to the dishonour of God, but also as that which is like to be to their
   own eternal loss and damage.

   2dly, That nothing can be inferred from the forementioned promise
   tending to set aside, or make void, the influence of motives to earnest
   endeavours to avoid all sin, to increase in holiness, and abound in
   good works, from an aim at a high and eminent degree of glory and
   happiness in the future world.

   3dly, That though it is to the eternal damage of the saints,
   ordinarily, when they yield to, and are overcome by temptations, yet
   Satan and other enemies of the saints by whom these temptations come,
   are always wholly disappointed in their temptation, and baffled in
   their design to hurt the saints, inasmuch as the temptation and the sin
   that comes by it, is for the saints' good, and they receive a greater
   benefit in the issue, than if the temptation had not been, and yet less
   than if the temptation had been overcome.

   As to Mr. Boston's View of the Covenant of Grace, I have had some
   opportunity with it, and I confess I did not understand his scheme
   delivered in that book. I have read his Fourfold State of Man, and
   liked it exceeding well. I think he herein shows himself to be a truly
   great divine.

   Hoping that you will accept my letter with candour, and remember me in
   your prayers, I subscribe myself

   Your affectionate and obliged Brother

   Your affectionate and obliged Brother

   and Servant,

   edwards. jonathan
     __________________________________________________________________

      LETTER II.

   TO MR. GILLESPIE. IN ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS.

   Northampton, April 2, 1750.

   Rev. And Dear Sir,

   I received your favour of September 19, 1748, the last summer, and
   would now heartily thank you for it. I suppose it might come in the
   same ship with letters I had from my other correspondents in Scotland,
   which I answered the last summer; but it did not come to hand till a
   long time after most of the others, and after I had finished and sent
   away my answers to them, and that opportunity for answering was past. I
   have had no leisure or opportunity to write any letters to Scotland
   from that time till now, by reason of my peculiar and very
   extraordinary circumstances, on account of the controversy that has
   arisen between me and my people, concerning the profession that ought
   to be made by persons that come to christian sacraments, which is
   likely speedily to issue in a separation between me and my
   congregation. This controversy, in the progress of it, has proved not
   only a controversy between me and my people, but between me and a great
   part of New England; there being many far and near that are warmly
   engaged in it. This affair has unavoidably engaged my mind, and filled
   up my time, and taken me off from other things. I need the prayers of
   my friends, that God would be with me, and direct and assist me in such
   a time of trial, and mercifully order the issue.

   As to the epistolary controversy, dear Sir, between you and me, about
   faith and doubting, I am sorry it should seem to be greater than it is,
   through misunderstanding of one another's meaning, and that the real
   difference between us is so great as it is, in some part of the
   controversy.

   As to the dispute about believing without spiritual light or sight, I
   thought I expressed my meaning in my last letter very plainly, but I
   kept no copy, and it might perhaps be owing to my dulness that I
   thought so. However, I perceive I was not understood. I cannot find out
   by any thing you say to me on this head, that we really differ in
   sentiments, but only in words. I acknowledge with you that "all are
   bound to believe the divine testimony, and trust in Christ; and that
   want of spiritual light or sight does not loose from the obligation one
   is laid under by the divine command, to believe instantly on Christ, at
   all seasons, nor excuse him, in any degree, for not believing. Even
   when one wants the influence and grace of the Spirit, still he is bound
   to believe. Ability is not the rule of duty." I think the obligation to
   believe, lies on a person who is remaining without spiritual light or
   sight, or even in darkness. No darkness, no blindness, no carnality or
   stupidity, excuses him a moment from having as strong and lively faith
   and love as ever was exercised by the apostle Paul, or rather renders
   it not sinful in him that he is at that same moment without such a
   faith and love;--and yet I believe it is absurd, and of very hurtful
   consequence, to urge persons to believe in the dark, in the manner and
   in the sense in which many hundreds have done in America, who plainly
   intend, a believing strongly with such a sort of strong faith or great
   confidence as is consistent with continuing still, even in the time of
   these strong acts of faith, without spiritual light; carnal, stupid,
   careless, and senseless. Their doctrine evidently comes to this, both
   in sense and effect, that it is a mere duty strongly to believe with a
   lightless and sightless faith, or to have a confident, although a
   blind, dark, and stupid faith. And such a faith has indeed been
   promoted exceedingly by their doctrine, and has prevailed with its
   dreadful effects, answerable to the nature of the cause. We have had,
   and have to this day, multitudes of such strong believers, whose bold,
   proud, and stupid confidence, attended with a very wicked behaviour,
   has given the greatest wound to the cause of truth and vital religion
   that ever it suffered in America.

   As to what follows in your letter, concerning a person's believing
   himself to be in a good state, and its being properly of the nature of
   faith: in this there seems to be some real difference between us. But,
   perhaps, there would be none, if distinctness were well observed in the
   use of words. If by a man's believing that he is in a good estate, be
   meant no more than his believing that he does believe in Christ, does
   love God, &c. I think there is nothing of the nature of faith in it;
   because knowing it, or believing it, depends on our own immediate
   sensation or consciousness, and not on divine testimony. True
   believers, in the hope they entertain of salvation, make use of the
   following syllogism, whosoever believes shall be saved: I believe,
   therefore, &c. Assenting to the major proposition is properly of the
   nature of faith, because the ground of my assent to that is divine
   testimony; but my assent to the minor proposition, I humbly conceive,
   is not of the nature of faith, because that is not grounded on divine
   testimony, but my own consciousness. The testimony that is the proper
   ground of faith is in the word of God, Rom. x. 17.. "Faith cometh by
   hearing, and hearing by the word of God." There is such a testimony
   given us in the word of God, that "He that believeth shall be saved."
   But there is no such testimony in the word of God, as that such an
   individual person in such a town in Scotland or New England, believes.
   There is such a proposition in the Scripture, as that Christ loves
   those that love him, and therefore, this every one is bound to believe,
   and affirm: believing this on divine testimony is properly of the
   nature of faith, and for any one to doubt of it, is properly of the
   heinous sin of unbelief. But there is no such proposition in the
   Scripture, nor is it any part of the gospel of Christ, that such an
   individual person in Northampton loves Christ. If I know that I have
   complacence in Christ, I know it the same way that I know I have
   complacence in my wife and children, viz. by the testimony of my own
   heart or inward consciousness. Evangelical faith has the gospel of
   Christ for its foundation; but that I love Christ is a proposition not
   contained in the gospel of Christ.

   And therefore, that we may not dispute in the dark, it is necessary,
   that we should explain what we mean by a person's believing he is in a
   good estate. If thereby we mean only believing the minor of the
   foregoing syllogism, or such like syllogisms, I believe or I love God,
   it is not in the nature of faith. But if by a man's believing himself
   to be in a good estate, be understood his believing not only the minor,
   but the consequence, therefore I shall be saved, or therefore God will
   never leave me nor forsake me; then a man's believing his good estate,
   partakes of the nature of faith; for these consequences depend on
   divine testimony in the word of God and the gospel of Jesus Christ.
   Yea, I would observe farther, that a man's judging of the faith or love
   he finds in himself, whether they are that sort of faith and love which
   he finds to be saving, may depend on his reliance on scripture rules
   and marks which are divine testimonies, which he may be tempted not to
   rely upon, from the consideration of his great unworthiness. But his
   judging that he has those individual inward acts of understanding, and
   exercises of heart, depends on inward sensations, and not on any
   testimony of the word of God. The knowing present acts depends on
   immediate consciousness, and the knowing past acts depends on memory.
   And therefore the fulness of my satisfaction, that I now have such an
   inward act or exercise of mind, depends on the strength of sensation;
   and my satisfaction, that I have had them heretofore, depends on the
   clearness of my memory, and not on the strength of my reliance on any
   divine testimony; and so my doubting whether I have, or have had, such
   individual inward acts, is not of the nature of unbelief, though it may
   arise from unbelief indirectly; because, if I had had more faith, the
   actings of it would have been more sensible, and the memory of them
   more clear, and so I should have been better satisfied that I had them.

   God seems to have given Abraham's servant a revelation, that the damsel
   in whom he found such marks, viz. coming to draw water with a pitcher
   to that well, her readiness to give him and his camels drink, &c.
   should be Isaac's wife, and therefore his assenting to this was of the
   nature of .faith, having divine testimony for its foundation. But his
   believing that Rebekah was the damsel that had these individual marks,
   his knowing that she came to draw water, and that she let down her
   pitcher, &c. was not of the nature of faith. His knowing this was not
   from divine testimony, but from the testimony of his own senses. (Vide
   Gen. xxiv.)

   You speak of "a saint's doubting of his good estate as a part of
   unbelief, and the opposite of faith, considered in its full compass and
   latitude, as one branch of unbelief, one ingredient in unbelief; and of
   assurance of a man's good estate, as one thing that belongs to the
   exercise of faith." I do not know whether I take your meaning in these
   expressions. If you mean, that a person's believing himself to be in a
   good estate is one thing that appertains to the essence of saving
   faith, or that saving faith, in all that belongs to its essence, yea
   its perfection, cannot be without implying it, I must humbly ask leave
   to differ from you. That a believing that I am in a good estate, is no
   part or ingredient in the essence of saving faith, is evident by this,
   that the essence of saving faith must be complete in me, before it can
   be true that I am in a good estate. If I have not as yet acted faith,
   yea if there be any thing wanting in me to make up the essence of
   saving faith, then I am not as yet in a state of salvation, and
   therefore can have no ground to believe that I am so. Any thing that
   belongs to the essence of saving faith is prior, in the order of
   nature, to a man's being in a [believing] stale of salvation, because
   it is saving faith that brings him into such a state. And therefore
   believing that he is in such a state cannot be one thing that is
   essential or necessary in order to his being in such a state; for that
   would imply a contradiction. It would be to suppose a man's believing
   that he is in a good estate to be prior, in the order of nature, to his
   being in a good estate. But a thing cannot be both prior and posterior,
   antecedent and consequent, with respect to the very same thing. The
   real truth of a proposition is in the order of nature first, before its
   being believed to be true. But till a man has already all that belongs
   to the essence of saving faith, that proposition, that he is in a good
   [believing] estate, is not as yet true. All the propositions contained
   in the gospel, all divine testimonies that we have in God's word, are
   true already, are already laid for a foundation for faith, and were
   laid long ago. But that proposition, I am in a good estate, not being
   one of them, is not true till I have first believed; and therefore this
   proposition cannot be believed to be true, till saving faith be first
   complete. Therefore the completeness of the act of saving faith will
   not make it take in a belief of this proposition, nor will the strength
   or perfection of the act cause it to imply this. If a man, in his first
   act of faith, has ever so great a conviction of God's sufficiency and
   faithfulness, and let his reliance on the divine testimony be ever so
   strong and perfect, all will have no tendency to make him believe this
   proposition, I am in a good estate, to be true, till it be true, which
   it is not till the first act of faith is complete, and has made it
   true. A belief of divine testimony in the first act of faith, may be to
   any assignable degree of strength and perfection, without believing
   that proposition, for there is no such divine testimony then extant,
   nor is there any such truth extant, but in consequence of the first act
   of faith. Therefore, (as I said) saving faith may be, with all that
   belongs to its essence, and that in the highest perfection, without
   implying a belief of my own good estate. I do not say it can be without
   having this immediate effect. But it is rather the effect of faith,
   than a part, branch, or ingredient of faith. And so I do not dispute
   whether a man's doubting of his good state may be a consequence of
   unbelief, (I doubt not but it is in those who are in a good state,)
   because, if men had the exercise of faith in such a degree as they
   ought to have, it could not but be very sensible and plain that they
   had it. But yet I think this doubting of a good state is entirely a
   different thing from the sin of unbelief itself, and has nothing of the
   nature of unbelief in it, i. e. if we take doubting one's good state in
   the sense in which I have before explained it, viz. for doubting
   whether I have such individual principles and acts in my soul. Take it
   in a complex sense, and it may have the sin of unbelief in it; e. g.
   If, although I doubt not that I have such and such qualifications, I
   yet doubt of those consequences, for which have divine testimony or
   promise; as when a person doubts not that he loves Christ, yet doubts
   whether he shall receive a crown of life. The doubting of this
   consequence is properly the sin of unbelief.

   You say, dear Sir, "The Holy Ghost requires us to believe the reality
   of his work in us in all its parts just as it is;" and, a little
   before, "The believer's doubting whether or not he has faith, is
   sinful; because it is belying the Holy Ghost, denying his work in him,
   so there is no sin to which that doubting can so properly be reduced as
   unbelief."

   Here I would ask leave thus to express my thoughts in a diversity from
   yours. I think, if it be allowed to be sinful for a believer to doubt
   whether he has faith, that this doubting is not the sin of unbelief on
   any such account as you mention, viz. as belying or denying any
   testimony of the Holy Ghost. There is a difference between doubting of
   the being of some work of the Holy Ghost, and denying the testimony of
   the Holy Ghost, as there is a difference between doubting concerning
   some other works of God, and denying the testimony of God. It is the
   work of God to give a man great natural abilities; and if we suppose
   God requires such a man to believe the reality of his work in all its
   parts just as it is, and so that it is sinful for him at all to doubt
   of his natural abilities being just as good as they are, yet this is no
   belying any testimony of God, though, it be doubting of a work of God,
   and so is diverse from the sin of unbelief. So, if we suppose a very
   eminent saint is to blame in doubting whether he has so much grace as
   he really has; he indeed does not believe the reality of God's work in
   him, in all its parts, just as it is, yet he is not therein guilty of
   the sin of unbelief, against any testimony of God, any more than the
   other. I acknowledge, that for a true saint in a carnal and careless
   frame, to doubt of his good state, is sinful, more indirectly, as the
   cause of it is sinful, viz. the lowness and insensibility of the
   actings of grace in him, and the prevalence of carnality and stupidity.
   Tis sinful to be without assurance, or, (as we say.) it is his own
   fault, he sinfully deprives himself of it; or foregoes it, as a
   servant's being without his tools is his sin, when he has carelessly
   lost them, or as it is his sin to be without strength of body, or
   without the sight of his eyes, when he has deprived himself of these by
   intemperance. Not that weakness or blindness of body, in their own
   nature, are sin, for they are qualities of the body, and not of mind,
   the subject in which sin is inherent. It is indirectly the duty of a
   true saint always to rejoice in the light of God's countenance, because
   sin is the cause of his being without this joy at any time, and
   therefore it was indirectly David's sin that he was not rejoicing in
   the light of God's countenance, at the very time when he was committing
   the great iniquities of adultery and murder. But yet it is not directly
   a believer's duty to rejoice in the light of God's countenance, when
   God hides his face. But it rather then becomes him to be troubled and
   to mourn. So there are perhaps many other privileges of saints that are
   their duty indirectly, and the want of them is sinful, not simply, but
   complexly considered. Of this kind I take the want of assurance of my
   good estate to be.

   I think no words of mine, either in my book or letter, implied that a
   person's deliverance from a bad frame does not begin with renewed acts
   of faith or trusting in God. If they did, they implied what I never
   intended. Doubtless if a saint comes out of an ill frame, wherein grace
   is asleep and inactive, it must be by renewed actings of grace. It is
   very plainly impossible, that grace should begin to cease to be
   inactive, in any other way, than by its beginning to be active. It must
   begin with the renewed actings of some grace or other, and I know
   nothing that I have said to the contrary, but that the grace that shall
   first begin sensibly to revive shall be faith, and that this shall lead
   the way to the renewed acting of all other graces, and to the farther
   acting of faith itself. But a person's coming out of a carnal,
   careless, dead frame, by, or in the reviving of grace in his soul, is
   quite another thing from a saint's having a strong exercise of faith,
   or strong hope, or strong exercise of any other grace, while yet
   remaining in a carnal, careless, dead frame; or, in other words, in a
   frame wherein grace is so far from being in strong exercise, that it is
   asleep, and in a great measure without exercise.

   There is a holy hope, a truly christian hope, that the Scripture speaks
   of, that is reckoned among the graces of the Spirit: and I think I
   should never desire or seek any other hope; for I believe no other hope
   has any holy or good tendency. Therefore this hope, this grace of hope
   alone, can properly be called a duty. But it is just as absurd to talk
   of the exercise of this holy hope, the strong exercise of this grace of
   the Spirit, in a carnal, stupid, careless frame, such a frame yet
   remaining, as it would be to talk of the strong exercises of love to
   God, or heavenly-mindedness, or any other grace, remaining in such a
   frame. It is doubtless proper, earnestly to exhort those who are in
   such a frame to come out of it, in and by the strong exercises of all
   grace; but I should not think it proper to press a man earnestly to
   maintain strong hope, notwithstanding the prevailing and continuance of
   great carnality and stupidity (which is plainly the case of the people
   I opposed). For this is plainly to press people to an unholy hope, a
   strong hope that is no christian grace, but strong and wicked
   presumption; and the promoting of this has most evidently been the
   effect of such a method of dealing with souls in innumerable multitudes
   of awful instances.

   You seem, Sir, to suppose, that God's manner of dealing with his
   saints, while in a secure and cureless frame, is first to give
   assurance of their good state while they remain in such a frame, and to
   make use of that assurance as a mean to bring them out of such a frame.
   Here, again, I must beg leave to differ from you, and to think, that
   none of the instances or texts you adduce from Scripture, do at all
   prove the point. I think it is God's manner, first to awaken their
   consciences, and to bring them to reflect upon themselves, and to bring
   them to feel their own calamity which they have brought upon themselves
   by so departing from God, (by which an end is put to their carelessness
   and security,) and again earnestly and carefully to seek God's face
   before they find him, and before God restores the comfortable and
   joyful sense of his favour; and I think this is abundantly evident both
   by Scripture and experience. You much insist on Jonah as a clear
   instance of the thing you lay down. You observe that he says, chap. ii.
   ver. 5, 7. "I said, I am cast of thy sight, yet will I look again
   towards thy holy temple. "When my soul fainted within me; I remembered
   the Lord, and my prayer came in unto thee, even into thine holy
   temple." You speak of these words as expressing an assurance of his
   good state and of God's favour; (I will not now dispute whether they do
   or not;) and you speak of this exercise of assurance, &c. as his
   practice in an evil frame, and in a careless frame; for he slept
   securely in the sides of the ship, manifesting dismal security, awful
   carelessness in a carnal frame. That Jonah was in a careless secure
   frame when he was asleep in the sides of the ship, I do not deny. But,
   dear Sir, does that prove that he remained still in a careless secure
   frame, when in his heart he said these things in the fish's belly,
   chap. ii. 4, 7.? does it prove that he remained careless after he was
   awakened, and saw the furious storm, and owned it was the fruit of
   God's anger towards him for his sins? and does it prove, that he still
   remained careless after the whale had swallowed him, when he seemed to
   himself to be in the belly hell? when the water compassed him about,
   even to the soul, and, as he says, all God's waters and billows passed
   over him, and he. was ready to despair when he went down to the bottoms
   of the mountains, was ready to think God had cast him out of his sight,
   and confined him in a prison, that he could never escape, the earth
   with her bars was about him, for ever, and his soul fainted within him.
   He was brought into this condition after his sleeping securely in the
   sides of the ship, before he said, "I will look again towards thine
   holy temple," &c. He was evidently first awakened out of carelessness
   and security, and brought into distress, before he was comforted.

   The other place you also much insist on, concerning the people of
   Israel, is very much like this. Before God comforted them with the
   testimonies of his favour, after their backslidings, he first, by
   severe chastisements, together with the awakening influences of his
   Spirit, Drought them out of their carelessness and carnal security. It
   appears by many scriptures, that this was Gods way of dealing with that
   people. So Hos. chap. ii. God first "hedged up her ways with thorns,
   and made a wall that she could not find Her paths. And took away her
   corn and wine, and wool and flax, destroyed her vines and fig-trees,
   and caused her mirth to cease; and, by this means, brought her to
   herself, brought her out of her security, carelessness, and deep sleep,
   very much as the prodigal son was brought to himself. God "brought her
   first into the wilderness, before he spake comfortably to her, and
   opened to her a door of hope. By her distress first brought her to say,
   "I will go and return to my first husband;" and then, when God spake
   comfortably to her, she called him "Ishi, my husband;" and God did as
   it were renewedly betroth her unto him. That passage Hosea ii. is very
   parallel with Jer. iii. One place serves well to illustrate and explain
   the other, and that it was God's way of dealing with his people Israel,
   after their apostacy and carnal security, first to awaken them, and
   under a sense of their sin and misery to bring them solicitously to
   seek his face, before he gave them sensible evidence of his favour; and
   not to awaken out of security, by first making manifest his favour to
   them. [548]

   And, besides, I would observe, that in Jer. iii. the prophecy is not
   concerning the recovery of backsliding saints or the mystical church,
   which, though she had corrupted herself, still continued to be God's
   wife: it is concerning apostate Israel, that had forsaken and renounced
   her husband, and gone after other lovers, and whom God had renounced,
   put away, and given her a bill of divorce, (ver. 8.) so that her
   recovery could not be by giving her assurance of her good estate as
   still remaining his wife, and that God was already married unto her,
   for that was not true, and is not consistent with the context. And
   whereas it is said, ver. 14. "Return, O backsliding children, saith the
   Lord; for I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a city,"
   &c. I am married, in the Hebrew, is in the preterperfect tense; but you
   know, Sir, that in the language of prophecy, the preter tense is very
   commonly put for the future; and whereas it is said, ver. 19. "How
   shall I put thee among the children? And I said, Thou shalt call me, My
   father." I acknowledge this expression here, my Father, and that Rom.
   viii. 15. is the language of faith. It is so two ways: 1st, It is such
   language of the soul as is the immediate effect of a lively faith. I
   acknowledge, that the lively exercises of faith do naturally produce
   satisfaction of a good state us their immediate effect. 2nd, It is
   language which, in another sense, does properly and naturally express
   the very act of faith itself, yea, the first act of faith in a sinner,
   before which he never was in a good state. As thus, supposing a man in
   distress, pursued by his enemies that sought his life, should have the
   gates of several fortresses set open before him, and should be called
   to from each of them to fly thither for refuge; and viewing them all,
   and one appearing strong and safe, but the rest insufficient, he should
   accept the invitation to that one, and fly thither, with this language,
   "This is my fortress; this is my refuge. In vain is salvation looked
   for from the other. Behold I come to thee; this is my sure defence."
   Not that he means that he is already within the fortress, and so in a
   good estate. But this is my chosen fortress, in the strength of which I
   trust, and to which I betake myself for safety. So if a woman were at
   once to be solicited by many lovers, to give herself to them in a
   married state, and beholding the superior excellencies of one far above
   all the rest, should betake herself to him, with this language, "This
   is my husband, behold I come unto thee, thou art my spouse. Not that
   she means that she is already married to him, but that he is her chosen
   husband, &c. Thus God offers himself to sinners as their Saviour, God,
   and Father; and the language of the heart of him that accepts the offer
   by active faith, is, "Thou art my Saviour; in vain is salvation hoped
   for from others that offer themselves. Thou art my God and Father." Not
   that he is already his child, but he chooses him, and comes to him,
   that he may be one of his children; as in Jer. iii. 19. Israel calls
   God his Father, as the way to be put among the children, and to be one
   of them, and not as being one already; and in ver. 21, 22, 23. she is
   not brought out of a careless and secure state by knowing that the Lord
   is her God, but she is first brought to consideration and sense of her
   sin and misery, weeping and supplications for mercy and conviction of
   the vanity of other saviours and refuges, not only before she has
   assurance of her good estate, but before she is brought to fly to God
   for refuge, that she may be in a good estate.

   As to the instance of Job, I would only say this: I think while in his
   state of sore affliction, though he had some great exercises of
   infirmity and impatience under his extreme trials, yet he was very far
   from being in such a frame as I intended, when I spoke of a secure,
   careless, carnal frame, &c. I doubt not, nor did I ever question it,
   that the saints' hope and knowledge of their good state, is in many
   cases of excellent benefit, to help them against temptation and the
   exercises of corruption.

   With regard to the case of extraordinary temptation, and buffeting of
   Satan, which you mention, I do not very well know what to say further.
   I have often found my own insufficiency as a counsellor in such like
   cases, wherein melancholy and bodily distemper have so great a hand,
   and give Satan so great advantage, as appears to me in the case you
   mention. If the Lord do not help, whence should we help? If some
   christian friends of such afflicted and (as it were) possessed persons,
   would, from time to time, pray and fast for them, it might be a proper
   exercise of christian charity, and the likeliest way I know for relief.
   I kept no copy of my former letter to you, and so do not remember fully
   what I have already said concerning this case. But this I have often
   found with such melancholy people, that the greatest difficulty does
   not lie in giving them good advice, but in persuading them to take it.
   One thing I think of great importance, which is, that such persons
   should go on in a steady course of performance of all duties, both of
   their general and particular calling, without suffering themselves to
   be diverted from it by any violence of Satan, or specious pretence of
   his whatsoever, properly ordering, proportioning, and timing all sorts
   of duties, duties to God, public, private, and secret, and duties to
   man, relative duties, of business and conversation, family duties,
   duties of friendship and good neighbourhood, duly proportioning labour
   and rest, intentness and relaxation, without suffering one duty to
   crowd out or intrench upon another. If such persons could be persuaded
   to this, I think, in this way, they would be best guarded against the
   devil, and he would soonest be discouraged, and a good state of body
   would be most likely to be gained, and persons would act most as if
   they trusted and I rested in God, and would be most in the way of his
   help and blessing.

   With regard to what you write concerning immediate revelations, I have
   thought of it, and I find I cannot say any thing to purpose, without
   drawing out this letter to a very extraordinary length, and I am
   already got to such length, that I had need to ask your excuse. I have
   written enough to tire your patience.

   It has indeed been with great difficulty that I have found time to
   write much. If you knew my extraordinary circumstances, I doubt not,
   you would excuse my not writing any more. I acknowledge the subject you
   mention is very important. Probably if God spares my life, and gives me
   opportunity, I may write largely upon it. I know not how Providence
   will dispose of me, I am going to be cast on the wide world, with my
   large family of ten children.--I humbly request your prayers for me
   under my difficulties and trials.

   As to the state of religion in this place and this land, it is at
   present very sorrowful and dark. But I must, for a more particular
   account of things, refer you to my letter to Mr. M'Lauren, of Glasgow,
   and Mr. Robe. So, asking a remembrance in your prayers, I must
   conclude, by subscribing myself, with much esteem and respect,

   Your obliged Brother and Servant,

   jonathan edwards.

   P. S. July 3, 1750. Having had no leisure to finish the preparation of
   my letters to Scotland before this time, by reason of the extraordinary
   troubles, hurries, and confusions of my unusual circumstances, I can
   now inform you, that the controversy between me and my people, that I
   mentioned in the beginning of my letter, has issued in a separation. An
   ecclesiastical council was called on the affair, who sat here the week
   before last, who, by a majority of one voice, determined an immediate
   separation to be necessary; and accordingly my pastoral relation to my
   people was dissolved on June 22. If I can procure the printed accounts
   from Boston of the proceedings of the council, I will give order to my
   friend there to enclose them with this letter, and direct them to
   you.--I desire your prayers, that I may take a suitable notice of the
   frowns of Heaven on me and this people, (between whom was once so great
   an union,) in bringing to pass such a separation between us; and that
   these troubles may be sanctified to me, that God would overrule this
   event for his own glory, (which doubtless many adversaries will rejoice
   and triumph in,) that God would open a door for my future usefulness,
   and provide for me and my numerous family, and take a fatherly care of
   us in our present unsettled, uncertain circumstances, being cast on the
   wide world.

   J. E.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [548] This is evident by many scriptures; as. Lev. xxvi. 40-42. Deut
   xxxii. 36-39. 1 Kings viii. 21, 22. chap. i. 4-8. Ezek. xx. 35, 36. 37.
   Hos. v 15. with chap. vi. 1-3. chap. xiii. 9, 10, chap. xiv. throughout
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

        A

  FAITHFUL NARRATIVE

        OF THE

SURPRISING WORK OF GOD

        IN THE

    CONVERSION OF MANY HUNDRED SOULS,

      IN NORTHAMPTON

        AND THE

    NEIGHBOURING TOWNS AND VILLAGES OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, IN NEW ENGLAND;

        IN A

      LETTER TO THE REV. COLMAN OF BOSTON.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PREFACE

    BY THE FIRST EDITORS, DR. ISAAC WATTS, AND DR. JOHN GUYSE

   The friendly correspondence which we maintain with our brethren of New
   England, gives us now and then the pleasure of hearing some remarkable
   instances of divine grace in the conversion of sinners, and some
   eminent examples of piety in that American part of the world. But never
   did we hear or read, since the first ages of Christianity, any event of
   this kind so surprising as the present Narrative hath set before us.
   The Rev. and worthy Dr. Colman, of Boston, had given us some short
   intimations of it in his letters; and upon our request of a more large
   and particular account, Mr. Edwards, the happy and successful minister
   of Northampton, which was one of the chief scenes of these wonders,
   drew up this history in an epistle to Dr. Colman.

   There were some useful sermons of the venerable and aged Mr. Wm.
   Williams, published late in New England, which were preached in that
   part of the country during this season of the glorious work of God in
   the conversion of men; to which Dr. Colman subjoined a most judicious
   and accurate abridgment of this epistle: and a little after, by Mr.
   Edwards's request, he sent the original to our hands, to be
   communicated to the world under our care here in London.

   We are abundantly satisfied of the truth of this narrative, not only
   from the pious character of the writer, but from the concurrent
   testimony of many other persons in New England; for this thing was not
   done in a corner. There is a spot of ground, as we are here informed,
   wherein there are twelve or fourteen towns and villages, chiefly
   situate in New Hampshire, near the banks of the river of Connecticut,
   within the compass of thirty miles, wherein it pleased God, two years
   ago, to display his free and sovereign mercy in the conversion of a
   great multitude of souls in a short space of time, turning them from a
   formal, cold, and careless profession of Christianity, to the lively
   exercise of every Christian grace, and the powerful practice of our
   holy religion, The great God has seemed to act over again the miracle
   of Gideon's fleece, which was plentifully watered with the dew of
   heaven, while the rest of the earth round about it was dry, and had no
   such remarkable blessing.

   There has been a great and just complaint for many years among the
   ministers and churches in Old England, and in New, (except about the
   time of the late earthquake there,) that the work of conversion goes on
   very slowly, that the Spirit of God in his saving influences is much
   withdrawn from the ministrations of his word, and there are few that
   receive the report of the gospel, with any eminent success upon their
   hearts. But as the gospel is the same divine instrument of grace still,
   as ever it was in the days of the apostles, so our ascended Saviour now
   and then takes a special occasion to manifest the divinity of this
   gospel by a plentiful effusion of his Spirit where it is preached: then
   sinners are turned into saints in numbers, and there is a new face of
   things spread over a town or a country. The wilderness and the solitary
   places are glad, the desert rejoices and blossoms as the rose [549] ;
   and surely concerning this instance we may add, that they have seen the
   glory of the Lord there, and the excellency of our God; they have seen
   the out-goings of God our King in his sanctuary.

   Certainly it becomes us, who profess the religion of Christ, to take
   notice of such astonishing exercises of his power and mercy, and give
   him the glory which is due, when he begins to accomplish any of his
   promises concerning the latter days: and it gives us further
   encouragement to pray, and wait, and hope for the like display of his
   power in the midst of us. The hand of God is not shortened that it
   cannot save, but we have reason to fear that our iniquities, our
   coldness in religion, and the general carnality of our spirits, have
   raised a wall of separation between God and us: and we may add, the
   pride and perverse humour of infidelity, degeneracy, and apostacy from
   the Christian faith, which have of late years broken out amongst us,
   seem to have provoked the Spirit of Christ to absent himself much from
   our nation. "Return, O Lord, and visit thy churches, and revive thine
   own work in the midst of us."

   From such blessed instances of the success of the gospel, as appear in
   this narrative, we may learn much of the way of the Spirit of God in
   his dealing with the souls of men, in order to convince sinners, and
   restore them to his favour and his image by Jesus Christ, his Son. We
   acknowledge that some particular appearances in the work of conversion
   among men may be occasioned by the ministry which they sit under,
   whether it be of a more or less evangelical strain, whether it be more
   severe and affrighting, or more gentle and persuasive. But wheresoever
   God works with power for salvation upon the minds of men, there will be
   some discoveries of a sense of sin, of the danger of the wrath of God,
   and the all-sufficiency of his Son Jesus, to relieve us under all our
   spiritual wants and distresses, and a hearty consent of soul to receive
   him in the various offices of grace, wherein he is set forth in the
   Holy Scriptures. And if our readers had opportunity (as we have had) to
   peruse several of the sermons which were preached during this glorious
   season, we should find that it is the common plain protestant doctrine
   of the Reformation, without stretching towards the antinomians on the
   one side, or the Arminians on the other, that the Spirit of God has
   been pleased to honour with such illustrious success.

   We are taught also by this happy event, how easy it will be for our
   blessed Lord to make a full accomplishment of all his predictions
   concerning his kingdom, and to spread his dominion from sea to sea,
   through all the nations of the earth. We see how easy it is for him
   with one turn of his hand, with one word of his mouth, to awaken whole
   countries of stupid and sleeping sinners, and kindle divine life in
   their souls. The heavenly influence shall run from door to door,
   filling the hearts and lips of every inhabitant with importunate
   inquiries, What shall we do to be saved? And how shall we escape the
   wrath to come? And the name of Christ the Saviour shall diffuse itself
   like a rich and vital perfume to multitudes that were ready to sink and
   perish under the painful sense of their own guilt and danger. Salvation
   shall spread through all the tribes and ranks of mankind, as the
   lightning from heaven in a few moments would communicate a living flame
   through ten thousand lamps and torches placed in a proper situation and
   neighbourhood. Thus a nation shall be born in a day when our Redeemer
   please, and his faithful and obedient subjects shall become as numerous
   as the spires of grass in a meadow newly mown, and refreshed with the
   showers of heaven. But the pleasure of this agreeable hint bears the
   mind away from our theme.

   Let us return to the present narrative: It is worthy of our
   observation, that this great and surprising work does not seem to have
   taken its rise from any sudden and distressing calamity of public
   terror that might universally impress the minds of a people: here was
   no storm, no earthquake, no inundation of water, no desolation by fire,
   no pestilence or any other sweeping distemper, nor any cruel invasion
   by their Indian neighbours, that might force the inhabitants into a
   serious thoughtfulness, and a religious temper, by the fears of
   approaching death and judgment. Such scenes as these have sometimes
   been made happily effectual to awaken sinners in Zion, and the formal
   professor and the hypocrite have been terrified with the thoughts of
   divine wrath breaking in upon them, Who shall dwell with everlasting
   burnings? But in the present case the immediate hand of God in the work
   of his Spirit appears much more evident, because there is no such awful
   and threatening Providence attending it.

   It is worthy also of our further notice, that when many profane
   sinners, and formal professors of religion, have been affrighted out of
   their present carelessness and stupidity by some astonishing terrors
   approaching them, those religious appearances have not been so durable,
   nor the real change of heart so thoroughly effected; many of this sort
   of sudden converts have dropped their religious concerns in a great
   measure when their fears of the threatening calamity were vanished. But
   it is a blessed confirmation of the truth of this present work of
   grace, that the persons who were divinely wrought upon in this season
   continue still to profess serious religion, and to practise it without
   returning to their former follies.

   It may not be amiss in this place to take notice, that a very
   surprising and threatening Providence has this last year attended the
   people of Northampton, among whom this work of divine grace was so
   remarkable: which Providence at first might have been construed by the
   unthinking world to be a signal token of God's displeasure against that
   town, or a judgment from heaven upon the people; but soon afterwards,
   like Paul's shaking the viper off from his hand, it discovered the
   astonishing care and goodness of God expressed towards a place where
   such a multitude of young converts were assembled: nor can we give a
   better account of it than in the language of this very gentleman, the
   Rev. Mr. Edwards, minister of that town, who wrote the following
   Letter, which was published in New England.

   Northampton, March 19, 1737.

   "We in this town, were the last Lord's Day the spectators, and many of
   us the subjects, of one of the most amazing instances of divine
   preservation, that perhaps was ever known in the land. Our
   meeting-house is old and decayed, so that we have been for some time
   building a new one, which is yet unfinished. It has been observed of
   late, that the house we have hitherto met in, has gradually spread at
   bottom; the cells and walls giving way, especially in the fore-side, by
   reason of the weight of timber at top, pressing on the braces that are
   inserted into the posts and beams of the house. It has done so more
   than ordinarily this spring; which seems to have been occasioned by the
   heaving of the ground through the extreme frost of the winter past it's
   now settling again on that side which is next the sun, by the spring
   thaws. By this means, the under-pinning has been considerably
   disordered; which people were not sensible of till the ends of the
   joists which bore up the front gallery, were drawn off from the girts
   on which they rested by the walls giving way. So that in the midst of
   the public exercise in the forenoon, soon after the beginning of
   sermon, the whole gallery--full of people, with all the seats and
   timber, suddenly and without any warning--sunk, and fell down with the
   most amazing noise upon the heads of those that sat under, to the
   astonishment of the congregation. The house was filled with dolorous
   shrieking and crying; and nothing else was expected than to find many
   people dead, and dashed to pieces.

   "The gallery in falling seemed to break and sink first in the middle;
   so that those who were upon it were thrown together in heaps before the
   front door. But the whole was so sudden, that many of them who fell,
   knew nothing at the time what it was that had befallen them. Others in
   the congregation thought it had been an amazing clap of thunder. The
   falling gallery seemed to be broken all to pieces before it got down;
   so that some who fell with it, as well as those who were under, were
   buried in the ruins; and were found pressed under heavy loads of
   timber, and could do nothing to help themselves.

   "But so mysteriously and wonderfully did it come to pass, that every
   life was preserved; and though many were greatly bruised, and their
   flesh torn, yet there is not, as I can understand, one bone broken or
   so much as put out of joint, among them all. Some who were thought to
   be almost dead at first, were greatly recovered; and but one young
   woman seems yet to remain in dangerous circumstances, by an inward hurt
   in her breast: but of late there appears more hope of her recovery.

   "None can give account, or conceive, by what means people's lives and
   limbs should be thus preserved, when so great a multitude were thus
   imminently exposed. It looked as though it was impossible but that
   great numbers must instantly be crushed to death, or dashed in pieces.
   It seems unreasonable to ascribe it to any thing else but the care of
   Providence, in disposing the motions of every piece of timber, and the
   precise place of safety where every one should sit, and fall, when none
   were in any capacity to care for their own preservation. The
   preservation seems to be most wonderful, with respect to the women and
   children in the middle ally, under the gallery, where it came down
   first, and with greatest force, and where there was nothing to break
   the force of the falling weight.

   "Such an event may be a sufficient argument of a divine Providence over
   the lives of men. We thought ourselves called to set apart a day to be
   spent in the solemn worship of God, to humble ourselves under such a
   rebuke of God upon us in time of public service in his house by so
   dangerous and surprising an accident; and to praise his name for so
   wonderful, and as it were miraculous, a preservation. The last
   Wednesday was kept by us to that end; and a mercy in which the hand of
   God is so remarkably evident, may be well worthy to affect the hearts
   of all who hear it."

   Thus far the letter.

   But it is time to conclude our Preface. If there should be any thing
   found in this narrative of the surprising conversion of such numbers of
   souls, where the sentiments or the style of the relater, or his
   inferences from matters of fact, do not appear so agreeable to every
   reader, we hope it will have no unhappy influence to discourage the
   belief of this glorious event. We must allow every writer his own way;
   and must allow him to choose what particular instances he would select
   from the numerous cases which came before him. And though he might have
   chosen others perhaps, of more significancy in the eye of the world,
   than the woman and the child, whose experiences he relates at large;
   yet it is evident he chose that of the woman, because she was dead, and
   she is thereby incapable of knowing any honours or reproaches on this
   account. And as for the child, those who were present, and saw and
   heard such a remarkable and lasting change, on one so very young, must
   necessarily receive a stronger impression from it, and a more agreeable
   surprise, than the mere narration of it can communicate to others at a
   distance. Children's language always loses its striking beauties at
   second-hand.

   Upon the whole, whatever defects any reader may find or imagine in this
   narrative, we are well satisfied, that such an eminent work of God
   ought not to be concealed from the world: and as it was the reverend
   author's opinion, so we declare it to be ours also, that it is very
   likely that this account of such an extraordinary and illustrious
   appearance of divine grace in the conversion of sinners, may, by the
   blessing of God, have a happy effect upon the minds of men, towards the
   honour and enlargement of the kingdom of Christ, much more than any
   supposed imperfection in this representation of it can do injury.

   May the worthy writer of this epistle, and all those his reverend
   brethren in the ministry, who have been honoured in this excellent and
   important service, go on to see their labours crowned with daily and
   persevering success! May the numerous subjects of this surprising work
   hold fast what they have received, and increase in every Christian
   grace and blessing! May a plentiful effusion of the blessed Spirit,
   also, descend on the British isles, and all their American plantations,
   to renew the face of religion there! And we entreat our readers in both
   Englands, to join with us in our hearty addresses to the throne of
   grace, that this wonderful discovery of the hand of God in saving
   sinners, may encourage our faith and hope of the accomplishment of all
   his words of grace, which are written in the Old Testament and in the
   New, concerning the large extent of this salvation in the latter days
   of the world. Came, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and spread thy dominion
   through all the ends of the earth. Amen.

   London,

   Isaac watts.

   Oct. 12, 1737.

   John guyse.

      FAITHFUL NARRATIVE,

      &C. &C.

   Rev. And honoured sir,

   Having seen your letter to my honoured uncle Williams of Hatfield, of
   July 20, wherein you inform him of the notice that has been taken of
   the late wonderful work of God, in this and some other towns in this
   country, by the Rev. Dr. Watts, and Dr. Guyse, of London, and the
   congregation to which the last of these preached on a monthly day of
   solemn prayer; as also, of your desire to be more perfectly acquainted
   with it, by some of us on the spot: and having been since informed by
   my uncle Williams that you desire me to undertake it; I would now do
   it, in as just and faithful a manner as in me lies.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [549] Isa. xxxv. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   A general introductory statement.

   The people of the country, in general, I suppose, are as sober,
   orderly, and good sort of people, as in any part of New England; and I
   believe they have been preserved the freest by far of any part of the
   country, from error, and variety of sects and opinions. Our being so
   far within the land, at a distance from sea-ports, and in a corner of
   the country, has doubtless been one reason why we have not been so much
   corrupted with vice, as most other parts. But without question, the
   religion and good order of the county, and purity in doctrine, has,
   under God, been very much owing to the great abilities, and eminent
   piety, of my venerable and honoured grandfather Stoddard. I suppose we
   have been the freest of any part of the land from unhappy divisions and
   quarrels in our ecclesiastical and religious affairs, till the late
   lamentable Springfield contention. [550]

   Being much separated from other parts of the province, and having
   comparatively but little intercourse with them, we have always managed
   our ecclesiastical affairs within ourselves. It is the way in which the
   country, from its infancy, has gone on, by the practical agreement of
   all; and the way in which our peace and good order has hitherto been
   maintained.

   The town of Northampton is of about 82 years standing, and has now
   about 200 families; which mostly dwell more compactly together than any
   town of such a size in these parts of the country. This probably has
   been an occasion, that both our corruptions and reformations have been,
   from time to time, the more swiftly propagated from one to another
   through the town. Take the town in general, and so far as I can judge,
   they are as rational and intelligent a people as most I have been
   acquainted with. Many of them have been noted for religion; and
   particularly remarkable for their distinct knowledge in things that
   relate to heart religion, and Christian experience, and their great
   regards thereto.

   I am the third minister who has been settled in the town. The Rev. Mr.
   Eleazer Mather, who was the first, was ordained in July, 1669. He was
   one whose heart was much in his work, and abundant in labours for the
   good of precious souls. He had the high esteem and great love for his
   people, and was blessed with no small success. The Rev. Mr. Stoddard
   who succeeded him, came first to the town the November after his death;
   but was not ordained till September 11, 1672, and died February 11,
   1728-9. So that he continued in the work of the ministry here, from his
   first coming to town, near 60 years. And as he was eminent and renowned
   for his gifts and grace; so he was blessed, from the beginning, with
   extraordinary success in his ministry, in the conversion of many souls.
   He had five harvests, as he called them. The first was about 57 years
   ago; the second about 53; the third about 40; the fourth about 24; the
   fifth and last about 18 years ago. Some of these times were much more
   remarkable than others, and the ingathering of souls more plentiful.
   Those about 53, and 40, and 24 years ago, were much greater than either
   the first or the last: but in each of them, I have heard my grandfather
   say, the greater part of the young people in the town, seemed to be
   mainly concerned for their eternal salvation.

   After the last of these, came a far more degenerate time (at least
   among the young people), I suppose, than ever before. Mr. Stoddard,
   indeed, had the comfort, before he died, of seeing a time where there
   were no small appearances of a divine work among some, and a
   considerable ingathering of souls, even after I was settled with him in
   the ministry, which was about two years before his death; and I have
   reason to bless God for the great advantage I had by it. In these two
   years there were nearly twenty that Mr. Stoddard hoped to be savingly
   converted; but there was nothing of any general awakening. The greater
   part seemed to be at that time very insensible of the things of
   religion, and engaged in other cares and pursuits. Just after my
   grandfather's death, it seemed to be a time of extraordinary dullness
   in religion. Licentiousness for some years prevailed among the youth of
   the town; there were many of them very much addicted to night-walking,
   and frequenting the tavern, and lewd practices, wherein some, by their
   example, exceedingly corrupted others. It was their manner very
   frequently to get together, in conventions of both sexes for mirth and
   jollity, which they called frolics; and they would often spend the
   greater part of the night in them, without regard to any order in the
   families they belonged to: and indeed family government did too much
   fail in the town. It was become very customary with many of our young
   people to be indecent in their carriage at meeting, which doubtless
   would not have prevailed in such a degree, had it not been that my
   grandfather, through his great age (though he retained his powers
   surprisingly to the last), was not so able to observe them. There had
   also long prevailed in the town a spirit of contention between two
   parties, into which they had for many years been divided; by which they
   maintained a jealousy one of the other, and were prepared to oppose one
   another in all public affairs.

   But in two or three years after Mr. Stoddard's death, there began to be
   a sensible amendment to these evils. The young people showed more of a
   disposition to hearken to counsel, and by degrees left off their
   frolics; they grew observably more decent in their attendance on the
   public worship, and there were more who manifested a religious concern
   than there used to be.

   At the latter end of the year 1733, there appeared a very unusual
   flexibleness, and yielding to advice, in our young people. It had been
   too long their manner to make the evening after the sabbath, [551] and
   after our public lecture, to be especially the times of their mirth,
   and company-keeping. But a sermon was now preached on the sabbath
   before the lecture, to show the evil tendency of the practice, and to
   persuade them to reform it; and it was urged on heads of families that
   it should be a thing agreed upon among them, to govern their families,
   and keep their children at home, at these times. It was also more
   privately moved, that they should meet together the next day, in their
   several neighborhoods, to know each other's minds; which was
   accordingly done, and the notion complied with throughout the town. But
   parents found little or no occasion for the exercise of government in
   the case. The young people declared themselves convinced by what they
   had heard from the pulpit, and were willing of themselves to comply
   with the counsel that had been given: and it was immediately, and, I
   suppose, almost universally, complied with; and there was a thorough
   reformation of these disorders thenceforward, which has continued ever
   since.

   Presently after this, there began to appear a remarkable religious
   concern at a little village belonging to the congregation called
   Pascommuck, where a few families were settled, at about three miles
   distance from the main body of the town. At this place, a number of
   persons seemed to be savingly wrought upon. In the April following,
   anno 1734, there happened a very sudden and awful death of a young man
   in the bloom of his youth; who being violently seized with a pleurisy,
   and taken immediately very delirious, died in about two days; which
   (together with what was preached publicly on that occasion) much
   affected many young people. This was followed with another death of a
   young married woman, who had been considerably exercised in mind, about
   the salvation of her soul, before she was ill, and was in great
   distress in the beginning of her illness; but seemed to have satisfying
   evidences of God's mercy to her, before her death; so that she died
   very full of comfort, in a most earnest and moving manner warning and
   counselling others. This seemed to contribute to render solemn the
   spirits of many young persons; and there began evidently to appear more
   of a religious concern on people's minds.

   In the fall of the year I proposed it to the young people, that they
   should agree among themselves to spend the evenings after lectures in
   social religion, and to that end divide themselves into several
   companies to meet in various parts of the town; which was accordingly
   done, and those meetings have been since continued, and the example
   imitated by elder people. This was followed with the death of an
   elderly person, which was attended with many unusual circumstances, by
   which many were much moved and affected.

   About this time began the great noise, in this part of the country,
   about Arminianism, which seemed to appear with a very threatening
   aspect upon the interest of religion here. The friends of vital piety
   trembled for fear of the issue; but it seemed, contrary to their fear,
   strongly to be overruled for the promoting of religion. Many who looked
   on themselves as in a Christless condition, seemed to be awakened by
   it, with fear that God was about to withdraw from the land, and that we
   should be given up to heterodoxy and corrupt principles; and that then
   their opportunity for obtaining salvation would be past. Many who were
   brought a little to doubt about the truth of the doctrines they had
   hitherto been taught, seemed to have a kind of trembling fear with
   their doubts, lest they should be led into by-paths, to their eternal
   undoing; and they seemed, with much concern and engagedness of mind, to
   inquire what was indeed the way in which they must come to be accepted
   with God. There were some things said publicly on that occasion,
   concerning justification by faith alone.

   Although great fault was found with meddling with the controversy in
   the pulpit, by such a person, and at that time--and though it was
   ridiculed by many elsewhere--yet it proved a word spoken in season
   here; and was most evidently attended with a very remarkable blessing
   of heaven to the souls of the people in this town. They received thence
   a general satisfaction, with respect to the main thing in question,
   which they had been in trembling doubts and concern about; and their
   minds were engaged the more earnestly to seek that they might come to
   be accepted of God, and saved in the way of the gospel, which had been
   made evident to them to be the true and only way. And then it was, in
   the latter part of December, that the Spirit of God began
   extraordinarily to set in, and wonderfully to work amongst us; and
   there were, very suddenly, one after another, five or six persons, who
   were to all appearance savingly convened, and some of them wrought upon
   in a very remarkable manner.

   Particularly, I was surprised with the relation of a young woman, who
   had been one of the greatest company-keepers in the whole town. When
   she came to me, I had never heard that she was become in any wise
   serious, but by the conversation I then had with her, it appeared to
   me, that what she gave an account of, was a glorious work of God's
   infinite power and sovereign grace; and that God had given her a new
   heart, truly broken and sanctified. I could not then doubt of it, and
   have seen much in my acquaintance with her since to confirm it.

   Though the work was glorious, yet I was filled with concern about the
   effect it might have upon others. I was ready to conclude, (though too
   rashly,) that some would be hardened by it, in carelessness and
   looseness of life; and would take occasion from it to open their mouths
   in reproaches of religion. But the event was the reverse, to a
   wonderful degree. God made it, I suppose, the greatest occasion of
   awakening to others, of any thing that ever came to pass in the town. I
   have had abundant opportunity to know the effect it had, by my private
   conversation with many. The news of it seemed to be almost like a flash
   of lightning, upon the hearts of young people, all over the town, and
   upon many others. Those persons amongst us, who used to be furthest
   from seriousness, and that I most feared would make an ill improvement
   of it, seemed greatly to be awakened with it. Many went to talk with
   her, concerning what she had met with: and what appeared in her seemed
   to be to the satisfaction of all that did so.

   Presently upon this, a great and earnest concern about the great things
   of religion, and the eternal world, became universal in all parts of
   the town, and among persons of all degrees, and all ages. The noise
   amongst the dry bones waxed louder and louder; all other talk but about
   spiritual and eternal things, was soon thrown by; all the conversation,
   in all companies and upon all occasions, was upon these things only,
   unless so much as was necessary for people carrying on their ordinary
   secular business. Other discourse man of the things of religion, would
   scarcely be tolerated in any company. The minds of people were
   wonderfully taken off from the world, it was treated amongst us as a
   thing of very little consequence. They seemed to follow their worldly
   business, more as a part of their duty, than from any disposition they
   had to it; the temptation now seemed to lie on that hand, to neglect
   worldly affairs too much, and to spend too much time in the immediate
   exercise of religion. This was exceedingly misrepresented by reports
   that were spread in distant parts of the land, as though the people
   here had wholly thrown by all worldly business, and betook themselves
   entirely to reading and praying, and such like religious exercises.

   But although people did not ordinarily neglect their worldly business;
   yet religion was with all sorts the great concern, and the world was a
   thing only by the bye. The only thing in their view was to get the
   kingdom of heaven, and every one appeared pressing into it. The
   engaged-ness of their hearts in this great concern could not be hid, it
   appeared in their very countenances. It then was a dreadful thing
   amongst us to lie out of Christ, in danger every day of dropping into
   hell; and what persons' minds were intent upon, was to escape for their
   lives, and to fly from wrath to come. All would eagerly lay hold of
   opportunities for their souls; and were wont very often to meet
   together in private houses, for religious purposes: and such meetings
   when appointed were greatly thronged.

   There was scarcely a single person in the town, old or young, left
   unconcerned about the great things of the eternal world. Those who were
   wont to be the vainest and loosest, and those who had been most
   disposed to think and speak slightly of vital and experimental
   religion, were now generally subject to great awakenings. And the work
   of conversion was carried on in a most astonishing manner, and
   increased more and more; souls did as it were come by flocks to Jesus
   Christ. From day to day, for many months together, might be seen
   evident instances of sinners brought out of darkness into marvellous
   light, and delivered out of an horrible pit, and from the miry day, and
   set upon a rock, with a new song of praise to God in their mouths.

   This work of God, as it was carried on, and the number of true saints
   multiplied, soon made a glorious alteration in the town: so that in the
   spring and summer following, anno 1735, the town seemed to be full of
   the presence of God: it never was so full of love, nor of joy, and yet
   so full of distress, as it was then. There were remarkable tokens of
   God's presence in almost every house. It was a time of joy in families
   on account of salvation being brought unto them; parents rejoicing over
   their children as new born, and husbands over their wives, and wives
   over their husbands. The goings of God were then seen in his sanctuary.
   God's day was a delight, and his tabernacles were amiable. Our public
   assemblies were then beautiful: the congregation was alive in God's
   service, every one earnestly intent on the public worship, every hearer
   eager to drink in the words of the minister as they came from his
   mouth; the assembly in general were, from time to time, in tears while
   the word was preached; some weeping with sorrow and distress, others
   with joy and love, others with pity and concern for the souls of their
   neighbours.

   Our public praises were then greatly enlivened; God was then served in
   our psalmody, in some measure, in the beauty of holiness. It has been
   observable, that there has been scarce any part of divine worship,
   wherein good men amongst us have had grace so drawn forth, and their
   hearts so lifted up in the ways of God, as in singing his praises. Our
   congregation excelled all that ever I knew in the external part of the
   duty before, the men generally carrying regularly, and well, three
   parts of music, and the women a part by themselves; but now they were
   evidently wont to sing with unusual elevation of heart and voice, which
   made the duty pleasant indeed.

   In all companies, on other days, on whatever occasions persons met
   together, Christ was to be heard of, and seen in the midst of them. Our
   young people, when they met, were wont to spend the time in "talking of
   the excellency and dying love of jesus christ, the glory of the way of
   salvation, the wonderful, free, and sovereign grace of God, his
   glorious work in the conversion of a soul, the truth and certainty of
   the great things of God's word, the sweetness of the views of his
   perfections, &c. And even at weddings, which formerly were mere
   occasions of mirth and jollity, there was now no discourse of any thing
   but religion, arid no appearance of any but spiritual mirth. Those
   amongst us who had been formerly converted, were greatly enlivened, and
   renewed with fresh and extraordinary incomes of the Spirit of God;
   though some much more than others, according to the measure of the gift
   of Christ. Many who before had laboured under difficulties about their
   own state, had now their doubts removed by more satisfying experience,
   and more clear discoveries of God's love.

   When this work first appeared, and was so extraordinarily carried on
   amongst us in the winter, others round about us seemed not to know what
   to make of it. Many scoffed at and ridiculed it; and some compared what
   we called conversion, to certain distempers. But it was very observable
   of many, who occasionally came amongst us from abroad with disregardful
   hearts, that what they saw here cured them of such a temper of mind.
   Strangers were generally surprised to find things so much beyond what
   they had heard, and were wont to tell others that the state of the town
   could not be conceived of by those who had not seen it. The notice that
   was taken of it by the people who came to town on occasion of the court
   that sat here in the beginning of March, was very observable. And those
   who came from the neighbourhood to our public lectures, were for the
   most part remarkably affected. Many who came to town, on one occasion
   or other, had their consciences smitten, and awakened; and went home
   with wounded hearts, and with those impressions that never wore off
   till they had hopefully a saving issue; and those who before had
   serious thoughts, had their awakenings and convictions greatly
   increased. There were many instances of persons who came from abroad on
   visits, or on business, who had not been long here before, to all
   appearance, they were savingly wrought upon; and partook of that shower
   of divine blessing which God rained down here, and went home rejoicing;
   till at length the same work began evidently to appear and prevail in
   several other towns in the county.

   In the month of March, the people in South-Hadley begun to be seized
   with deep concern about the things of religion; which very soon became
   universal. The work of God has been very wonderful there; not much, if
   any thing, short of what it has been here, in proportion to the size of
   the place. About the same time, it began to break forth in the west
   part of Suffield, (where it also has been very great,) and it soon
   spread into all parts of the town. It next appeared at Sunderland, and
   soon overspread the town: and I believe was, for a season, not less
   remarkable than it was here. About the same time it began to appear in
   a part of Deerfield, called Green River, and afterwards filled the
   town, and there has been a glorious work there. It began also to be
   manifest, in the south part of Hatfield, in a place called the Hill,
   and the whole, town, in the second week in April, seemed to be seized,
   as it were at once, with concern about the things of religion; and the
   work of God has been great there. There has been also a very general
   awakening at West-Springfield, and Long Meadow; and in Enfield there
   was for a time a pretty general concern amongst some who before had
   been very loose persons. About the same time that this appeared at
   Enfield, the Rev. Mr. Bull, of Westfield, informed me, that there had
   been a great alteration there, and that more had been done in one week,
   than in seven years before. Something of this work likewise appeared in
   the first precinct in Springfield, principally in the north and south
   extremes of the parish. And in Hadley old town, there gradually
   appeared so much of a work of God on souls, as at another time would
   have been thought worthy of much notice. For a short time there was
   also a very great and general concern, of the like nature, at
   Northfield. And wherever this concern appeared, it seemed not to be in
   vain: but in every place God brought saving blessings with him, and his
   word attended with his Spirit (as we have all reason to think) returned
   not void. It might well be said at that time, in all parts of the
   county, who are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their
   windows?

   As what other towns heard of and found in this, was a great means of
   awakening them; so our hearing of such a swift and extraordinary
   propagation, and extent of this work, did doubtless for a time serve to
   uphold the work amongst us. The continual news kept alive the talk of
   religion, and did greatly quicken and rejoice the hearts of God's
   people, and much awakened those who looked on themselves as still left
   behind, and made them the more earnest that they also might share in
   the great blessings that others had obtained.

   This remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God, which thus extended
   from one end to the other of this county, was not confined to it, but
   many places in Connecticut have partaken in the same mercy. For
   instance, the first parish in Windsor, under the pastoral care of the
   Rev. Mr. Marsh, was thus blest about the same time as we in
   Northampton, while we had no knowledge of each other's circumstances.
   There has been a very great ingathering of souls to Christ in that
   place, and something considerable of the same work begun afterwards in
   East Windsor, my honoured father's parish, which has in times past been
   a place favoured with mercies of this nature, above any on this western
   side of New England, excepting Northampton; there having been four or
   five seasons of the pouring out of the Spirit to the general awakening
   of the people there, since my father's settlement amongst them.

   There was also the last spring and summer a wonderful work of God
   carried on at Coventry, under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Meacham. I
   had opportunity to converse with some Coventry people, who gave me a
   very remarkable account of the surprising change that appeared in the
   most rude and vicious persons there. The like was also very great at
   the same time in a part of Lebanon, called the Crank, where the Rev.
   Mr. Wheelock, a young gentleman, is lately settled: and there has been
   much of the same at Durham, under the ministry of the Rev. Mr.
   Chauncey; and to appearance no small ingathering of souls there.
   Likewise amongst many of the young people in the first precinct in
   Stratford, under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Gould; where the work was
   much promoted by the remarkable conversion of a young woman who had
   been a great company-keeper, as it was here.

   Something of this work appeared in several other towns in those parts,
   as I was informed when I was there, the last fall And we have since
   been acquainted with something very remarkable of this nature at
   another parish in Stratford, called Ripton, under the pastoral care of
   the Rev. Mr. Mills. There was a considerable revival of religion last
   summer at Newhaven old town, as I was once and again informed by the
   Rev. Mr. Noyes, the minister there, and by others: and by a letter
   which I very lately received from Mr. Noyes, and also by information we
   have had other ways. This flourishing of religion still continues, and
   has lately much increased. Mr. Noyes writes, that many this summer have
   been added to the church, and particularly mentions several young
   persons that belong to the principal families of that town.

   There has been a degree of the same work at a part of Guildford; and
   very considerable at Mansfield, under the ministry of the Rev. Mr.
   Eleazar Williams; and an unusual religious concern at Tolland; and
   something of it at Hebron, and Bolton. There was also no small effusion
   of the Spirit of God in the north parish in Preston, in the eastern
   part of Connecticut, of which I was informed, and saw something, when I
   was the last autumn at the house, and in the congregation of the Rev.
   Mr. Lord, the minister there; who, with the Rev. Mr. Owen, of Groton,
   came up hither in May, the last year, on purpose to see the work of
   God. Having heard various and contradictory accounts of it, they were
   careful when here to satisfy themselves; and to that end particularly
   conversed with many of our people; which they declared to be entirely
   to their satisfaction; and that the one half had not been told them,
   nor could be told them. Mr. Lord told me that, when he got home, he
   informed his congregation of what he had seen, and that they were
   greatly affected with it; and that it proved the beginning of the same
   work amongst them, which prevailed till there was a general awakening,
   and many instances of persons, who seemed to be remarkably converted. I
   also have lately heard that there has been something of the work at
   Woodbury.

   But this shower of divine blessing has been yet more extensive: there
   was no small degree of it in some part of the Jerseys; as I was
   informed when I was at New York, (in a long journey I took at that time
   of the year for my health,) by some people of the Jerseys, whom I saw.
   Especially the Rev. William Tennent, a minister who seemed to have such
   things much at heart, told me of a very great awakening of many in a
   place called the Mountains, under the ministry of one Mr. Cross; and of
   a very considerable revival of religion in another place under the
   ministry of his brother the Rev. Gilbert Tennent; and also at another
   place, under the ministry of a very pious young gentleman, a Dutch
   minister, whose name as I remember was Freelinghousa.

   This seems to have been a very extraordinary dispensation of
   providence; God has in many respects gone out of, and much beyond, his
   usual and ordinary way. The work in this town, and some others about
   us, has been extraordinary on account of the universality of it,
   affecting all sorts, sober and vicious, high and low, rich and poor,
   wise and unwise. It reached the most considerable families and persons,
   to all appearance, as much as others. In former stirrings of this
   nature, the bulk of the young people have been greatly affected; but
   old men and little children have been so now. Many of the last have, of
   their own accord, formed themselves into religious societies, in
   different parts of the town. A loose careless person could scarcely be
   found in the whole neighbourhood; and if there was any one that seemed
   to remain senseless or unconcerned, it would be spoken of as a strange
   thing.

   This dispensation has also appeared very extraordinary in the numbers
   of those on whom we have reason to hope it has had a saving effect. We
   have about six hundred and twenty communicants, which include almost
   all our adult persons. The church was very large before; but persons
   never thronged into it, as they did in the late extraordinary
   time.--Our sacraments are eight weeks asunder, and I received into our
   communion about a hundred before one sacrament, fourscore of them at
   one time, whose appearance, when they presented themselves together to
   make an open explicit profession of Christianity, was very affecting to
   the congregation. I took in near sixty before the next sacrament day:
   and I had very sufficient evidence of the conversion of their souls,
   through divine grace, though it is not the custom here, as it is in
   many other churches in this country, to make a credible relation of
   their inward experiences the ground of admission to the Lord's supper.

   I am far from pretending to be able to determine how many have lately
   been the subjects of such mercy; but if I may be allowed to declare any
   thing that appears to me probable in a thing of this nature, I hope
   that more than 300 souls were savingly brought home to Christ, in this
   town, in the space of half a year, and about the same number of males
   as females. By what I have heard Mr. Stoddard say, this was far from
   what has been usual in years past; for he observed that in his time,
   many more women were converted than men. Those of our young people who
   are on other accounts most considerable, are mostly, as I hope, truly
   pious, and leading persons in the ways of religion. Those who were
   formerly loose young persons, are generally, to all appearance, become
   true lovers of God and Christ, and spiritual in their dispositions. I
   hope that by far the greater part of persons in this town, above
   sixteen years of age, are such as have the saving knowledge of Jesus
   Christ. By what I have heard I suppose it is so in some other places;
   particularly at Sunderland and South Hartley.

   This has also appeared to be a very extraordinary dispensation, in that
   the Spirit of God has so much extended not only his awakening, but
   regenerating influences, both to elderly persons, and also to those who
   are very young. It has been heretofore rarely heard of, that any were
   converted past middle age; but now we have the same ground to think,
   that many such have at this time been savingly changed, as that others
   have been so in more early years. I suppose there were upwards of fifty
   persons converted in this town above forty years of age; more than
   twenty of them above fifty; about ten of them above sixty; and two of
   them above seventy years of age.

   It has heretofore been looked on as a strange thing, when any have
   seemed to be savingly wrought upon and remarkably changed in their
   childhood. But now, I suppose, near thirty were, to appearance,
   savingly wrought upon, between ten and fourteen years of age; two
   between nine and ten, and one of about four years of age; and because I
   suppose this last will be with most difficulty believed, I will
   hereafter give a particular account of it. The influences of God's Holy
   Spirit have also been very remarkable on children in some other places;
   particularly at Sunderland, South Hadley, and the west part of
   Suffield. There are several families in this town who are all hopefully
   pious. Yea, there are several numerous families, in which, I think, we
   have reason to hope that all the children are truly godly, and most of
   them lately become so. There are very few houses in the whole town,
   into which salvation has not lately come, in one or more instances.
   There are several negroes, who from what was seen in them then, and
   what is discernible in them since, appear to have been truly born again
   in the late remarkable season.

   God has also seemed to have gone out of his usual way, in the quickness
   of his work, and the swift progress His Spirit has made in his
   operations on the hearts of many. It is wonderful that persons should
   be so suddenly, and yet so greatly changed. Many have been taken from a
   loose and careless way of living, and seized with strong convictions of
   their guilt and misery, and in a very little time old things have
   passed away, and all things have become new with them.

   God's work has also appeared very extraordinary in the degrees of his
   influences; in the degrees both of awakening and conviction, and also
   of saving light, love, and joy, that many have experienced. It has also
   been very extraordinary in the extent of it, and its being so swiftly
   propagated from town to town. In former times of the pouring out of the
   Spirit of God on this town, though in some of them it was very
   remarkable, it reached no further then, the neighbouring towns all
   around continued unmoved.

   This work seemed to be at its greatest height in this town, in the
   former part of the spring, in March and April. At that time, God's work
   in the conversion of souls was carried on amongst us in so wonderful a
   manner, that, so far as I can judge, it appears to have been at the
   rate, at least, of four persons in a day; or near thirty in a week,
   take one with another, for five or six weeks together. When God in so
   remarkable a manner took the work into his own hands, there was as much
   done in a day or two as at ordinary times, with all endeavours that men
   can use, and with such a blessing as we commonly have, is done in a
   year.

   I am very sensible, how apt many would be, if they should see the
   account I have here given, presently to think with themselves that I am
   very fond of making a great many converts, and of magnifying the
   matter; and to think that, for want of judgment, I take every religious
   pang, and enthusiastic conceit, for saving conversion. I do not much
   wonder, if they should be apt to think so; and, for this reason, I have
   forborne to publish an account of this great work of God, though I have
   often been solicited. But having now a special call to give an account
   of it, upon mature consideration I thought it might not be beside my
   duty to declare this amazing work, as it appeared to me to be indeed
   divine, and to conceal no part of the glory of it; leaving it with God
   to take care

   of the credit of his own work, and running the venture of any
   censorious thoughts, which might be entertained of me to my
   disadvantage. That distant persons may be under as great advantage as
   may be to judge for themselves of this matter, I would be a little more
   large and particular.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [550] The Springfield Contention relates to the settlement of a
   minister there, which occasioned too warm debates between some, both
   pastors and people, that were for it, and others that were against it,
   on account of their different apprehensions about his principles, and
   about some steps that were taken to procure his ordination.

   [551] It must be noted, that it has never been our manner, to observe
   the evening that follows the sabbath, but that which precedes it, as
   part of the holy time.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   The manner of conversion various, yet bearing a great analogy.

   I therefore proceed to give an account of the manner of persons being
   wrought upon; and here there is a vast variety, perhaps as manifold as
   the subjects of the operation; but yet in many things there is a great
   analogy in all.--Persons are first awakened with a sense of their
   miserable condition by nature, the danger they are in of perishing
   eternally, and that it is of great importance to them that they
   speedily escape and get into a better state. Those who before were
   secure and senseless, are made sensible how much they were in the way
   to ruin, in their former courses. Some are more suddenly seized with
   convictions--it may be, by the news of others' conversion, or something
   they hear in public, or in private conference--their consciences are
   smitten, as if their hearts were pierced through with a dart. Others
   are awakened more gradually, they begin at first to be something more
   thoughtful and considerate, so as to come to a conclusion in their
   minds, that it is their best and wisest way to delay no longer, but to
   improve the present opportunity. They have accordingly set themselves
   seriously to meditate on those things that have the most awakening
   tendency, on purpose to obtain convictions; and so their awakenings
   have increased, till a sense of their misery, by God's Holy Spirit
   setting in therewith, has had fast hold of them. Others who before had
   been somewhat religious, and concerned for their salvation, have been
   awakened in a new manner; and made sensible that their slack and dull
   way of seeking, was never like to attain that purpose.

   These awakenings when they have first seized on persons, have had two
   effects; one was, that they have brought | them immediately to quit
   their sinful practices; and the looser sort have been brought to
   forsake and dread their former vices and extravagancies. When once the
   Spirit of God began to be so wonderfully poured out in a general way
   through the town, people had soon done with their old quarrels,
   backbitings, and intermeddling with other men's matters. The tavern was
   soon left empty, and persons kept very much at home; none went abroad
   unless on necessary business, or on some religious account, and every
   day seemed in many respects like a Sabbath-day. The other effect was,
   that it put them on earnest application to the means of salvation,
   reading, prayer, meditation, the ordinances of God's house, and private
   conference; their cry was, What shall we do to be saved? The place of
   resort was now altered, it was no longer the tavern, but the minister's
   house that was thronged far more than ever the tavern had been wont to
   be.

   There is a very great variety, as to the degree of fear and trouble
   that persons are exercised with, before they attain any comfortable
   evidences of pardon and acceptance with God. Some are from the
   beginning carried on with abundantly more encouragement and hope than
   others. Some have had ten times less trouble of mind than others, in
   whom yet the issue seems to be the same. Some have had such a sense of
   the displeasure of God, and the great danger they were in of damnation,
   that they could not sleep at nights; and many have said that when they
   have laid down, the thoughts of sleeping in such a condition have been
   frightful to them; they have scarcely been free from terror while
   asleep, and they have awakened with fear, heaviness, and distress,
   still abiding on their spirits. It has been very common, that the deep
   and fixed concern on persons' minds, has had a painful influence on
   their bodies, and given disturbance to animal nature.

   The awful apprehensions persons have had of their misery, have for the
   most part been increasing, the nearer they have approached to
   deliverance; though they often pass through many changes and
   alterations in the frame and circumstances of their minds. Sometimes
   they think themselves wholly senseless, and fear that the Spirit of God
   has left them, and that they are given up to judicial hardness; yet
   they appear very deeply exercised about that fear, and are in great
   earnest to obtain convictions again.

   Together with those fears, and that exercise of mind which is rational,
   and which they have just ground for, they have often suffered many
   needless distresses of thought, in which Satan probably has a great
   hand, to entangle them, and block up their way. Sometimes the distemper
   of melancholy has been evidently mixed; of which, when it happens, the
   tempter seems to take great advantage, and puts an unhappy bar in the
   way of any good effect. One knows not how to deal with such persons;
   they turn every thing that is said to them the wrong way, and most to
   their own disadvantage. There is nothing that the devil seems to make
   so great a handle of, as a melancholy humour; unless it be the real
   corruption of the heart.

   But it is very remarkable, that there has been far less of this mixture
   at this time of extraordinary blessing, than there was wont to be in
   persons under awakenings at other times; for it is evident that many
   who before had been exceedingly involved in such difficulties, seemed
   now strangely to be set at liberty. Some persons who had before, for a
   long time, been exceedingly entangled with peculiar temptations of one
   sort or other, unprofitable and hurtful distresses, were soon helped
   over former stumbling-blocks, that hindered their progress towards
   saving good; convictions have wrought more kindly, and they have been
   successfully carried on in the way to life. And thus Satan seemed to be
   restrained, till towards the latter end of this wonderful time, when
   God's Holy Spirit was about to withdraw.

   Many times persons under great awakenings were concerned, because they
   thought they were not awakened, but miserable, hard-hearted, senseless,
   sottish creatures still, and sleeping upon the brink of hell. The sense
   of the need they have to be awakened, and of their comparative
   hardness, grows upon them with their awakenings; so that they seem to
   themselves to be very senseless, when indeed most sensible. There have
   been some instances of persons who have had as great a sense of their
   danger and misery, as their natures could well subsist under, so that a
   little more would probably have destroyed them; and yet they have
   expressed themselves much amazed at their own insensibility and
   sottishness, at such an extraordinary time.

   Persons are sometimes brought to the borders of despair, and it looks
   as black as midnight to them a little before the day dawns in their
   souls. Some few instances there have been, of persons who have had such
   a sense of God's wrath for sin, that they have been overborne; and made
   to cry out under an astonishing sense of their guilt, wondering that
   God suffers such guilty wretches to live upon earth, and that he doth
   not immediately send them to hell. Sometimes their guilt doth so stare
   them in the face, that they are in exceeding terror for fear that God
   will instantly do it; but more commonly their distresses under legal
   awakenings have not been to such a degree. In some, these terrors do
   not seem to be so sharp, when near comfort, as before; their
   convictions have not seemed to work so much that way, but to be led
   further down into their own hearts, to a further sense of their own
   universal depravity and deadness in sin.

   The corruption of the heart has discovered itself in various exercises,
   in the time of legal convictions; sometimes it appears in a great
   struggle, like something roused by an enemy, and Satan the old
   inhabitant seems to exert himself, like a serpent disturbed and
   enraged. Many in such circumstances, have felt a great spirit of envy
   towards the godly, especially towards those who are thought to have
   been lately converted, and most of all towards acquaintance and
   companions, when they are thought to be converted. Indeed, some have
   felt many heart-risings against God, and murmurings at his way of
   dealing with mankind, and his dealings with themselves in particular.
   It has been much insisted on, both in public and private, that persons
   should have the utmost dread of such envious thoughts; which if allowed
   tend exceedingly to quench the Spirit of God, if not to provoke him
   finally to forsake them. And when such a spirit has much prevailed, and
   persons have not so earnestly strove against it as they ought to have
   done, it has seemed to be exceedingly to the hinderance of the good of
   their souls. But in some other instances, where persons have been much
   terrified at the sight of such wickedness in their hearts, God has
   brought good to them out of evil; and made it a means of convincing
   them of their own desperate sinfulness, and bringing them off from all
   self-confidence.

   The drift of the Spirit of God in his legal strivings with persons,
   have seemed most evidently to be, to bring to a conviction of their
   absolute dependence on his sovereign power and grace, and an universal
   necessity of a mediator. This has been effected by leading them more
   and more to a sense of their exceeding wickedness and guiltiness in his
   sight; their pollution, and the insufficiency of their own
   righteousness; that they can in no wise help themselves, and that God
   would be wholly just and righteous in rejecting them and all that they
   do, and in casting them off for ever. There is however, a vast variety,
   as to the manner and distinctness of such convictions.

   As they are gradually more and more convinced of the corruption and
   wickedness of their hearts: they seem to themselves to grow worse and
   worse, harder and blinder, and more desperately wicked, instead of
   growing better. They are ready to be discouraged by it, and oftentimes
   never think themselves so far of from good, as when they are nearest.
   Under the sense which the Spirit of God gives them of their sinfulness,
   they often think that they differ from all others; their hearts are
   ready to sink with the thought, that they are the worst of all, and
   that none ever obtained mercy who were so wicked as they.

   When awakenings first begin, their consciences are commonly most
   exercised about their outward vicious course, or other acts of sin; but
   afterwards, are much more burdened with a sense of heart-sins, the
   dreadful corruption of their nature, their enmity against God, the
   pride of their hearts, their unbelief, their rejection of Christ, the
   stubbornness and obstinacy of their wills; and the like. In many, God
   makes much use of their own experience, in the course of their
   awakenings and endeavours after saving good, to convince them of their
   own vile emptiness and universal depravity.

   Very often under first awakenings, when they are brought to reflect on
   the sin of their past lives, and have something of a terrifying sense
   of God's anger, they set themselves to walk more strictly, and confess
   their sins, and perform many religious duties, with a secret hope of
   appeasing God's anger, and making up for the sins they have committed.
   And oftentimes, at first setting out, their affections are so moved,
   that they are full of tears, in their confessions and prayers; which
   they are ready to make very much of, as though they were some
   atonement, and had power to move correspondent affections in God too.
   Hence they are for a while big with expectation of what God will do for
   them; and conceive they grow better apace, and shall soon be thoroughly
   converted. But these affections are but short-lived; they quickly find
   that they fail, and then they think themselves to be grown worse again.
   They do not find such a prospect of being soon converted, as they
   thought: instead of being nearer, they seem to be farther off; their
   hearts they think are grown harder, and by this means their fears of
   perishing greatly increase. But though they are disappointed, they
   renew their attempts again and again; and still as their attempts are
   multiplied, so are their disappointments. All foils, they see no token
   of having inclined God's heart to them, they do not see that he hears
   their prayers at all, as they expected he would; and sometimes there
   have been great temptations arising hence to leave off seeking, and to
   yield up the case. But as they are still more terrified with fears of
   perishing, and their former hopes of prevailing on God to be merciful
   to them in a great measure fail; sometimes their religious affections
   have turned into heart-risings against God, because he will not pity
   them, and seems to have little regard to their distress, and piteous
   cries, and to all the pains they take. They think of the mercy God has
   shown to others; how soon and how easily others have obtained comfort,
   and those too who were worse than they, and have not laboured so much
   as they have done; and sometimes they have had even dreadful
   blasphemous thoughts, in these circumstances.

   But when they reflect on these wicked workings of heart against God--if
   their convictions are continued, and the Spirit of God is not provoked
   utterly to forsake them--they have more distressing apprehensions of
   the anger of God towards those whose hearts work after such a sinful
   manner about him; and it may be, have great fears that they have
   committed the unpardonable sin, or that God will surely never show
   mercy to them who are such vipers; and are often tempted to leave off"
   in despair. But then perhaps by something they read or hear of the
   infinite mercy of God, and all-sufficiency of Christ for the chief of
   sinners, they have some encouragement and hope renewed; but think that
   as yet they are not fit to come to Christ; they are so wicked that
   Christ will never accept of them. And then it may be they set
   themselves upon a new course of fruitless endeavours, in their own
   strength, to make themselves better; and still meet with new
   disappointments. They are earnest to inquire, what they shall do? They
   do not know but there is something else to be done, in order to their
   obtaining converting grace, that they have never done yet. It may be
   they hope, that they are something better than they were; but then the
   pleasing dream all vanishes again. If they are told, that they trust
   too much to their own strength and righteousness, they cannot unlearn
   this practice all at once, and find not yet the appearance of any good,
   but all looks as dark as midnight to them. Thus they wander about from
   mountain to hill, seeking rest, and finding none. When they are beat
   out of one refuge, they fly to another; till they are as it were
   debilitated, broken, and subdued with legal humblings; in which God
   gives them a conviction of their own utter helplessness and
   insufficiency, and discovers the true remedy in a clearer knowledge of
   Christ and his gospel.

   When they begin to seek salvation, they are commonly profoundly
   ignorant of themselves; they are not sensible how blind they are, and
   how little they can do towards bringing themselves to see spiritual
   things aright, and towards putting forth gracious exercises in their
   own souls.

   They are not sensible how remote they are from love to God, and other
   holy dispositions, and how dead they are in sin. When they see
   unexpected pollution in their own hearts, they go about to wash away
   their own defilements, and make themselves clean; and they weary
   themselves in vain, till God shows them that it is in vain, and that
   their help is not where they have sought it.

   But some persons continue wandering in such a kind of labyrinth, ten
   times as long as others, before their own experience will convince them
   of their insufficiency; and so it appears not to be their own
   experience only, but the convincing influence of God's Holy Spirit with
   their experience, that attains the effect. God has of late abundantly
   shown, that he does not need to wait to have men convinced by long and
   often repeated fruitless trials; for in multitudes of instances he has
   made a shorter work of it. He has so awakened and convinced persons'
   consciences, and made them so sensible of their exceeding great
   vileness, and given them such a sense of his wrath against sin, as has
   quickly overcome all their vain self-confidence, and borne them down
   into the dust before a holy and righteous God.

   There have been some who have not had great terrors, but have had a
   very quick work. Some of those who have not had so deep a conviction of
   these things before their conversion, have much more of it afterwards.
   God has appeared far from limiting himself to any certain method in his
   proceedings with sinners under legal convictions. In some instances, it
   seems easy for our reasoning powers to discern the methods of divine
   wisdom, in his dealings with the soul under awakenings; in others, his
   footsteps cannot be traced, and his ways are past finding put. Some who
   are less distinctly wrought upon, in what is preparatory to grace,
   appear no less eminent in gracious experiences afterwards.

   There is in nothing a greater difference, in different persons, than
   with respect to the time of their being under trouble; some but a few
   days, and others for months or years. There were many in this town, who
   had been, before this effusion of the Spirit upon us, for years, and
   some for many years, concerned about their salvation. Though probably
   they were not thoroughly awakened, yet they were concerned to such a
   degree as to be very uneasy, so as to live an uncomfortable disquieted
   life. They continued in a way of taking considerable pains about their
   salvation; but had never obtained any comfortable evidence of a good
   state. Several such persons, in this extraordinary time, have received
   light; but many of them were some of the last. They first saw
   multitudes of others rejoicing, with songs of deliverance in their
   mouths, who before had seemed wholly careless and at ease, and in
   pursuit of vanity; while they had been bowed down with solicitude about
   their souls. Yea, some had lived licentiously, and so continued till a
   little before they were converted; and vet soon grew up to a holy
   rejoicing in the infinite blessings God had bestowed upon them.

   Whatever minister has a like occasion to deal with souls, in a flock
   under such circumstances, as this was in the last year, I cannot but
   think he will soon find himself under a necessity, greatly to insist
   upon it with them, that God is under no manner of obligation to show
   mercy to any natural man, whose heart is not turned to God: and that a
   man can challenge nothing either in absolute justice, or by free
   promise, from any thing he does before he has believed on Jesus Christ,
   or has true repentance begun in him. It appears to me, that if I had
   taught those who came to me under trouble, any other doctrine, I should
   have taken a most direct course utterly to undo them. I should have
   directly crossed what was plainly the drift of the Spirit of God in his
   influences upon them; for if they had believed what I said, it would
   either have promoted self-flattery and carelessness, and so put an end
   to their awakenings; or cherished and established their contention and
   strife with God, concerning his dealings with them and others, and
   blocked up their way to that humiliation before the Sovereign Disposer
   of life and death, whereby God is wont to prepare them for his
   consolations. And yet those who have been under awakenings have
   oftentimes plainly stood in need of being encouraged, by being told of
   the infinite and all-sufficient mercy of God in Christ; and that it is
   God's manner to succeed diligence, and to bless his own means, that so
   awakenings and encouragements, fear and hope, may be duly mixed, and
   proportioned to preserve their minds in a just medium between the two
   extremes of self-flattery and despondence, both which tend to slackness
   and negligence, and in the end to security. I think I have found that
   no discourses have been more remarkably blessed, than those in which
   the doctrine of God's absolute sovereignty, with regard to the
   salvation of sinners, and his just liberty, with regard to answering
   the prayers, or succeeding the pains, of natural men, continuing such,
   have been insisted on. I never found so much immediate saving fruit, in
   any measure, of any discourses I have offered to my congregation, as
   some from these words, "That every mouth may be stopped; [552] "
   endeavouring to show from thence, that it would be just with God for
   ever to reject and cast off mere natural men.

   As to those in whom awakenings seem to have a saving issue, commonly
   the first thing that appears after their legal troubles, is a
   conviction of the justice of God in their condemnation, appearing in a
   sense of their own exceeding sinfulness, and the vileness of all their
   performances. In giving an account of this, they expressed themselves
   very variously; some, that they saw God was sovereign, and might
   receive others and reject them; some, that they were convinced, God
   might justly bestow mercy on every person in the town, in the world,
   and damn themselves to all eternity; some, that they see God may justly
   have no regard to all the pains they have taken, and all the prayers
   they have made; some, that if they should seek, and take the utmost
   pains all their lives, God might justly cast them into hell at last,
   because all their labours, prayers, and tears cannot make an atonement
   for the least sin, nor merit any blessing at the hands of God. Some
   have declared themselves to be in the hands of God, that he may dispose
   of them just as he pleases; some, that God may glorify himself in their
   damnation, and they wonder that God has suffered them to live so long,
   and has not cast them into hell long ago.

   Some are brought to this conviction by a great sense of their
   sinfulness, in general, that they are such vile wicked creatures in
   heart and life: others have the sins of their lives in an extraordinary
   manner set before them, multitudes of them coming just then fresh to
   their memory, and being set before them with their aggravations. Some
   have their minds especially fixed on some particular wicked practice
   they have indulged. Some are especially convinced by a sight of the
   corruption and wickedness of their hearts. Some, from a view they have
   of the horridness of some particular exercises of corruption, which
   they have had in the time of their awakening, whereby the enmity of the
   heart against God has been manifested. Some are convinced especially by
   a sense of the sin of unbelief, the opposition of their hearts to the
   way of salvation by Christ, and their obstinacy in rejecting him and
   his grace.

   There is a great deal of difference as to distinctness here; some, who
   have not so clear a sight of God's justice in their condemnation, yet
   mention things that plainly imply it. They find a disposition to
   acknowledge God to be just and righteous in his threatenings; and that
   they are undeserving: and many times, though they had not so particular
   a sight of it at the beginning, they have very clear discoveries of it
   soon afterwards, with great humblings in the dust before God.

   Commonly persons' minds immediately before this discovery of God s
   justice are exceedingly restless, in a kind of struggle and tumult, and
   sometimes in mere anguish; but generally, as soon as they have this
   conviction, it immediately brings their minds to a calm, an unexpected
   quietness and composure; and most frequently, though not always, then
   the pressing weight upon their spirits is taken away, and a general
   hope arises, that some time or other God will be gracious, even before
   any distinct and particular discoveries of mercy. Often they then come
   to a conclusion within themselves, that they will lie at God's feet,
   and wait his time; and they rest in that, not being sensible that the
   Spirit of God has now brought them to a frame whereby they are prepared
   for mercy. For it is remarkable, that persons when they first have this
   sense of the justice of God, rarely, at the time, think any thing of
   its being that humiliation they have often heard insisted on, and that
   others experience.

   In many persons, the first conviction of the justice of God in their
   condemnation, which they take particular notice of, and probably the
   first distinct conviction of it that they have, is of such a nature, as
   seems to be above any thing merely legal. Though it be after legal
   humblings, and much of a sense of their own helplessness, and of the
   insufficiency of their own duties; yet it does not appear to be forced
   by mere legal terrors and convictions; but rather from a high exercise
   of grace, in saving repentance, and evangelical humiliation. For there
   is in it a sort of complacency of soul, in the attribute of God's
   justice, as displayed in his threatenings of eternal damnation to
   sinners. Sometimes at the discovery of it, they can scarcely forbear
   crying out, it is just! it is just! Some express themselves, that they
   see the glory of God would shine bright in their own condemnation; and
   they are ready to think that if they are damned, they could take part
   with God against themselves, and would glorify his justice therein. And
   when it is thus, they commonly have some evident sense of free and
   all-sufficient grace, though they give no distinct account of it; but
   it is manifest, by that great degree of hope and encouragement they
   then conceive, though they were never so sensible of their own vileness
   and ill-deservings as they are at that time.

   Some, when in such circumstances, have felt that sense of the
   excellency of God's justice, appearing in the vindictive exercises of
   it, against such sinfulness as theirs was; and have had such a
   submission of mind in their idea of this attribute, and of those
   exercises of it--together with an exceeding loathing of their own
   unworthiness, and a kind of indignation against themselves--that they
   have sometimes almost called it a willingness to be damned; though it
   must be owned they had not clear and distinct ideas of damnation, nor
   does any word in the Bible require such self-denial as this. But the
   truth is, as some have more clearly expressed it, that salvation has
   appeared too good for them, that they were worthy of nothing but
   condemnation, and they could not tell how to think of salvation being
   bestowed upon /hem, fearing it was inconsistent with the glory of Cud's
   majesty, that they had so much contemned and affronted.

   That calm of spirit that some persons have found after their legal
   distresses, continues some time before any special and delightful
   manifestation is made to the soul of the grace of God as revealed in
   the gospel. But very often some comfortable and sweet view of a
   merciful God, of a sufficient Redeemer, or of some great and joyful
   things of the gospel, immediately follows, or in a very little time:
   and in some, the first sight of their just desert of hell, and God's
   sovereignty with respect to their salvation, and a discovery of
   all-sufficient grace, are so near, that they seem to go as it were
   together.

   These gracious discoveries given, whence the first special comforts are
   derived, are in many respects very various. More frequently, Christ is
   distinctly made the object of the mind, in his all-sufficiency and
   willingness to save sinners; but some have their thoughts more
   especially fixed on God, in some of his sweet and glorious attributes
   manifested in the gospel, and shining forth in the face of Christ. Some
   view the all-sufficiency of the mercy and trace of God; some, chiefly
   the infinite power of God, and his ability to save them, and to do all
   things for them; and some look most at the truth and faithfulness of
   God. In some, the truth and certainty of the gospel in general is the
   first joyful discovery they have; in others, the certain truth of some
   particular promises; in some, the grace and sincerity of God in his
   invitations, very commonly in some particular invitation in the mind,
   and it now appears real to them that God does indeed invite them. Some
   are struck with the glory and wonderfulness of the dying love of
   Christ; and some with the sufficiency and preciousness of his blood, as
   offered to make an atonement for sin; and others with the value and
   glory of his obedience and righteousness. In some the excellency and
   loveliness of Christ, chiefly engages their thoughts; in some his
   divinity, that he is indeed the Son of the living Cod; and in others,
   the excellency of the way of salvation by Christ, and the suitableness
   of it to their necessities.

   Some have an apprehension of these things so given, that it seems more
   natural to them to express it by sight or discovery; others think what
   they experience better expressed by the realizing conviction, or a
   lively or feeling sense of heart; meaning, as I suppose, no other
   difference but what is merely circumstantial or gradual.

   There is, often, in the mind, some particular text of Scripture,
   holding forth some evangelical ground of consolation; sometimes a
   multitude of texts, gracious invitations and promises flowing in one
   after another, filling the soul more and more with comfort and
   satisfaction. Comfort is first given to some, while reading some
   portion of Scripture; but in some it is attended with no particular
   scripture at all, either in reading or meditation. In some, many divine
   things seem to be discovered to the soul as it were at once; others
   have their minds especially fixing on some one thing at first, and
   afterwards a sense is given of others; in some with a swifter, and
   others a slower, succession, and sometimes with interruptions of much
   darkness.

   The way that grace seems sometimes first to appear, after legal
   humiliation, is in earnest longings of soul after God and Christ: to
   know God, to love him, to be humble before him, to have communion with
   Christ in his benefits; which longings, as they express them, seem
   evidently to be of such a nature as can arise from nothing but a sense
   of the superlative excellency of divine things, with a spiritual taste
   and relish of them, and an esteem of them as their highest happiness
   and best portion. Such longings as I speak of, are commonly attended
   with firm resolutions to pursue this good for ever, together with a
   hoping, waiting disposition. When persons have begun in such frames,
   commonly other experiences and discoveries have soon followed, which
   have yet more clearly manifested a change of heart.

   It must needs be confessed that Christ is not always distinctly and
   explicitly thought of in the first sensible act of grace, (though most
   commonly he is,) but sometimes he is the object of the mind only
   implicitly. Thus sometimes when persons have seemed evidently to be
   stripped of all their own righteousness, and to have stood
   self-condemned as guilty of death, they have been comforted with a
   joyful and satisfying view, that the mercy and grace of God is
   sufficient for them--that their sins, though never so great, shall be
   no hinderance to their being accepted; that there is mercy enough in
   God for the whole world, and the like--when they give no account of any
   particular or distinct thought of Christ. But yet, when the account
   they give is duly weighed, and they are a little interrogated about it,
   it appears that the revelation of mercy in the gospel, is the ground of
   their encouragement and hope; and that it is indeed the mercy of God
   through Christ that is discovered to them, and that it is depended on
   in Aim, and not in any wise moved by any thing in them.

   Sometimes disconsolate souls have been revived, and brought to rest in
   God, by a sweet sense of his grace and faithfulness, in some special
   invitation or promise; in which nevertheless there is no particular
   mention of Christ, nor is it accompanied with any distinct thought of
   him in their minds: but yet, it is not received as out of Christ, but
   as one of the invitations or promises made of God to poor sinners
   through his Son Jesus. And such persons afterwards have had clear and
   distinct discoveries of Christ, accompanied with lively and special
   actings of faith and love towards him.

   Frequently, when persons have first had the gospel-ground of relief
   discovered to them, and have been entertaining their minds with the
   sweet prospect, they have thought nothing at that time of their being
   converted. To see, that there is an all-sufficiency in God, and such
   plentiful provision made in Christ, after they have been borne down,
   and sunk with a sense of their guilt and fears of wrath, exceedingly
   refreshes them. The view is joyful to them; as it is in its own nature
   glorious, gives them quite new and delightful ideas of God and Christ,
   greatly encourages them to seek conversion. This begets in them a
   strong resolution to devote themselves and their whole lives to God and
   his Son, and patiently to wait till God shall see fit to make all
   effectual; and very often entertain a strong persuasion, that he will
   in his own time do it for them

   There is wrought in them a holy repose of soul in God through Christ,
   with a secret disposition to fear and love him, and to hope for
   blessings from him in this way. Yet, they have no imagination that they
   are now converted, it does not so much as come into their minds: and
   very often the reason is, that they do not see that they accept of this
   sufficiency of salvation they behold in Christ, having entertained a
   wrong notion of acceptance; not being sensible that the obedient and
   joyful entertainment which their hearts give to this discovery of
   grace, is a real acceptance of it. They know not that the sweet
   complacence they feel in the mercy and complete salvation of God, as it
   includes pardon and sanctification, and is held forth to them only
   through Christ, is a true receiving of this mercy, or a plain evidence
   of their receiving it. They expected I know not what kind of act of
   soul, and perhaps they had no distinct idea of it themselves.

   And indeed it appears very plainly in some of them, that before their
   own conversion they had very imperfect ideas what conversion was. It is
   all new and strange, and what there was no clear conception of before.
   It is most evident, as they themselves acknowledge, that the
   expressions used to describe conversion, and the graces of God's Holy
   Spirit--such as a spiritual sight of Christ, faith in Christ, poverty
   of spirit, trust in God, &c.--did not convey those distinct ideas to
   their minds, which they were intended to signify. Perhaps to some of
   them it was but little more than the names of colours are to convey the
   ideas to one that is blind from his birth.

   In this town there has always been a great deal of talk about
   conversion and spiritual experiences; and therefore people in general
   had formed a notion in their own minds what these things were. But when
   they come to be the subjects of them, they find themselves much
   confounded in their notions, and overthrown in many of their former
   conceits And it has been very observable, that persons of the greatest
   understanding, and who had studied most about things of this nature,
   have been more confounded than others. Some such persons declare, that
   all their former wisdom is brought to nought, and that they appear to
   have been mere babes, who knew nothing. It has appeared, that none have
   stood more in need of instruction, even of their fellow-Christians,
   concerning their own circumstances and difficulties, than they: and it
   seems to have been with delight, that they have seen themselves thus
   brought down, and become nothing; that free grace and divine power may
   be exalted in them.

   It was very wonderful to see how persons' affections were sometimes
   moved--when God did as it were suddenly open their eyes, and let into
   their minds a sense of the greatness of his grace, the fulness of
   Christ, and his readiness to save--after having been broken with
   apprehensions of divine wrath, and sunk into an abyss, under a sense of
   guilt which they were ready to think was beyond the mercy of God. Their
   joyful surprise has caused their hearts as it were to leap, so that
   they have been ready to break forth into laughter, tears often at the
   same time issuing like a flood, and intermingling a loud weeping.
   Sometimes they have not been able to forbear crying out with a loud
   voice, expressing their great admiration. In some, even the view of the
   glory of God's sovereignty, in the exercises of his grace, has
   surprised the soul with such sweetness, as to produce the same effects.
   I remember an instance of one, who, reading something concerning God's
   sovereign way of saving sinners, as being self-moved-- having no regard
   to men's own righteousness as the motive of his grace, but as
   magnifying himself and abasing man, or to that purpose--felt such a
   sudden rapture of joy and delight in the consideration of it: and yet
   then he suspected himself to be in a Christless condition, and had been
   long in great distress for fear that God would not have mercy on him.

   Many continue a long time in a course of gracious exercises and
   experiences, and do not think themselves to be converted, but conclude
   otherwise; and none knows how long they would continue so, were they
   not helped by particular instructions. There are undoubted instances of
   some who have lived in this way for many years together, and these
   circumstances had various consequences, with various persons, and with
   the same persons, at various times. Some continue in great
   encouragement and hope, that they shall obtain mercy in a stedfast
   resolution to persevere in seeking it, and in an humble waiting in it
   before God. But very often, when the lively sense of the sufficiency of
   Christ and the riches of divine grace, begins to vanish, upon a
   withdrawment of divine influences, they return to greater distress than
   ever. For they have now a far greater sense of the misery of a natural
   condition than before, being in a new manner sensible of the reality of
   eternal things, the greatness of God, his excellency, and how dreadful
   it is to be separated from him, and to be subject to his wrath; so that
   they are sometimes swallowed up with darkness and amazement. Satan has
   a vast advantage in such cases to ply them with various temptations,
   which he is not wont to neglect: in such a case, persons very much need
   a guide to lead them to an understanding of what we are taught in the
   word of God concerning the nature of grace, and to help them to apply
   it to themselves.

   I have been much blamed and censured by many, that I should make it my
   practice, when I have been satisfied concerning persons' good estate,
   to signify it to them. This has been greatly misrepresented abroad, as
   innumerable other things concerning us, to prejudice the country
   against the whole affair. But let it be noted, that what I have
   undertaken to judge of, has rather been qualifications, and declared
   experiences, than persons. Not but that I have thought it my duty, as a
   pastor, to assist and instruct persons in applying scripture-rules and
   characters to their own case; (in which, I think, many greatly need a
   guide;) and I have, where the case appeared plain, used freedom in
   signifying my hope of them to others. But I have been far from doing
   this concerning all that I have had some hopes of; and I believe have
   used much more caution than many have supposed. Yet I should account it
   a great calamity to be deprived of the comfort of rejoicing with those
   of my flock, who have been in great distress, whose circumstances I
   have been acquainted with, when there seems to be good evidence that
   those who were dead are alive, and that those who were lost are found.
   I am sensible the practice would have been safer in the hands of one of
   a riper judgment and greater experience: but yet, there seemed to be an
   absolute necessity of it on the fore-mentioned accounts; and it has
   been found what God has most remarkably owned and blessed amongst us,
   both to the persons themselves, and to others.

   Grace in many persons, through this ignorance of their state, and their
   loosing on themselves still as the objects of God's displeasure, has
   been like the trees in winter, or like seed in the spring suppressed
   under a hard clod of earth. Many in such cases have laboured to their
   utmost to divert their minds from the pleasing and joyful views they
   have had, and to suppress those consolations and gracious affections
   that arose thereupon. And when it has once come into their minds to
   inquire, whether or no this was not true grace, they have been much
   afraid lest they should be deceived with common illuminations and
   flashes of affection, and eternally undone with a false hope. But when
   they have been better instructed, and so brought to allow of 'hope,
   this has awakened the gracious disposition of their hearts into life
   and vigour, as the warm beams of the sun in the spring have quickened
   the seeds and productions of the earth. Grace being now at liberty, and
   cherished with hope, has soon flowed out to their abundant satisfaction
   and increase.

   There is no one thing that I know of which God has made such a means of
   promoting his work amongst us, as the news of others' conversion. This
   has been owned in awakening sinners, engaging them earnestly to seek
   die same blessing, and in quickening saints. Though I have thought that
   a minister declaring his judgment about particular persons'
   experiences, might from these things be justified; yet I often signify
   to my people, how unable man is to know another's heart, and how unsafe
   it is to depend merely on the judgment of others. I have abundantly
   insisted, that a manifestation of sincerity in fruits brought forth, is
   better than any manifestation they can make of it in words alone: and
   that without this, all pretences to spiritual experiences are vain.
   This all my congregation can witness. And the people in general have
   manifested an extraordinary dread of being deceived; being exceeding
   fearful lest they should build wrong. Some of them have been backward
   to receive hope, even to a great extreme, which has occasioned me to
   dwell longer on this part of the narrative.

   Conversion is a great and glorious work of God's power, at once
   changing the heart, and infusing life into the dead soul; though the
   grace then implanted more gradually displays itself in some than in
   others. But as to fixing on the precise time when they put forth the
   very first act of grace, there is a great deal of difference in
   different persons; in some it seems to be very discernible when the
   very time was; but others are more at a loss. In thin respect, there
   are very many who do not know, even when they have it, that it is the
   grace of conversion, and sometimes do not think it to be so till a long
   time after. Many, even when they come to entertain great hopes that
   they are converted, if they remember what they experienced in the first
   exercises of grace, they are at a loss whether it was any more than a
   common illumination; or whether some other more clear and remarkable
   experience which they had afterwards, was not the first of a saving
   nature. The manner of God's work on the soul, sometimes especially, is
   very mysterious; and it is with the kingdom of God as to its
   manifestation in the heart of a convert, as is said, " So is the
   kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and
   should sleep, and rise, night and day, and the seed should spring, and
   grow up, he knoweth not how; for the earth bringeth forth of herself,
   first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear." [553]

   In some, converting light is like a glorious brightness suddenly
   shining upon a person, and all around him: they are in a remarkable
   manner brought out of darkness into marvellous light. In many others it
   has been like the dawning of the day, when at first but a little light
   appears, and it may be is presently hid with a cloud; and then it
   appears again, and shines a little brighter, and gradually increases,
   with intervening darkness, till at length it breaks forth more clearly
   from behind the clouds. And many are, doubtless, ready to date their
   conversion wrong, throwing by those lesser degrees of light that
   appeared at first dawning, and calling some more remarkable experience
   they had afterwards, their conversion. This often, in a great measure,
   arises from a wrong understanding of what they have always been taught,
   that conversion is a great change, wherein old things are done away,
   and nil things become new, or at least from a false inference from that
   doctrine.

   Persons commonly at first conversion, and afterwards, have had many
   texts of Scripture brought to their minds, which are exceeding suitable
   to their circumstances, often come with great power, as the word of God
   or of Christ indeed; and many have a multitude of sweet invitations,
   promises, and doxologies flowing in one after another, bringing great
   light and comfort with them, filling the soul brimful, enlarging the
   heart, and opening the mouth in religion. And it seems to me necessary
   to suppose, that there is an immediate influence of the Spirit of God,
   oftentimes, in bringing texts of Scripture to the mind. Not that I
   suppose it is done in a way of immediate revelation, without any use of
   the memory; but yet there seems plainly to be an immediate and
   extraordinary influence, in leading their thoughts to such and such
   passages of Scripture, and exciting them in the memory. Indeed in some,
   God seems to bring texts of scripture to their minds no otherwise than
   by leading them into such frames and meditations, as harmonize with
   those scriptures; but in many persons there seems to be something more
   than this.

   Those who, while under legal convictions, have had the greatest
   terrors, have not always obtained the greatest light and comfort; nor
   have they always light most suddenly communicated; but yet, I think,
   the time of conversion has generally been most sensible in such
   persons. Oftentimes, the first sensible change after the extremity of
   terrors, is a calmness, and then the light gradually comes in; small
   glimpses at first, after their midnight darkness, and a word or two of
   comfort, as it were softly spoken to them. They have a little taste of
   the sweetness of divine grace, and the love of a Saviour; when terror
   and distress of conscience begin to be turned into an humble, meek
   sense of their own unworthiness before God. There is felt, inwardly,
   sometimes a disposition to praise God; and after a little while the
   light comes in more clearly and powerfully. But yet, I think, more
   frequently, great terrors have been followed with more sudden and great
   light and comfort; when the sinner seems to be as it were subdued and
   brought to a calm, from a kind of tumult of mind, then God lets in an
   extraordinary sense of his great mercy through a Redeemer."

   Converting influences very commonly bring an extraordinary conviction
   of the reality and certainty of the great things of religion; though in
   some this is much greater some time after conversion, than at first.
   They have that sight and taste of the divine excellency there is in the
   gospel, which is more effectual to convince them, than reading many
   volumes of arguments without it. It seems to me, that in many
   instances, when the glory of Christian truths has been set before
   persons, and they have at the same time as it were seen, and tasted,
   and felt the divinity of them, they have been as far from doubting
   their truth, as they are from doubting whether there be a sun, when
   their eyes are open in the midst of a clear hemisphere, and the strong
   blaze of his light overcomes all objections. And yet, many of them, if
   we should ask them why they believed those things to be true, would not
   be able well to express or communicate a sufficient reason to satisfy
   the inquirer; and perhaps would make no other answer but that they see
   them to be true. But a person might soon be satisfied, by a particular
   conversation with them, that what they mean by such an answer is, that
   they have intuitively beheld, and immediately felt, most illustrious
   and powerful evidence of divinity in them.

   Some are thus convinced of the truth of the gospel in general, and that
   the Scriptures are the word of God': others have their minds more
   especially fixed on some particular great doctrine of the gospel, some
   particular truths that they are meditating on, or reading of, in some
   portion of Scripture. Some have such convictions in a much more
   remarkable manner than others: and there are some who never had such a
   special sense of the certainty of divine things impressed upon them,
   with such inward evidence and strength, have yet very clear exercises
   of grace; i. e. of love to God, repentance, and holiness. And if they
   be more particularly examined, they appear plainly to have an inward
   firm persuasion of the reality of divine things, such as they did not
   use to have before their conversion. And those who have the most clear
   discoveries of divine truth, in the manner that has been mentioned,
   cannot have this always in view. When the sense and relish of the
   divine excellency of these things fades, on a withdrawment of the
   Spirit of God, they have not the medium of the conviction of their
   truth at command. In a dull frame, they cannot recall the idea and
   inward sense they had, perfectly to mind; things appear very dim to
   what they did before. And though there still remains an habitual strong
   persuasion; yet not so as to exclude temptations to unbelief, and all
   possibility of doubting. But then, at particular times, by God's Help,
   the same sense of things revives again, like fire that lay hid in
   ashes. I suppose the grounds of such a conviction of the truth of
   divine things to be just and rational; but yet, in some, God makes use
   of their own reason much more sensibly than in others. Oftentimes
   persons have (so far as could be judged) received the first saving
   conviction from renaming which they have heard from the pulpit; and
   often in the course of reasoning they are led into in their own
   meditations.

   The arguments are the same that they have heard hundreds of times; but
   the force of the arguments, and their conviction by them, is altogether
   new; they come with a new and before unexperienced power. Before, they
   heard it was so, and they allowed it to be so; but now they see it to
   be so indeed. Things now look exceeding plain to them, and they wonder
   they did not see them before.

   They are so greatly taken with their new discovery, and things appear
   so plain and so rational to them, that they are often at first ready to
   think they can convince others , and are apt to engage in talk with
   every one they meet with, almost to this end; and when they are
   disappointed, are ready to wonder that their reasonings seem to make no
   more impression.

   Many fall under such a mistake as to be ready to doubt of their good
   estate, because there was so much use made of their own reason in the
   convictions they have received; they are afraid that they have no
   illumination above the natural force of their own faculties: and many
   make that an objection against the spirituality of their convictions,
   that it is so easy to see things as they now see them. They have often
   heard, that conversion is a work of mighty power, manifesting to the
   soul what neither man nor angel can give such a conviction of; but it
   seems to them that these things are so plain and easy, and rational,
   that any body can see them. If they are asked, why they never saw thus
   before; they say, it seems to them it was because they never thought of
   it. But very often these difficulties are soon removed by those of
   another nature; for when God withdraws, they find themselves as it were
   blind again, they for the present lose their realizing sense of those
   things that looked so plain to them, and, by all they can do, they
   cannot recover it, till God renews the influences of his Spirit.

   Persons after their conversion often speak of religious things as
   seeming new to them; that preaching is a new thing; that it seems to
   them they never heard preaching before; that the Bible is a new book:
   they find there vein chapters, new psalms, new histories, because they
   see them in a new light. Here was a remarkable instance of an aged
   woman, of above seventy years, who had spent most of her days under Mr.
   Stoddard's powerful ministry. Reading in the New Testament concerning
   Christ's sufferings for sinners, she seemed to be astonished at what
   she read, as what was real and very wonderful, but quite new to her. At
   first, before she had time to turn her thoughts, she wondered within
   herself, that she had never heard of it before; but then immediately
   recollected herself, and thought she had often heard of it, and read
   it, but never till now saw it as real. She then cast in her mind, how
   wonderful this was, that the Son of God should undergo such things for
   sinners, and how she had spent her time in ungratefully sinning against
   so good a God, and such a Saviour; though she was a person, apparently,
   of a very blameless and inoffensive life. And she was so overcome by
   those considerations, that her nature was ready to fail under them:
   those who were about her, and knew not what was the matter, were
   surprised, and thought she was a dying.

   Many have spoken much of their hearts being drawn out in love to God
   and Christ; and of their minds being wrapt up in delightful
   contemplation of the glory and wonderful grace of God, the excellency
   and dying love of Jesus Christ; and of their souls going forth in
   longing desires after God and Christ. Several of our young children
   have expressed much of this; and have manifested a willingness to leave
   father and mother and all things in the world, to go and be with
   Christ. Some persons having had such longing desires after Christ, or
   which have risen to such degree, as to take away their natural
   strength. Some have been so overcome with a sense of the dying love of
   Christ, to such poor, wretched, and unworthy creatures, as to weaken
   the body. Several persons have had so great a sense of the glory of
   God, and excellency of Christ, that nature and life seemed almost to
   sink under it; and in all probability, if God had showed them a little
   more of himself, it would have dissolved their frame. I have seen some,
   and conversed with them in such frames, who have certainly been
   perfectly sober, and very remote from any thing like enthusiastic
   wildness. And they have talked, when able to speak, of the glory of
   God's perfections, the wonderfulness of his grace in Christ, and their
   own unworthiness, in such a manner as cannot be perfectly expressed
   after them. Their sense of their exceeding littleness and vileness, and
   their disposition to abase themselves before God, has appeared to be
   great in proportion to their light and joy.

   Such persons amongst us as have been thus distinguished with the most
   extraordinary discoveries, have commonly nowise appeared with the
   assuming, self-conceited, and self-sufficient airs of enthusiasts; but
   exceedingly the contrary. They are eminent for a spirit of meekness,
   modesty, self-diffidence, and a low opinion of themselves. No persons
   appear so sensible of their need of instruction, and so eager to
   receive it, as some of them; nor so ready to think others better than
   themselves. Those that have been considered as converted amongst us,
   have generally manifested a longing to lie low, and in the dust before
   God; withal complaining of their not being able to lie low enough.

   They speak much of their sense of excellency in the way of salvation by
   free and sovereign grace, through the righteousness of Christ alone;
   and how it is with delight that they renounce their own righteousness,
   and rejoice in having no account made of it. Many have expressed
   themselves to this purpose, that it would lessen the satisfaction they
   hope for in heaven to have it by their own righteousness, or in any
   other way than as bestowed by free grace, and for Christ's sake alone.
   They speak much of the inexpressibleness of what they experience, how
   their words fail, so that they cannot declare it. And particularly they
   speak with exceeding admiration of the superlative excellency of that
   pleasure and delight which they sometimes enjoy; how a little of it is
   sufficient to pay them for all the pains and trouble they have gone
   through in seeking salvation; and how far it exceeds all earthly
   pleasures. Some express much of the sense which these spiritual views
   give them of the vanity of earthly enjoyments, how mean and worthless
   all these things appear to them.

   Many, while their minds have been filled with spiritual delights, have
   as it were forgot their food; their bodily appetite has failed, while
   their minds have been entertained with meat to eat that others knew not
   of. The light and comfort which some of them enjoy, give a new relish
   to their common blessings, and cause ail things about them to appear as
   it were beautiful, sweet, and pleasant. All things abroad, the sun,
   moon, and stars, the clouds and sky, the heavens and earth, appear as
   it were with a cast of divine glory and sweetness upon them. Though
   this joy include in it a delightful sense of the safety of their own
   state, yet frequently, in times of their highest spiritual
   entertainment, this seems not to be the chief object of their fixed
   thought and meditation. The supreme attention of their minds is to the
   glorious excellencies of God and Christ; and there is very often a
   ravishing sense of God's love accompanying a sense of his excellency.
   They rejoice in a sense of the faithfulness of God's promises, as they
   respect the future, eternal enjoyment of him.

   The unparalleled joy that many of them speak of, is what they find when
   they are lowest in the dust, emptied most of themselves, and as it were
   annihilating themselves before God; when they are nothing, and God is
   all; seeing their own unworthiness, depending not at all on themselves,
   but alone on Christ, and ascribing all glory to God. Then their souls
   are most in the enjoyment of satisfying rest; excepting that, at such
   times, they apprehend themselves to be not sufficiently self-abased;
   for then above all times do they long to be lower. Some speak much of
   the exquisite sweetness, and rest of soul, that is to be found in the
   exercise of resignation to God, and humble submission to his will. Many
   express earnest longings of soul to praise God; but at the same time
   complain that they cannot praise him as they would, and they want to
   have others help them in praising him. They want to have every one
   praise God, and are ready to call upon every thing to praise him. They
   express a longing desire to live to God's glory, and to do something to
   his honour; but at the same time complain of their insufficiency and
   barrenness; that they are poor and impotent creatures, can do nothing
   of themselves, and are utterly insufficient to glorify their Creator
   and Redeemer.

   While God was so remarkably present amongst us by his Spirit, there was
   no book so delightful as the Bible; especially the Book of Psalms, the
   Prophecy of Isaiah, and the New Testament. Some, by reason of their
   love to God's word, at times, have been wonderfully delighted and
   affected at the sight of a Bible; and then, also, there was no time so
   prized as the Lord's day, and no place in this world so desired as
   God's house. Our converts then remarkably appeared united in dear
   affection to one another, and many have expressed much of that spirit
   of love which they felt toward all mankind; and particularly to those
   who had been least friendly to them. Never, I believe, was so much done
   in confessing injuries, and making up differences, as the last year.
   Persons, after their own conversion, have commonly expressed an
   exceeding great desire for the conversion of others. Some have thought
   that they should be willing to die for the conversion of any soul,
   though of one of the meanest of their fellow-creatures, or of their
   worst enemies; and many have, indeed, been in great distress with
   desires and longings for it. This work of God had also a good effect to
   unite the people's affections much to their minister.

   There are some persons whom I have been acquainted with, but more
   especially two, that belong to other towns, who have been swallowed up
   exceedingly with a sense of the awful greatness and majesty of God; and
   both of them told me to this purpose, that if at the time, they had
   entertained the least fear that they were not at peace with this so
   great a God, they should certainly have died.

   It is worthy to be remarked, that some persons, by their conversion,
   seem to be greatly helped as to their doctrinal notions of religion. It
   was particularly remarkable in one, who, having been taken captive in
   his childhood, was trained up in Canada, in the popish religion. Some
   years since he returned to this his native place, and was in a measure
   brought off from popery; but seemed very awkward and dull in receiving
   any clear notion of the protestant scheme, till he was converted; and
   then he was remarkably altered in this respect.

   There is a vast difference, as observed, in the degree, and also in the
   particular manner, of persons' experiences, both at and after
   conversion; some have grace working more sensibly in one way, others in
   another. Some speak more fully of a conviction of the justice of God in
   their condemnation; others, more of their consenting to the way of
   salvation by Christ; and some, more of the actings of love to God and
   Christ. Some more of acts of affiance, in a sweet and assured
   conviction of the truth and faithfulness of God in his promises;
   others, more of their choosing and resting in God, as their whole and
   everlasting portion; and of their ardent and longing desire after God,
   to have communion with him; and others, more of their abhorrence to
   themselves for their past sins, and earnest longings to live to God's
   glory for the time to come. But it seems evidently to be the same work,
   the same habitual change wrought in the heart, it all tends the same
   way, and to the same end; and it is plainly the same spirit that
   breathes and acts in various persons. There is an endless variety in
   the particular manner and circumstances in which persons are wrought
   on; and an opportunity of seeing so much will show, that God is further
   from confining himself to a particular method in his work on souls,
   than some imagine. I believe it has occasioned some good people amongst
   us, who were before too ready to make their own experience a rule to
   others, to be less censorious and more extended in their charity; and
   this is an excellent advantage indeed. The work of God has been
   glorious in its variety; it has the more displayed the manifold and
   unsearchable wisdom of God, and wrought more charity among his people.

   There is a great difference among those who are converted, as to the
   degree of hope and satisfaction they have concerning their own state.
   Some have a high degree of satisfaction in this matter almost
   constantly; and yet it is rare that any enjoy so full an assurance of
   their interest in Christ, that self-examination should seem needless to
   them; unless it be at particular seasons, while in the actual enjoyment
   of some great discovery God gives of his glory and rich grace in
   Christ, to the drawing forth of extraordinary acts of grace. But the
   greater part, as they sometimes fall into dead frames of spirit, are
   frequently exercised with scruples and fears concerning their
   condition.

   They generally have an awful apprehension of the dreadful nature of a
   false hope; and there has been observable in most a great caution, lest
   in giving an account of their experiences, they should say too much,
   and use too strong. terms. Many, after they have related their
   experiences, have been greatly afflicted with fears, lest they have
   played the hypocrite, and used stronger terms than their case would
   fairly allow of; and yet could not find how they could correct
   themselves.

   I think the main ground of the doubts and fears, that persons after
   their conversion have been exercised with, about their own state, has
   been, that they have found so much corruption remaining in their
   hearts. At first, their souls seem to be all alive, their hearts are
   fixed, and their affections flowing; they seem to live quite above the
   world, and meet with but little difficulty in religious exercises; and
   they are ready to think it will always be so. Though they are truly
   abased under a sense of their vileness, by reason of former acts of
   sin; yet they are not then sufficiently sensible, what corruption still
   remains in their hearts; and therefore, are surprised when they find
   that they begin to be in dull and dead frames, troubled with wandering
   thoughts at the time of public and private worship, and utterly unable
   to keep themselves from them. When they find themselves unaffected,
   while yet there is the greatest occasion to be affected; and when they
   feel worldly dispositions working in them--pride, envy, stirrings of
   revenge, or some ill spirit towards some person that has injured them,
   as well as other workings of indwelling sin--their hearts are almost
   sunk with the disappointment; and they are ready presently to think
   that they are mere hypocrites.

   They are ready to argue, If God had, indeed, done such great things for
   them, as they hoped, such ingratitude would be inconsistent with it.
   They complain of the hardness and wickedness of their hearts; and say
   there is so much corruption, that it seems to them impossible there
   should be any goodness there. Many of them seem to be much more
   sensible how corrupt their hearts are, than before they were converted;
   and some have been too ready to be impressed with fear, that instead of
   becoming better, they are grown much worse, and make it an argument
   against the goodness of their state. But in truth, the case seems
   plainly to be, that now they feel the pain of their own wound; they
   have a watchful eye upon their hearts, that they did not use to have.
   They take more notice of what sin is there, which is now more
   burdensome to them; they strive more against it, and feel more of its
   strength.

   They are somewhat surprised that they should in this respect find
   themselves so different from the idea they generally had entertained of
   godly persons. For, though grace be indeed of a far more excellent
   nature than they imagined; yet, those who are godly have much less of
   it, and much more remaining corruption, than they thought. They never
   realized it, that persons were wont to meet with such difficulties,
   after they were once converted. When they are thus exercised with
   doubts about their state, through the deadness of their frames; as long
   as these frames last, they are commonly unable to satisfy themselves of
   the truth of their grace, by all their self-examination. When they hear
   of the signs of grace laid down for them to try themselves by, they are
   often so clouded, that they do not know how to apply them. They hardly
   know whether they have such and such things or no, and whether they
   have experienced them or not. That which was the sweetest, best, and
   most distinguishing in their experiences, they cannot recover a sense
   of. But on a return of the influences of the Spirit of God, to revive
   the lively actings of grace, the light breaks through the cloud, and
   doubting and darkness soon vanish away.

   Persons are often revived put of their dead and dark frames, by
   religious conversation: while they are talking of divine things, or
   ever they are aware, their souls are carried away into holy exercises
   with abundant pleasure. And oftentimes, while relating their past
   experiences to their Christian brethren, they have a sense of them
   revived, and the same experiences in a degree again renewed. Sometimes,
   while persons are exercised in mind with several objections against the
   goodness of their state, they have scriptures one after another coming
   to their minds, to answer their scruples, and unravel their
   difficulties, exceedingly apposite and proper to their circumstances.
   By these means, their darkness is scattered; and often, before the
   bestowment of any new remarkable comforts, especially after
   long-continued deadness and ill frames, there are renewed humblings, in
   a great sense of their own exceeding vileness and unworthiness, as
   before their first comforts were bestowed.

   Many in the country hare entertained a mean thought of this great work,
   from what they have heard of impressions made on persons' imaginations.
   But there have been exceeding great misrepresentations, and innumerable
   false reports, concerning that matter. It is not, that I know of, the
   profession or opinion of any one person in the town, that any weight is
   to be laid on any thing seen with the bodily eyes. I know the contrary
   to be a received and established principle amongst us. I cannot say
   that there have been no instances of persons who have been ready to
   give too much heed to vain and useless imaginations; but they have been
   easily corrected, and 1 conclude it will not be wondered at, that a
   congregation should need a guide in such cases, to assist them in
   distinguishing wheat from chaff. But such impressions on the
   imaginations as have been more usual, seem to me to be plainly no other
   than what is to be expected in human nature in such circumstances, and
   what is the natural result of the strong exercise of the mind, and
   impressions on the heart.

   I do not suppose, that they themselves imagined they saw any thing with
   their bodily eyes; but only have had within them ideas strongly
   impressed, and as it were lively pictures in their minds. For instance,
   some when in great terrors, through fear of hell, have had lively ideas
   of a dreadful furnace. Some, when their hearts have been strongly
   impressed, and their affections greatly moved with a sense of the
   beauty and excellency of Christ, have had their imaginations so wrought
   upon, that, together with a sense of his glorious spiritual
   perfections, there has arisen in the mind an idea of one of glorious
   majesty, and of a sweet and gracious aspect. Some, when they have been
   greatly affected with Christ's death, have at the same time a lively
   idea of Christ hanging upon the cross, and his blood running from his
   wounds. Surely such things will not be wondered at by them who have
   observed, how any strong affections about temporal matters will excite
   lively ideas and pictures of different things in the mind.

   The vigorous exercises of the mind, doubtless, more strongly impress it
   with imaginary ideas in some than others, which probably may arise from
   the difference of constitution, and seems evidently in some, partly to
   arise from their peculiar circumstances. When persons have been
   exercised with extreme terrors, and there is a sudden change to light
   and joy, the imagination seems more susceptive of strong ideas; the
   inferior powers, and even the frame of the body, are much more
   affected, than when the same persons have as great spiritual light and
   joy afterwards; of which it might, perhaps, be easy to give a tea-son.
   The forementioned Reverend Messrs. Lord and Owen--who, I believe, are
   esteemed persons of learning and discretion where they are best
   known--declared, that they found these impressions on persons'
   imaginations quite different things from what fame had before
   represented to them, and that they were what none need to wonder at--
   or to that purpose.

   There have indeed been some few instances of impressions on persons'
   imaginations, which have been somewhat mysterious to me, and I have
   been at a loss about them. For, though it has been exceeding evident to
   me, by many things that appeared both then and afterwards, that they
   indeed had a greater sense of the spiritual excellency of divine things
   accompanying them; yet I have not been able well to satisfy myself,
   whether their imaginary ideas have been more than could naturally arise
   from their spiritual sense of things. However, I have used the utmost
   caution in such cases; great care has been taken both in public and in
   private to teach persons the difference between what is spiritual and
   what is merely imaginary. I have often warned persons not to lay the
   stress of their hope on any ideas of any outward glory, or any external
   thing whatsoever, and have met with no opposition in such instructions.
   But it is not strange if some weaker persons, in giving; an account of
   their experiences, have not so prudently distinguished between the
   spiritual and imaginary part; of which some who have not been well
   affected to religion might take advantage.

   There has been much talk in many parts of the country, as though the
   people have symbolized with the quakers, and the quakers themselves
   have been moved with such reports; and some came here, once and again,
   hoping to find good waters to fish in; but without the least success,
   and have left off coming. There have also been reports spread about the
   country, as though the first occasion of so remarkable a concern was an
   apprehension that the world was near to an end; which was altogether a
   false report. Indeed, after this concern became so general and
   extraordinary, as related, the minds of some were filled with
   speculation, what so great a dispensation of Divine Providence might
   forebode; and some reports were heard from abroad, as though certain
   divines and others thought the conflagration was nigh; but such reports
   were never generally looked upon worthy of notice.

   The work which has now been wrought on souls, is evidently the same
   that was wrought in my venerable predecessor's days; as I have had
   abundant opportunity to know, having been in the ministry here two
   years with him, and so conversed with a considerable number whom my
   grandfather thought to be savingly converted at that time; and having
   been particularly acquainted with the experiences of many who were
   converted under his ministry before. And I know no one of them, who in
   the least doubts of its being the same spirit and the same work.
   Persons have now no otherwise been subject to impressions on their
   imaginations than formerly: the work is of the same nature, and has not
   been attended with any extraordinary circumstances, excepting such as
   are analogous to the extraordinary degree of it before described. And
   God's people who were formerly converted, have now partaken of the same
   shower of divine blessing--in the renewing, strengthening, edifying
   influences of the Spirit of God--that others have in his converting
   influences; and the work here has also been plainly the same with that
   of other places which have been mentioned, as partaking of the same
   blessing. I have particularly conversed with persons, about their
   experiences, who belong to all parts of the country, and in various
   parts of Connecticut, where a religious concern has lately appeared:
   and have been informed of the experiences of many others by their own
   pastors.

   It is easily perceived by the foregoing account, that it is very much
   the practice of the people here, to converse freely one with another
   about their spiritual experiences; which many have been disgusted at.
   But however our people may have, in some respects, gone to extremes in
   it, it is, doubtless, a practice that the circumstances of this town,
   and neighbouring towns, have naturally led them into. Whatsoever people
   have their minds engaged to such a degree in the same affair, that it
   is ever uppermost in their thoughts, they will naturally make it the
   subject of conversation when they get together, in which they will grow
   more and more free. Restraints will soon vanish; and they will not
   conceal from one another what they meet with. And it has been a
   practice which, in the general, has been attended with many good
   effects, and what God has greatly blessed amongst us: but it must be
   confessed, there may have been some ill consequences of it; which yet
   are rather to be laid to the indiscreet management of it than to the
   practice itself; and none can wonder, if among such a multitude some
   fail of exercising so much prudence in choosing the time, manner, and
   occasion of such discourse, as is desirable.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [552] Rom. iii. 19.

   [553] Mark iv. 26, 27, 28.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   This work further illustrated in particular instances.

   But to give a clear idea of the nature and manner of the operation of
   God's Spirit, in this wonderful effusion of it, I would give an account
   of two particular instances. The first is an adult person, a young
   woman whose name was abigail hutchinson. I fix upon her especially,
   because she is now dead, and so it may be more fit to speak freely of
   her than of living instances: though I am under far greater
   disadvantages, on other accounts, to give a full and clear narrative of
   her experiences, than I might of some others; nor can any account be
   given but what has been retained in the memories of her friends, of
   what they have heard her express in her lifetime.

   She was of an intelligent family: there could be nothing in her
   education that tended to enthusiasm, but rather to the contrary
   extreme. It is in nowise the temper of the family to be ostentatious of
   experiences, and it was far from being her temper. She was before her
   conversion, to the observation of her neighbours, of a sober and
   inoffensive conversation; and was a still, quiet, reserved person. She
   had long been infirm of body, but her infirmity had never been observed
   at all to incline her to be notional or fanciful, or to occasion any
   thing of religious melancholy. She was under awakenings scarcely a
   week, before there seemed to be plain evidence of her being savingly
   converted.

   She was first awakened in the winter season, on Monday, by something
   she heard her brother say of the necessity of being in good earnest in
   seeking regenerating grace, together with the news of the conversion of
   the young woman before mentioned, whose conversion so generally
   affected most of the young people here. This news wrought much upon
   her, and stirred up a spirit of envy in her towards this young woman,
   whom she thought very unworthy of being distinguished from others by
   such a mercy; but withal it engaged her in a firm resolution to do her
   utmost to obtain the same blessing. Considering with herself what
   course she should take, she thought, that she had not a sufficient
   knowledge of the principles of religion, to render her capable of
   conversion; whereupon she resolved thoroughly to search the Scriptures;
   and accordingly immediately began at the beginning of the Bible,
   intending to read it through. She continued thus till Thursday: and
   then there was a sudden alteration, by a great increase of her concern,
   in an extraordinary sense of her own sinfulness, particularly the
   sinfulness of her nature, and wickedness of her heart. This came upon
   her, as she expressed it, as a flash of lightning, and struck her into
   an exceeding terror. Upon which she left off reading the Bible, in
   course, as she had begun; and turned to the New Testament, to see if
   she could not find some relief there for her distressed soul.

   Her great terror, she said, was, that she had sinned against God: her
   distress grew more and more for three days; until she saw nothing but
   blackness of darkness before her, and her very flesh trembled for fear
   of Gods wrath: she wondered and was astonished at herself, that she had
   been so concerned for her body, and had applied so often to physicians
   to heal that, and had neglected her soul. Her sinfulness appeared with
   a very awful aspect to her, especially in three things; viz. her
   original, sin, and her sin in murmuring at God's providence--in the
   weakness and afflictions she had been under--and in want of duty to
   parents, though others had looked upon her to excel in dutifulness. On
   Saturday, she was so earnestly engaged in reading the Bible and other
   books, that she continued in it, searching for something to relieve
   her, till her eyes were so dim, that she could not know the letters.
   While she was thus engaged in reading, prayer, and other religious
   exercises, she thought of those words of Christ, wherein he warns us
   not to be as the heathen, that think they shall be heard for their much
   speaking; which, she said, led her to see that she had trusted to her
   own prayers and religious performances, and now she was put to a
   nonplus, and knew not which way to turn herself, or where to seek
   relief.

   While her mind was in this posture, her heart, she said, seemed to fly
   to the minister for refuge, hoping, that he could give her some relief.
   She came the same day to her brother, with the countenance of a person
   in distress, expostulating with him, why he had not told her more of
   her sinfulness, and earnestly inquiring of him what she should do. She
   seemed that day to feel in herself an enmity against the Bible, which
   greatly affrighted her. Her sense of her own exceeding sinfulness
   continued increasing from Thursday till Monday and she gave this
   account of it: That it had been her opinion, till now, she was not
   guilty of Adam's sin, nor any way concerned in it, because she was not
   active in it; but that now she saw she was guilty of that sin, and all
   over defiled by it; and the sin which she brought into the world with
   her, was alone sufficient to condemn her.

   On the Sabbath-day she was so ill, that her friends thought it not best
   that she should go to public worship, of which she seemed very
   desirous: but when she went to bed on the Sabbath night, she took up a
   resolution, that she would the next morning go to the minister, hoping
   to find some relief there. As she awaked on Monday morning, a little
   before day, she wondered within herself at the easiness and calmness
   she felt in her mind, which was of that kind she never felt before. As
   she thought of this, such words as these were in her mind: The words of
   the Lord are pure words, health to the soul, and marrow to the bones:
   and then these words, The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; which
   were accompanied with a lively sense of the excellency of Christ, and
   his sufficiency to satisfy for the sins of the whole world. She then
   thought of that expression. It is a pleasant thing for the eyes to
   lie-hold the sun; which words then seemed to her to be very applicable
   to Jesus Christ. By these things her mind was led into such
   contemplations and views of Christ, as filled her exceeding full of
   joy. She told her brother, in the morning, that she had seen (i. e. in
   realizing views by faith) Christ the last night, and that she had
   really thought that she had not knowledge enough, to be converted; but,
   says she, God can make it quite easy! On Monday she felt all day a
   constant sweetness in her soul. She had a repetition of the same
   discoveries of Christ three mornings together, and much in the same
   manner, at each time, waking a little before day; but brighter and
   brighter every day.

   At the last time, on Wednesday morning, while in the enjoyment of a
   spiritual view of Christ's glory and fulness, her soul was filled with
   distress for Christless persons, to consider what a miserable condition
   they were in. She felt a strong inclination immediately to go forth to
   warn sinners; and proposed it the next day to her brother to assist her
   in going from house to house; but her brother restrained her, by
   telling her of the unsuitableness of such a method. She told one of her
   sisters that day, that she loved all mankind, but especially the people
   of God. Her sister asked her, Why she loved all mankind? She replied,
   Because God had made them. After this, there happened to come into the
   shop where she was at work, three persons who were thought to have been
   lately converted: her seeing of them, as they stepped in one after
   another, so affected her, and so drew forth her love to them, that it
   overcame her, and she almost fainted. When they began to talk of the
   things of religion, it was more than she could bear; they were obliged
   to cease on that account. It was a very frequent thing with her to be
   overcome with a flow of affection to them whom she thought godly, in
   conversation with them, and sometimes only at the sight of them.

   She had many extraordinary discoveries of the glory of God and Christ;
   sometimes, in some particular attributes, and sometimes in many. She
   gave an account, that once, as those four words passed through her
   mind, wisdom, justice, goodness, and truth, her soul was filled with a
   sense of the glory of each of these divine attributes, but especially
   the last. Truth, said she, sunk the deepest! And, therefore, as these
   words passed, this was repeated, truth, truth! Her mind was so
   swallowed up with a sense of the glory of God's truth and other
   perfections, that she said, it seemed as though her life was going, and
   that she saw it was easy with God to take away her life by discoveries
   of himself. Soon after this she went to a private religious meeting,
   and her mind was full of a sense and view of the glory of God all the
   time. When the exercise was ended, some asked her concerning what she
   had experienced; and she began to give an account, but as she was
   relating it, it revived such a sense of the same things, that her
   strength failed; and they were obliged to take her and lay her upon the
   bed. Afterwards she was greatly affected, and rejoiced with these
   words, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain!

   She had several days together a sweet sense of the excellency and
   loveliness of Christ in his meekness, which disposed her continually to
   be repeating over these words, which were sweet to her, meek and lowly
   in heart, meek and lowly in heart. She once expressed herself to one of
   her sisters to this purpose, that she had continued whale days and
   whole nights, in a constant ravishing view of the glory of God and
   Christ, having enjoyed as much as her life could bear. Once, as her
   brother was speaking of the dying love of Christ, she told him, she had
   such a sense of it, that the mere mentioning of it was ready to
   overcome her.

   Once, when she came to me, she said, that at such and such a time, she
   thought she saw as much of God, and had as much joy and pleasure, as
   was possible in this life; and that yet, afterwards, God discovered
   himself far more abundantly. She saw the same things as before, yet
   more clearly, and in a far more excellent and delightful manner; and
   was filled with a more exceeding sweetness. She likewise gave me such
   an account of the sense she once had, from day to day, of the glory of
   Christ, and of God, in his various attributes, that it seemed to me she
   dwelt for days together in a kind of beatific vision of God; and seemed
   to have, as I thought, as immediate an intercourse with him, as a child
   with a father. At the same time, she appeared most remote from any high
   thought of herself, and of her own sufficiency; but was like a little
   child, and expressed a great desire to be instructed, telling me that
   she longed very often to come to me for instruction, and wanted to live
   at my house, that 1 might tell her what was her duty.

   She often expressed a sense of the glory of God appearing in the trees,
   the growth of the fields, and other works of God's hands. She told her
   sister who lived near the heart of the town, that she once thought it a
   pleasant thing to live in the middle of the town, but now, says she, I
   think it much more pleasant to sit and see the wind blowing the trees,
   and to behold in the country what god has made. She had sometimes the
   powerful breathings of the Spirit of God on her soul, while reading the
   Scripture; and would express her sense of the certain truth and
   divinity thereof. She sometimes would appear with a pleasant smile on
   her countenance; and once, when her sister took notice of it, and asked
   why she smiled, she replied, I am brim-full of a sweet feeling within!
   She often used to express how good and meet it was to lie low before
   God, and the lower (says she) the better! and that it was pleasant to
   think of lying in the dust, all the days of her life, mourning for sin.
   She was wont to manifest a great sense of her own meanness and
   dependence. She often expressed an exceeding compassion, and pitiful
   love, which she found in her heart towards persons in a Christless
   condition. This was sometimes so strong, that, as she was passing by
   such in the streets, or those that she feared were such, she would be
   overcome by the sight of them. She once said, that she longed to have
   the whole world saved, she wanted, as it were, to pull them all to her;
   she could not bear to have one lost.

   She had great longings to die, that she might be with Christ: which
   increased until she thought she did not know how to be patient to wait
   till God's time. But once, when she felt those longings, she thought
   with herself, If I long to die, why do I go to physicians? Whence she
   concluded that her longings for death were not well regulated. After
   this she often put it to herself, which she should choose, whether to
   live or to die, to be sick or to be well; and she found she could not
   tell, till at last she found herself disposed to say these words; I am
   quite willing to live, and quite willing to die; quite willing to be
   sick, and quite willing to be well; and quite willing for any thing
   that God will bring upon me! And then, said she, I felt myself
   perfectly easy, in a full submission to the will of God. She then
   lamented much, that she had been so eager in her longings for death, as
   it argued want of such a resignation to God as ought to be. She seemed
   henceforward to continue in this resigned frame till death.

   After this, her illness increased upon her: and once after she had
   before spent the greater part of the night in extreme pain, she waked
   out of a little sleep with these words in her heart and mouth; I am
   willing to suffer for Christ's sake, I am willing to spend and be spent
   for Christ's sake, I am willing to spend my life, even my very life,
   for Christ's sake! And though she had an extraordinary resignation,
   with respect to life or death, yet the thoughts of dying were exceeding
   sweet to her. At a time when her brother was reading in Job, concerning
   worms feeding on the dead body, she appeared with a pleasant smile; and
   being asked about it, she said, It was sweet to her to think of her
   being in such circumstances. At another time, when her brother
   mentioned the danger there seemed to be, that the illness she laboured
   under, might be an occasion of her death, it filled her with joy that
   almost overcame her. At another time, when she met a company following
   a corpse to the grave, she said, it was sweet to her to think, that
   they would in a little time follow her in like manner.

   Her illness, in the latter part of it, was seated much in her throat;
   and an inward swelling filled up the pipe, so that she could swallow
   nothing but what was perfectly liquid, and but very little of that,
   with great and long strugglings. That which she took in fled out at her
   nostrils, till at last she could swallow nothing at all. She had a
   raging appetite for food; so that she told her sister, when talking
   with her about her circumstances, that the worst bit would be sweet to
   her; but yet, when she saw that she could not swallow it, she seemed to
   be as perfectly contented without it, as if she had no appetite. Others
   were greatly moved to see what she underwent, and were filled with
   admiration at her unexampled patience. At a time when she was striving
   in vain to get down a little of something liquid, and was very much
   spent with it; she looked up on her sister with a smile, saying, O
   sister, this is for my good! At another time, when her sister was
   speaking of what she underwent, she told her, that she lived a heaven
   upon earth for all that. She used sometimes to say to her sister, under
   her extreme sufferings, It is good to be so! Her sister once asked her,
   why she said so; why, says she, because God would have it so: it is
   best that things should be us God would have them: it looks best to me.
   After her confinement, as they were leading her from the bed to the
   door, she seemed overcome by the sight of things abroad, as showing
   forth the glory of the being who had made them. As she lay on her
   death-bed, she would often say these words, God is my friend! And once
   looking upon her sister, with a smile, said, O sister, How good it is!
   How sweet and comfortable it is to consider, and think of heavenly
   things! and used this argument to persuade her sister to be much in
   such meditations.

   She expressed, on her death-bed, an exceeding longing, both for persons
   in a natural state, that they might be converted; and for the godly,
   that they might see and know more of God. And when those who looked on
   themselves as in a Christless state came to see her, she would be
   greatly moved with compassionate affection. One in particular, who
   seemed to be in great distress about the state of her soul, and had
   come to see her from time to time, she desired her sister to persuade
   not to come any more, because the sight of her so wrought on her
   compassions, that it overcame her nature. The same week that she died,
   when she was in distressing circumstances as to her body, some of the
   neighbours who came to see her, asked if she was willing to die? She
   replied, that she was quite willing either to live or die; she was
   willing to be in pain; she was wilting to be so always as she was then,
   if that was the will of God. She willed what God willed. They asked her
   whether she was willing to die that night? She answered, Yes, if it be
   God's will. And seemed to speak all with that perfect composure of
   spirit, and with such a cheerful and pleasant countenance, that it
   filled them with admiration.

   She was very weak a considerable time before she died, having pined
   away with famine and thirst, so that her flesh seemed to be dried upon
   her bones; and therefore could say but little, and manifested her mind
   very much by signs. She said she had matter enough to fill up all her
   time with talk, if she had hut strength. A few days before her death,
   some asked her, Whether she held her integrity still? Whether she was
   not afraid of death? she answered to this purpose, that she had not the
   least degree of fear of death. They asked her why she would be so
   confident? She answered, If I should say otherwise, I should speak
   contrary to what I know. There is, said she, indeed, a dark entry, that
   looks something dark, but on the other side there appears such a bright
   shining light, that I cannot be afraid! She said not long before she
   died, that she used to be afraid how she should grapple with death;
   But, says she, God has showed me that he can make it easy in great
   pain. Several days before she died, she could scarcely say any thing
   but just Yes, and No, to questions that were asked her; for she seemed
   to be dying for three days together. But seemed to continue in an
   admirably sweet composure of soul, without any interruption, to the
   last; and died as a person that went to sleep, without any struggling,
   about noon, on Friday, June. 27, 1735.

   She had long been infirm, and often had been exercised with great pain;
   but she died chiefly of famine. It was, doubtless, partly owing to her
   bodily weakness, that her nature was so often overcome, and ready to
   sink with gracious affection; but yet the truth was, that she had more
   grace, and greater discoveries of God and Christ, than the present
   frail state did well consist with. She wanted to be where strong grace
   might have more liberty, and be without the clog of a weak body; there
   she longed to be, and there she doubtless now is. She was looked upon
   amongst us, as a very eminent instance of Christian experience; but
   this is but a very broken and imperfect account I have given of her:
   her eminency would much more appear, if her experiences were fully
   related, as she was wont to express, and manifest them, while living. I
   once read this account to some of her pious neighbours, who were
   acquainted with her, who said, to this purpose, that the picture fell
   much short of the life; and particularly that it much failed of duly
   representing her humility, and that admirable lowliness of heart, that
   at all times appeared in her. But there are, blessed be God! many
   living instances, of much the like nature, and in some things no less
   extraordinary.

   But I now proceed to the other instance, that of the little child
   before mentioned. Her name is Phebe Bartlet, [554] daughter of William
   Bartlet. I shall give the account as I took it from the mouth of her
   parents, whose veracity none who know them doubt of.

   She was born in March, 1731. About the latter end of April, or
   beginning of May, 1735, she was greatly affected by the talk of her
   brother, who had been hopefully converted a little before, at about
   eleven years of age, and then seriously talked to her about the great
   things of religion. Her parents did not know of it at that time, and
   were not wont, in the counsels they gave to their children,
   particularly to direct themselves to her, being so young, and, as they
   supposed, not capable of understanding. But after her brother had
   talked to her, they observed her very earnestly listen to the advice
   they gave to the other children; and she was observed very constantly
   to retire, several times in a day, as was concluded, for secret prayer.
   She grew more and more engaged in religion, and was more frequent in
   her closet; till at last she was wont to visit it five or six times a
   day: and was so engaged in it, that nothing would at any time divert
   her from her stated closet exercises. Her mother often observed and
   watched her, when such things occurred as she thought most likely to
   divert her, either by putting it out of her thoughts, or otherwise
   engaging her inclinations; but never could observe her to fail. She
   mentioned some very remarkable instances.

   She once of her own accord spake of her unsuccessfulness, in that she
   could not find God, or to that purpose. But on Thursday, the last day
   of July, about the middle of the day, the child being in the closet,
   where it used to retire, its mother heard it speaking aloud; which was
   unusual, and never had been observed before. And her voice seemed to be
   as of one exceedingly importunate and engaged; but her mother could
   distinctly hear only these words, spoken in a childish manner, but with
   extraordinary earnestness, and out of distress of soul, pray, blessed
   lord, give me salvation! i pray, beg, pardon all my sins.' When the
   child had done prayer, she came out of the closet, sat down by her
   mother, and cried out aloud. Her mother very earnestly asked her
   several times, what the matter was, before she would make any answer;
   but she continued crying, and writhing her body to and fro, like one in
   anguish of spirit. Her mother then asked her, whether she was afraid
   that God would not give her salvation. She then answered, Yes, I am
   afraid I shall go to hell! Her mother then endeavoured to quiet her,
   and told her she would not have her cry, she must be a good girl, and
   pray every day, and she hoped God would give her salvation. But this
   did not quiet her at all; she continued thus earnestly crying, and
   taking on for some time, till at length she suddenly ceased crying, and
   began to smile, and presently said with a smiling countenance, Mother,
   the Kingdom of heaven is come to me! Her mother was surprised at the
   sudden alteration, and at the speech; and knew not what to make of it;
   but at first said nothing to her. The child presently spake again, and
   said, there is another come to me, and there is another, there is
   three; and being asked what she meant, she answered, one is, Thy will
   be done, and there is another, Enjoy him for ever; by which it seems,
   that when the child said, there is three come to me; she meant three
   passages of her catechism that came to her mind.

   After the child had said this, she retired again into her closet; and
   her mother went over to her brother's, who was next neighbour; and when
   she came back, the child, being come out of the closet, meets her
   mother with this cheerful speech; I can find God now! referring to what
   she had before complained of, that she could not find God. Then the
   child spoke again and said, I love God! her mother asked her, how well
   she loved God, whether she loved God better than her father and mother,
   she said, Yes. Then she asked her, whether she loved God better than
   her little sister Rachel. She answered, Yes, better than any thine!
   Then her elder sister, referring to her saving she could find God now,
   asked her, where she could find God. She answered, In heaven. Why, said
   she, have you been in heaven? No, said the child. By this it seems not
   to have been any imagination of any thing seen with bodily eyes, that
   she called God, when she said, I can find God now. Her mother asked
   her, whether she was afraid of going to hell, and if that had made her
   cry? She answered, Yes, I was; but now I shan't. Her mother asked her,
   whether she thought that God had given her salvation: she answered,
   Yes. Her mother asked her, When? She answered, To-day. She appeared all
   that afternoon exceeding cheerful and joyful. One of the neighbours
   asked her, how she felt herself? She answered, I feel better than I
   did. The neighbour asked her, what made her feel better. She answered,
   God makes me. That evening, as she lay a-bed, she called one of her
   little cousins to her, who was present in the room, as having something
   to say to him; and when he came, she told him, that Heaven was better
   than earth. The next day, her mother asked her what God made her for?
   She answered, To serve him; and added. Every body should serve God, and
   get an interest in Christ.

   The same day the elder children, when they came home from school,
   seemed much affected with the extraordinary change that seemed to be
   made in Phebe. And her sister Abigail standing by, her mother took
   occasion to counsel her, now to improve her time, to prepare for
   another world. On which Phebe burst out in tears, and cried out, Poor
   Nabby. Her mother told her, she would not have her cry, she hoped that
   God would give Nabby salvation; but that did not quiet her, she
   continued earnestly crying for some time. When she had in a measure
   ceased, her sister Eunice being by her, she burst out again, and cried,
   Poor Eunice! and cried exceedingly; and when she had almost done, she
   went into another room, and there looked up on her sister Naomi: and
   burst out again, crying, Poor Amy! Her mother was greatly affected at
   such a behaviour in a child, and knew not what to say to her. One of
   the neighbours coming in a little after, asked her what she had cried
   for. She seemed at first backward to tell the reason: her mother told
   her she might tell that person, for he had given her an apple: upon
   which she said, she cried because she was afraid they would go to hell.

   At night, a certain minister, who was occasionally in the town, was at
   the house, and talked with her of religious

   things. After he was gone, she sat leaning on the table, with tears
   running from her eyes; and being asked what made her cry, she said, It
   was thinking about God. The next day, being Saturday, she seemed great
   part of the day to be in a very affectionate frame, had four turns of
   crying and seemed to endeavour to curb herself, and hide her tears, and
   was very backward to talk of the occasion. On the Sabbath-day she was
   asked, whether she believed in God; she answered, Yes. And being told
   that Christ was the Son of God, she made ready answer, and said, I know
   it.

   From this time there appeared a very remarkable abiding change in the
   child. She has been very strict upon the Sabbath; and seems to long for
   the Sabbath-day before it comes, and will often in the week time be
   inquiring how long it is to the Sabbath-day, and must have the days
   between particularly counted over, before she will be contented. She
   seems to love God's house, and is verv eager to go thither. Her mother
   once asked her, why she had such a mind to go? whether it was not to
   see fine folks? She said, No, it was to hear Mr. Edwards preach. When
   she is in the place of worship, she is very far from spending her time
   there as children at her age usually do, but appears with an attention
   that is very extraordinary for such a child. She also appears very
   desirous at all opportunities to go to private religious meetings; and
   is very still and attentive at home, during prayer, and has appeared
   affected in time of family-prayer. She seems to delight much in hearing
   religious conversation. When I once was there with some strangers, and
   talked to her something of religion, she seemed more than ordinarily
   attentive; and when we were gone, she looked out very wistfully after
   us, and said, I wish they would come again! Her mother asked her, why?
   Says she, I love to hear em talk.

   She seems to have very much of the fear of God before her eyes, and an
   extraordinary dread of sinning against him; of which her mother
   mentioned the following remarkable instance. Some time in August, the
   last year, she went with some bigger children, to get some plums in a
   neighbour's lot, knowing nothing of any harm in what she did; but when
   she brought some of the plums into the house, her mother mildly
   reproved her, and told her that she must not get plums without leave,
   because it was sin: God had commanded her not to steal. The child
   seemed greatly surprised, and burst out in tears, and cried out, I wont
   have these plums! and turning to her sister Eunice, very earnestly said
   to her, Why did you ask me to go to that plum-tree? 1 should not have
   gone, if you had not asked me. The other children did not seem to be
   much affected or concerned; but there was no pacifying Phebe. Her
   mother told her, she might go and ask leave, and then it would not be
   sin for her to eat them; and sent one of the children to that end; and,
   when she returned, her mother told her, that the owner had given leave,
   now she might eat them, and it would not be stealing. This stilled her
   a little while; but presently she broke out again into an exceeding fit
   of crying. Her mother asked her, what made her cry again? Why she cried
   now, since they had asked leave? What it was that troubled her now? And
   asked her several times very earnestly, before she made any answer; but
   at last said, it was because, because it was sin. She continued a
   considerable time crying: and said she would not go again if Eunice
   asked her an hundred times; and she retained her aversion to that fruit
   for a considerable time, under the remembrance of her former sin.

   She sometimes appears greatly affected, and delighted with texts of
   Scripture that come to her mind. Particularly about the beginning of
   November, that text came to her mind, Rev. iii. 20. "Behold, I stand at
   the door, and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
   will come in, and sup with him, and he with me." She spoke of it to
   those of the family, with a pent appearance of joy, a smiling
   countenance, and elevation of voice; and afterwards she went into
   another room, where her mother overheard her talking very earnestly to
   the children about it; and particularly heard her say to them, three or
   four times over, with an air of exceeding joy and admiration, Why it is
   to sup with god. Some time about the middle of winter, very late in the
   night, when all were a-bed, her mother perceived that she was awake,
   and heard her, as though she was weeping. She called to her, and asked
   her what was the matter. She answered with a low voice, so that her
   mother could not hear what she said; but thinking that it might be
   occasioned by some spiritual affection, said no more to her: but
   perceived her to lie awake, and to continue in the same frame, for a
   considerable time. The next morning, she asked her, whether she did not
   cry the last night. The child answered, Yes, I did cry a little, for I
   was thinking about God and Christ, and they loved me. Her mother asked
   her, whether to think of God and Christ loving her made her cry? she
   answered, Yes, it does sometimes.

   She has often manifested a great concern for the good of others' souls:
   and has been wont many times affectionately to counsel the other
   children. Once, about the latter end of September, the last year, when
   she and some others of the children were in a room by themselves,
   husking Indian corn, the child, after a while, came out and sat by the
   fire. Her mother took notice that she appeared with a more than
   ordinary serious and pensive countenance; but at last she broke
   silence, and said, I have been talking to Nabby and Eunice. Her mother
   asked her, what she had said to them. Why, said she, I told them they
   must pray, and prepare to die; that they had but a little while to live
   in this world, and they must be always ready. When Nabby came out, her
   mother asked her, whether she had said that to them. Yes, said she, she
   said that, and a great deal more. At other times, the child took
   opportunities to talk to the other children about the great concern of
   their souls, so as much to affect them. She was once exceeding
   importunate with her mother to go with her sister Naomi to pray: her
   mother endeavoured to put her off; but she pulled her by the sleeve,
   and seemed as if she would by no means be denied. At last her mother
   told her, that Amy must go and pray by herself; but, says the child,
   she will not go; and persisted earnestly to beg of her mother to go
   with her.

   She has discovered an uncommon degree of a spirit of charity,
   particularly on the following occasion. A poor man that lives in the
   woods, had lately lost a cow that the family much depended on; and
   being at the house, he was relating his misfortune, and telling of the
   straits and difficulties they were reduced to by it. She took much
   notice of it, and it wrought exceedingly on her compassion. After she
   had attentively heard him awhile, she went away to her father, who was
   in the shop, and entreated him to give that man a cow: and told him,
   that the poor man had no cow! that the hunters, or something else, had
   killed his cow! and entreated him to give him one of theirs. Her father
   told her, that they could not spare one. Then she entreated him to let
   him and his family come and live at his house: and had much more talk
   of the same nature, whereby she manifested bowels of compassion to the
   poor.

   She has manifested great love to her minister: particularly when I
   returned from my long journey for my health, the last fall. When she
   heard of it, she appeared very joyful at the news, and told the
   children of it, with ah elevated voice, as the most joyful tidings;
   repeating it over and over, Mr. Edwards is come home! Mr. Edwards is
   come home! She still continues very constant in secret prayer, so far
   as can he observed, for she seems to have no desire that others should
   observe her when she retires, being a child of a reserved temper. Every
   night, before she goes to bed, she will say her catechism, and will by
   no means miss. She never forgot it but once, and then, after she was
   a-bed, thought of it, and cried out in tears, I han't said my
   catechism! and would not be quieted till her mother asked her the
   catechism as she lay in bed. She sometimes appears to be in doubt about
   the condition of her soul; and when asked, whether she thinks that she
   is prepared for death, speaks something doubtfully about it. At other
   times she seems to have no doubt, but when asked, replies, Yes, without
   hesitation.

   In the former part of this great work of God amongst us, till it got to
   its height, we seemed to be wonderfully smiled upon and blessed in all
   respects. Satan seemed to be unusually restrained; persons who before
   had been involved in melancholy, seemed to be as it were waked up out
   of it; and those who had been entangled with extraordinary temptations,
   seemed wonderfully freed. And not only so, but it was the most
   remarkable time of health that ever I knew since I have been in the
   town. We ordinarily have several bills put up, every sabbath, for sick
   persons; but now we had not so much as one for many sabbaths together.
   But after this it seemed to be otherwise.

   When this work of God appeared to be at its greatest height, a poor
   weak man who belongs to the town, being in great spiritual trouble, was
   hurried with violent temptations to cut his own throat, and made an
   attempt, but did not do it effectually. He, after this, continued a
   considerable time exceedingly overwhelmed with melancholy; but has now
   for a long time been very greatly delivered, by the light of God's
   countenance lifted up upon him, and has expressed a great sense of his
   sin in so far yielding to temptation; and there are in him all hopeful
   evidences of his having been made a subject of saving mercy.

   In the latter part of May, it began to be very sensible that the Spirit
   of God was gradually withdrawing from us, and after this time Satan
   seemed to be more let loose, and raged in a dreadful manner. The first
   instance wherein it appeared, was a person putting an end to his own
   life by cutting his throat. He was a gentleman of more than common
   understanding, of strict morals, religious in his behaviour, and a
   useful and honourable person in the town; but was of a family that are
   exceedingly prone to the disease of melancholy, and his mother was
   killed with it. He had, from the beginning of this extraordinary time,
   been exceedingly concerned about the state of his soul, and there were
   some things in his experience that appeared very hopeful; but he durst
   entertain no hope concerning his own good estate. Towards the latter
   part of his time, he grew much discouraged, and melancholy grew again
   upon him, till he was wholly overpowered by it, and was in a great
   measure past a capacity of receiving advice, or being reasoned with to
   any purpose. The devil took the advantage, and drove him into
   despairing thoughts. He was kept awake at nights, meditating terror, so
   that he had scarce any sleep at all for a long time together; and it
   was observed at last, that he was scarcely well capable of managing his
   ordinary business, and was judged delirious by the coroner's inquest.
   The news of this extraordinarily affected the minds of people here, and
   struck them as it were with astonishment. After this, multitudes in
   this and other towns seemed to have it strongly suggested to them, and
   pressed upon them, to do as this person had done. And many who seemed
   to be under no melancholy, some pious persons who had no special
   darkness or doubts about the goodness of their state--nor were under
   any special trouble or concern of mind about any thing spiritual or
   temporal--had it urged upon them as if somebody had spoke to them, Cut
   your own throat, now is a good opportunity. Now! now! So that they were
   obliged to fight with all their might to resist it, and yet no reason
   suggested to them why they should do it.

   About the same time, there were two remarkable instances of persons led
   away with strange enthusiastic delusions; one at Suffield, and another
   at South Hadley. That which has made the greatest noise in the country
   was the conduct of the man at South Hadley; whose delusion was, that he
   thought himself divinely instructed to direct a poor man in melancholy
   and despairing circumstances, to say certain words in prayer to God, as
   recorded in Psal. cxvi. 4. for his own relief. The man is esteemed a
   pious man; I have seen this error of his; had a particular acquaintance
   with him; and I believe none would question his piety who had such
   acquaintance. He gave me a particular account of the manner how he was
   deluded, which is too long to be here inserted; but, in short, he
   exceedingly rejoiced, and was elevated with the extraordinary work
   carried on in this part of the country; and was possessed with an
   opinion, that it was the beginning of the glorious times of the church
   spoken of in Scripture. He had read it as the opinion of some divines,
   that many in these times should be endued with extraordinary gifts of
   the Holy Ghost, and had embraced the notion, though he had at first no
   apprehensions that any besides ministers would have such gifts. But he
   since exceedingly laments the dishonour he has done to God, and the
   wound he has given religion in it, and has lain low before God and man
   for it.

   After these things, the instances of conversion were rare here in
   comparison of what they had before been, though that remarkable
   instance before noticed of the little child, was after this. The Spirit
   of God not long after this time, appeared very sensibly withdrawing
   from all parts of the country, though we have heard of the work going
   on in some places of Connecticut, and that it continues to be carried
   on even to this day. But religion remained here, and I believe in some
   other places, the main subject of conversation for several months
   after. And there were some turns, wherein God's work seemed to revive,
   and we were ready to hope that all was going to be renewed again; yet,
   in the main, there was a gradual decline of that general, engaged,
   lively spirit in religion, which had been. Several things have happened
   since, which have diverted people's minds, and turned their
   conversation more to other affairs; particularly, his excellency the
   Governor's coming up, and the committee of general court, on the treaty
   with the Indians.--Afterwards, the Springfield controversy; and since
   that, our people in this town have been engaged in the building of a
   new meeting-house. Some other occurrences might be mentioned, that have
   seemed to have this effect. But as to those who have been thought
   converted at this time, they generally seem to have had an abiding
   change wrought on them. I have had particular acquaintance with many of
   them since; and they generally appear to be persons who have a new
   sense of things, new apprehensions and views of God, of the divine
   attributes of Jesus Christ, and the great things of the gospel. They
   have a new sense of their truth, and they affect them in a new manner;
   though it is very far from being always alike with them, neither can
   they revive a sense of things when they please. Their hearts are often
   touched, and sometimes filled, with new sweetnesses and delights; there
   seems to express an inward ardour and burning of heart, like to which
   they never experienced before; sometimes, perhaps, occasioned only by
   the mention of Christ's name, or some one of the divine perfections.
   There are new appetites, and a new kind of breathings and pantings of
   heart, and groanings that cannot be uttered. There is a new kind of
   inward labour and struggle of soul towards heaven and holiness.

   Some who before were very rough in their temper and manners, seemed to
   be remarkably softened and sweetened. And some have had their souls
   exceedingly filled, and overwhelmed with light, love, and comfort, long
   since the work of God has ceased to be so remarkably earned on in a
   general way; and some have had much greater experiences of this nature
   than they had before. There is still a great deal of religious
   conversation continued in the town, amongst young and old; a religious
   disposition appears to be still maintained amongst our people, by their
   holding frequent private religions meetings; and all sorts are
   generally worshipping God at such meetings, on Sabbath-nights, and in
   the evening after our public lecture. Many children in the town still
   keep up such meetings among themselves. I know of no one young person
   in the town who has returned to former ways of looseness and
   extravagance in any respect; but we still remain a reformed people, and
   God has evidently made us a new people.

   I cannot say that there has been no instance, of any one person who has
   conducted himself unworthily; nor am I so vain as to imagine that we
   have not been mistaken in our good opinion concerning any; or that
   there are none who pass amongst us for sheep, that are indeed wolves in
   sheep's clothing; and who probably may, some time or other, discover
   themselves by their fruits. We are not so pure, but that we have great
   cause to be humbled and ashamed that we are so impure; nor so
   religious, but that those who watch for our halting, may see things in
   us, whence they may take occasion to reproach us and religion. But in
   the main, there has been a great and marvelous work of conversion and
   sanctification among the people here; and they have paid all due
   respect to those who have been blest of God to be the instruments of
   it. Both old and young have shown a forwardness to hearken not only to
   my counsels, but even to my reproofs, from the pulpit.

   A great part of the country have not received the most favourable
   thoughts of this affair; and to this day many retain a jealousy
   concerning it, and prejudice against it. I have reason to think that
   the meanness and weakness of the instrument, that has been made use of
   in this town, has prejudiced many against it; nor does it appear to me
   strange that it should be so. But yet the circumstance of this great
   work of God, is analogous to other circumstances of it. God has so
   ordered the manner of the work in many respects, as very signally and
   remarkably to show it to be his own peculiar and immediate work; and to
   secure the glory of it wholly to his own almighty power, and sovereign
   grace. And whatever the circumstances and means have been, and though
   we are so unworthy, yet so hath it pleaded God to work! And we are
   evidently a people blessed of the Lord! For here, in this corner of the
   world, God dwells, and manifests his glory.

   Thus, Reverend Sir, I have given a large and particular account of this
   remarkable affair; and yet, considering how manifold God's works have
   been amongst us, it is but a very brief one. I should have sent it much
   sooner, had I not been greatly hindered by illness in my family, and
   also in my own person. It is probably much larger than you expected,
   and, it may be, than you would have chosen. I thought that the
   extraordinary nature of the thing, and the innumerable
   misrepresentations which have gone abroad of it, many of which,
   doubtless, have reached your ears, made it necessary that I should be
   particular. But I would leave it entirely with your wisdom to make what
   use of it you think best, to send a part of it to England, or all, or
   none, if you think it not worthy; or otherwise to dispose of it as you
   may think most for God's glory, and the interest of religion. If you
   are pleased to send any thing to the Rev. Dr. Guyse, I should be glad
   to have it signified to him, as my humble desire, that since he and the
   congregation to which he preached, have been pleased to take so much
   notice of us, as they have, that they would also think of us at the
   throne of grace, and seek there for us, that God would not forsake us,
   but enable us to bring forth fruit answerable to our profession, and
   our mercies; and that our "light may so shine before men, that others
   seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven."

   When I first heard of the notice the Rev. Dr. Watts and Dr. Guyse look
   of God's mercies to us, I took occasion to inform our congregation of
   it in a discourse from these words--A city that is set upon a hill
   cannot be hid. And having since seen a particular account of the notice
   which the Rev. Dr. Guyse and his congregation took of it, in a letter
   you wrote to my honoured uncle Williams, I read that part of your
   letter to the congregation, and laboured as much as in me lay to
   enforce their duty from it. The congregation were very sensibly moved
   and affected at both times.

   I humbly request of you, Reverend Sir, your prayers for this county, in
   its present melancholy circumstances, into which it is brought by the
   Springfield quarrel; which, doubtless, above all things that have
   happened, has tended to put a stop to the glorious work here, and to
   prejudice this country against it, and hinder the propagation of it. I
   also ask your prayers for this town, and would particularly beg an
   interest in them for him who is,

   Honoured Sir,

   With humble respect,

   Your obedient Son and Servant,

   jonathan edwards.

   Northampton,

   Nov. 6, 1736.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [554] She was living in March, 1789, and maintained the character of a
   true convert.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  SOME THOUGHTS

        CONCERNING

  THE PRESENT REVIVAL OF RELIGION

    IN NEW ENGLAND,

        AND THE

      WAY IN WHICH IT OUGHT TO BE ACKNOWLEDGED AND PROMOTED.

        HUMBLY OFFERED TO THE PUBLIC,

    IN A TREATISE ON THAT SUBJECT.

   --Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a
   high-way for our God
     __________________________________________________________________

      THE PREFACE.

   In the ensuing treatise, I condemn ministers assuming, or taking too
   much upon them, and appearing as though they supposed that they were
   the persons to whom it especially belonged to dictate, direct, and
   determine; but perhaps shall be thought to be very guilty of it myself.
   And some, when they read this treatise, may be ready to say that while
   I condemn this in others, I have the monopoly of it. I confess that I
   have taken a great deal of liberty freely to express my thoughts
   concerning almost every thing appertaining to the wonderful work of God
   that has of late been carried on in the land, and to declare what has
   appeared to me to be the mind of God concerning the duty and
   obligations of all sorts of persons, and even those that are my
   superiors and fathers, ministers of the gospel, and civil rulers. But
   yet I hope the liberty I have taken is not greater than can be
   justified. In a free nation, such liberty of the press is allowed, a
   that every author takes leave, without offence, freely to speak his
   opinion concerning the management of public affairs, and the duty of
   the legislature, and those that are at the head of the administration,
   though vastly his superiors. As at this day, private subjects offer
   their sentiments to the public, from the press, concerning the
   management of public affairs, and the duty of the legislature, and
   those that are at the head of the administration, though vastly his
   superiors. As at this day, private subjects offer their sentiments to
   the public, from the press, concerning the management of the war with
   Spain; freely declaring what they think to be the duty of the
   parliament, and the principal ministers of state, &c. We in New England
   are now engaged in a more important war. And I am sure, if we consider
   the sad jangling and confusion that has attended it, we shall confess
   that it is highly requisite somebody should speak his mind, concerning
   the way in which it ought to be managed. Not only a few of the many
   particulars, which are the matter of strife, should be debated, on the
   one side and the other, in pamphlets (as has of late been done, with
   heat and fierceness enough) which do not tend to bring the contention
   in general to an end, but rather to inflame it, and increase the
   uproar--but something should be published to bring the affair in
   general, and the many things that attend it, which are the subjects of
   debate, under a particular consideration. And certainly it is high time
   that this was done. If private persons may speak their minds without
   arrogance; much more may a minister of the kingdom of Christ speak
   freely about things of this nature, which do so nearly concern the
   interest of the kingdom of his Lord and Master, at so important a
   juncture. If some elder minister had undertaken this, I acknowledge it
   would have been more proper; but I have heard of no such thing like to
   be done. I hope therefore I shall be excused for undertaking such a
   work. I think that nothing I have said can justly be interpreted, as
   though I would impose my thoughts upon any, or did not suppose that
   others have equal right to think for themselves. We are not accountable
   one to another for our thoughts; but we must all give an account to Him
   who searches our hearts, and has doubtless his eye especially upon us
   at such an extraordinary season as this. If I have well confirmed my
   opinion concerning this work, and the way in which it should be
   acknowledged and promoted, with Scripture and reason, I hope those who
   read it will receive it as a manifestation of the mind and will it. I
   think I have been made in some measure sensible, and much more of late
   than formerly, of my need of more wisdom than I have. I make it my rule
   to lay hold of light and embrace it, wherever I see it, though held
   forth by a child or an enemy. If I have assumed too much in the
   following discourse, and have spoken in a manner that savours of a
   spirit of pride, no wonder that others can better discern it than I
   myself. If it be so, I ask pardon, and beg the prayers of every
   Christian reader, that I may have more light, humility, and zeal; and
   that I may be favoured with such measures of the divine Spirit, as a
   minister of the gospel stands in need of, at such an extraordinary
   season.

  THOUGHTS ON THE REVIVAL, &C
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   SHOWING THE EXTRAORDINARY WORK WHICH HAS OFLATE BEEN GOING ON IN THIS
   LAND, IS A GLORIOUS WORK OF GOD

   The error of those who have had ill thoughts of the great religious
   operation on the minds of men, which has been carried on of late in New
   England, (so far as the ground of such an error has been in the
   understanding, and not in the disposition,) seems fundamentally to lie
   in three things: First, In judging of this work a priori. Secondly, In
   not taking the Holy Scriptures as a whole rule whereby to judge of such
   operations. Thirdly, In not justly separating and distinguishing the
   good from the bad.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   We should not judge of this work by the supposed causes, but by the
   effects.

   They have greatly erred in the way in which they have gone about to try
   this work, whether it be a work of the Spirit of God or no, viz. In
   judging of it a priori, from the way that it began, the instruments
   that have been employed, the means that have been used, and the methods
   that have been taken and succeeded, in carrying it on. Whereas, if we
   duly consider the matter, it will evidently appear that such a work is
   not to be judged of a priori, but a posteriori. We are to observe the
   effect wrought; and if, upon examination of that, it be found to be
   agreeable to the word of God, we are bound to rest in it as God's work;
   and be like to be rebuked for our arrogance, if we refuse so to do till
   God shall explain to us how he has brought this effect to pass, or why
   he has made use of such and such means in doing it. These texts are
   enough to cause us, with trembling, to forbear such a way of proceeding
   in judging of a work of God's Spirit: "Who hath directed the Spirit of
   the Lord, or being his counselor hath taught him? With whom took he
   counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of
   judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of
   understanding?" "The wind bloweth where is listeth, and thou hearest
   the sound thereof; but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it
   goeth." We hear the sound, we perceive the effect, and from thence we
   judge that the wind does indeed blow; without waiting, before we pass
   this judgment, first to be satisfied what should be the cause of the
   wind's blowing from such a part of the heavens, and how it should come
   to pass that it should blow in such a manner, at such a time. To judge
   a priori, is a wrong way of judging of any of the works of God. We are
   not to resolve that we will first be satisfied how God brought this or
   the other effect to pass, and why he hath made it thus, or why it has
   pleased him to take such a course, and to use such and such means,
   before we will acknowledge his work, and give him the glory of it. This
   is too much for the clay to take upon it with respect to the potter.
   "God gives not account of his matters: His judgements are a great deep:
   He hath his way in the sea, and his path in the great waters, and his
   footsteps are not known; and who shall teach God knowledge, or enjoin
   him his way, or say unto him, What dost thou? We know not the works of
   God who maketh all." No wonder therefore if those that go this
   forbidden way to work, in judging of the present wonderful operation,
   are perplexed and confounded. We ought to take heed that we do not
   expose ourselves to the calamity of those who pried into the ark of
   God, when God mercifully returned it to Israel, after it had departed
   from them.

   Indeed God has not taken that course, nor made use of those means, to
   begin and carry on this great work, which men in their wisdom would
   have thought most advisable, if he had asked their counsel; but quite
   the contrary. But it appears to me that the great God has wrought like
   himself, in the manner of his carrying on this work; so as very much to
   show his own glory, exalt his own sovereignty, power, and
   all-sufficiency. He has poured contempt on all that human strength,
   wisdom, prudence, and sufficiency which men have been wont to trust,
   and to glory in; so as greatly to cross, rebuke, and chastise the pride
   and other corruptions of men; Isa. ii. 17.

   "And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of
   men shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that
   day." God doth thus, in intermingling in his providence so many
   stumbling-blocks with this work; in suffering so much of human weakness
   and infirmity to appear; and in ordering so many things that are
   mysterious to men's wisdom; in pouring out his Spirit chiefly on the
   common people, and bestowing his greatest and highest favours upon
   them, admitting them nearer to himself than the great, the honourable,
   the rich, and the learned; agreeable to that prophecy, "The Lord also
   shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of
   David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify
   themselves against Judah." Those who dwelt in the tents of Judah were
   the common people, who dwelt in the country, and were of inferior rank.
   The inhabitants of Jerusalem were their citizens, their men of wealth
   and figure; and Jerusalem also was the chief place of the habitation or
   resort of their priests and Levites, and their officers and judges;
   there sat the great Sanhedrin. The house of David was the highest rank
   of all, the royal family, and the great men about the king--It is
   evident by the context, that this prophecy has respect to something
   further than saving the people out of the Babylonian captivity.

   God in this work has begun at the lower end, and he has made use of the
   weak and foolish things of the world to carry it on. Some of the
   ministers chiefly employed, have been mere babes in age and standing;
   and some of them not so high in reputation among their brethren as many
   others; and God has suffered their infirmities to appear in the sight
   of others, so as much to displease them; and at the same time it has
   pleased God greatly to succeed them, while he has not so succeeded
   others who are generally reputed vastly their superiors. Yea, there is
   reason to think that it has pleased God to make use of the infirmities
   of some, particularly their imprudent zeal, and censorious spirit, to
   chastise the deadness, negligence, earthly-mindedness, and vanity found
   among ministers in the late times of declension and deadness, wherein
   wise virgins and foolish, ministers and people, have sunk into a deep
   sleep. These things in ministers of the gospel, that go forth as the
   ambassadors of Christ, and have the care of immortal souls, are
   extremely abominable to God, vastly more hateful in his sight than all
   the imprudence and intemperate heats, wildness and distraction (as some
   call it) of these zealous preachers. A supine carelessness, and a vain,
   carnal, worldly spirit in a minister of the gospel, is the worst
   madness and distraction in the sight of God. God may also make use at
   this day of the unchristian censoriousness of some preachers, the more
   to humble and purify some of his children and true servants that have
   been wrongfully censured, to fit them for more eminent service and
   future honour.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   We should judge by the rule of Scripture.

   Another foundation-error of those who do not acknowledge the divinity
   of this work is, not taking the Holy Scriptures as whole, and in itself
   a sufficient rule to judge of such things by. They who have one certain
   consistent rule to judge by, are like to come to some clear
   determination; but they who have a dozen different rules, instead of
   justly and clearly determining, do but perplex and darken themselves
   and others. They who would learn the true measure of any thing, and
   will have many different measures to try it by, have a task that they
   will not accomplish.--Those of whom I am speaking will indeed make some
   use of Scripture, so far as they think it serves their turn, but do not
   make use of it alone as a rule sufficient by itself, but make as much
   and a great deal more use of other things, diverse and wide from it, by
   which to judge of this work. For,

   1. Some make philosophy, instead of the Holy Scriptures, their rule of
   judging of this work; particularly the philosophical notions they
   entertain of the nature of the soul, its faculties and affections. Some
   are ready to say, "There is but little sober solid religion in this
   work; it is little else but flash and noise. Religion now all runs out
   into transports and high flights of the passions and affections." In
   their philosophy, the affections of the soul are something diverse from
   the will, and not appertaining to the noblest part of the soul. They
   are ranked among the meanest principles that belong to men as partaking
   of animal nature, and what he has in common with the brute creation,
   rather than any thing whereby he is conformed to angels and pure
   spirits. And though they acknowledge that a good use may be made of the
   affections in religion, yet they suppose that the substantial part of
   religion does not consist in them, but that they are something
   adventitious and accidental in Christianity.

   But these gentlemen, I cannot but think, labour under great mistakes,
   both in their philosophy and divinity. It is true; distinction must be
   made in the affections or passions. There is a great deal of difference
   in high and raised affections, which must be distinguished by the skill
   of the observer. Some are much more solid than others. There are many
   exercises of the affections that are very flashy, and little to be
   depended on; and oftentimes a great deal appertains to them, or rather
   is the effect of them, that has its seat in animal nature, and is very
   much owing to the constitution and frame of the body; and that which
   sometimes more especially obtains the name of passion, is nothing solid
   or substantial. But it is false philosophy to suppose this to be the
   case with all exercises of affection in the soul, or with all great and
   high affections; and false divinity to suppose that religious
   affections do not appertain to the substance and essence of
   Christianity. On the contrary, it seems to me that the very life and
   soul of all true religion consists in them.

   I humbly conceive that the affections of the soul are not properly
   distinguished from the will, as though they were two faculties. All
   Acts of the affections are in some sense acts of the will, and all the
   acts of the will are acts of the affections. All Exercises of the will
   are, in some degree or other, exercises of the soul's appetition or
   aversion; or which is the same thing, of its love or hatred. The soul
   wills one thing rather than another, or chooses one thing rather than
   another, no otherwise than as it loves one thing more than another; but
   love and hatred are affections of the soul. Therefore all acts of the
   will are truly acts of the affections; though the exercises of the will
   do not obtain the name of passions, unless the will either in its
   aversion or opposition, be exercised in a high degree, or in a vigorous
   and lively manner--All will allow that true virtue or holiness has its
   seat chiefly in the heart, rather than in the head. It therefore
   follows, from what has been said already, that it consists chiefly in
   holy affections. The things of religion take place in men's hearts, no
   further than they are affected with them. The informing of the
   understanding is all vain, any farther than it affects the heart, or,
   which is the same thing, has influence on the affections.

   Those gentlemen, who make light of these raised affections in religion,
   will doubtless allow that true religion and holiness, as it has its
   seat in the heart, is capable of very high degrees, and high exercises
   in the soul. For instance, they will probably allow, that the holiness
   of the heart or will is capable of being raised to a hundred times as
   great a degree of strength as it is in the most eminent saint on earth,
   or to be exerted in a hundred times so vigorous exercises of the heart;
   and yet be true religion or holiness still. Now therefore I would ask
   them, by what name they will call these high and vigorous exercises of
   the will or heart? Are they not high affections? What can they consist
   in, but in high acts of love; strong and vigorous exercises of
   benevolence and complacence; high, exalting, and admiring thoughts of
   God and his perfections; strong desires after God, &c.?--And now, what
   are we come to but high and raised affections? Yea, those very
   affections that before they objected against, as worthy of little
   regard?

   All will allow that there is nothing but solid religion in heaven; but
   there, holiness is raised to an exceeding great height, to strong,
   high, exalted exercises of heart. Now, what other strong and high
   exercises, or of holiness as it has its seat in their hearts, can we
   devise for them, but holy affections, high degrees of actings of love
   to God, rejoicing in God, admiration of God, &c.?--Therefore these
   things in the saints and angels in heaven are not to be despised and
   cashiered by the name of great heats and transports of the
   passions.--And it will doubtless be yet further allowed, that the more
   eminent the saints are on earth, the stronger their grace, and the
   higher its exercises are, the more they are like the saints in heaven,
   i. e. (by what has been just now observed,) the more they have of high
   or raised affections in religion.

   Though there are false affections in religion, and in some respects
   raised high; yet undoubtedly there are also true, holy, and solid
   affections; and the higher these are raised, the better. And, when they
   are raised to an exceeding great height, they are not to be suspected
   merely because of their degree, but on the contrary to be esteemed.
   Charity, or divine love, is in Scripture represented as the sum of all
   the religion of the heart; but this is only a holy affection. And
   therefore, in proportion as this is firmly fixed in the soul, and
   raised to a great height, the more eminent a person is in holiness.
   Divine love or charity is represented as the sum of all the religion of
   heaven, and that wherein mainly the religion of the church in its more
   perfect state on earth shall consist, when knowledge, and tongues, and
   prophesyings shall cease; and therefore the higher this holy affection
   is raised in the church of God, or in a gracious soul, the more
   excellent and perfect is the state of the church, or a particular soul.

   If we take the Scriptures for our rule, then the greater and higher our
   exercises of love to God, delight and complacency in him, desires and
   longings after him, delight in his children, love to mankind,
   brokenness of heart, abhorrence of sin, and self-abhorrence for it; the
   more we have of the peace of God which passeth all understanding, and
   joy in the Holy Ghost, unspeakable and full of glory; the higher our
   admiring thoughts of God, exulting and glorying in him; so much the
   higher is Christ's religion, or that virtue which he and his apostles
   taught, raised in the soul.

   It is a stumbling to some, that religious affections should seem to be
   so powerful, or that they should be so violent, (as they express it,)
   in some persons. They are therefore ready to doubt whether it can be
   the Spirit of God; or, whether this vehemence be not rather a sign of
   the operation of an evil spirit. But why should such a doubt arise?
   What is represented in Scripture as more powerful in its effects than
   the Spirit of God? Which is therefore called "the power of the
   Highest," Luke i. 35. and its saving effect in the soul is called "the
   power of godliness." So we read of the "demonstration of the Spirit and
   of power," 1 Cor. ii. 4. And it is said to operate in the minds of men
   with the "exceeding greatness of divine power," and "according to the
   working of God's mighty power," Eph. i. 19. So we read of "the
   effectual working of his power, " Eph. iii. 7". "the power that worketh
   in Christians, " Eph. iii. 20. the glorious power of God in the
   operations of the Spirit, Col. i. 11. In 2 Tim. i. 7. the Spirit of God
   is called 2 Tim. i. 7. "the Spirit of power, and of love, and of a
   sound mind."--So the Spirit is represented by a mighty wind, and by
   fire, things most powerful in their operation. Many are guilty of not
   taking the Holy Scriptures as a sufficient and whole rule, whereby to
   judge of this work. They judge by those things which the Scripture does
   not give as any signs or marks whereby to judge one way or the other,
   viz. the effects that religious exercises and affections of mind have
   upon the body. Scripture-rules respect the state of the mind, moral
   conduct, and voluntary behaviour, and not the physical state of the
   body. The design of the Scripture is to teach us divinity, and not
   physic and anatomy. Ministers are made the watchmen of men's souls, and
   not their bodies; and therefore the great rule which God has committed
   into their hands, is to make them divines, and not physicians.--Christ
   knew what instructions and rules his church would stand in need of,
   better than we do; and, if he had seen it needful in order to the
   church's safety, he doubtless would have given to ministers rules for
   judging of bodily effects. He would have told them how the pulse should
   beat under such and such religious exercises of mind; when men should
   look pale, and when they should shed tears; when they should tremble,
   and whether or no they should ever be put into convulsions. He probably
   would have put some book into their hands, that should have tended to
   make them excellent anatomists and physicians. But he has not done it,
   because he did not see it to be needful.--He judged, that if ministers
   thoroughly did their duty as watchmen and overseers of the state and
   frame of men's souls, and of their voluntary conduct, according to the
   rules he had given, his church would be well provided for as to its
   safety in these matters. And therefore those ministers of Christ, and
   overseers of souls, who are full of concern about the involuntary
   motions of the fluids and solids of men's bodies, and who from thence
   are full of doubts and suspicions of the cause--when nothing appears
   but that the state and frame of their minds, and their voluntary
   behaviour, is good, and agreeable to God's word--go out of the place
   that Christ has set them in, and leave their proper business, as much
   as if they should undertake to tell who are under the influence of the
   Spirit by their looks, or their gait. I cannot see which way we are in
   danger, or how the devil is like to get any notable advantage against
   us, if we do but thoroughly do our duty with respect to those two
   things, viz. the state of persons' minds, and their moral conduct;
   seeing to it that they be maintained in an agreeableness to the rules
   that Christ has given us. If things are but kept right in these
   respects, our fears and suspicions arising from extraordinary bodily
   effects seem wholly groundless. The most specious thing alleged against
   these extraordinary effects on the body, is, That the body is impaired,
   and that it is hard to think that God, in the merciful influences of
   his Spirit on men, would their bodies, and impair their health.

   But if it were in multiplied instances (which I do not suppose it is)
   that persons received a lasting wound to their health by extraordinary
   religious impressions made upon their minds, yet it is too much for us
   to determine that God shall never bring an outward calamity, in
   bestowing a vastly greater spiritual and eternal good. Jacob in doing
   his duty in wrestling with God for the blessing, and even at the same
   time that he received the blessing from God, suffered a great outward
   calamity from his hand. God gave him the blessing, but sent him away
   halting on his thigh, and he went lame all his life after. And yet this
   is not mentioned as if it were any diminution of the great mercy of God
   to him, when God blessed him, and he received his name Israel, because
   as a prince he had power with God, and had prevailed.

   But, say some, The operations of the Spirit of God are of a benign
   nature; nothing is of a more kind influence on human nature than the
   merciful breathings of God's own Spirit. But it has been generally
   supposed and allowed in the church of God, till now, that there is such
   a thing as being sick of love to Christ, or having the bodily strength
   weakened by strong and vigorous exercises of love to him. And however
   kind to human nature the influences of the Spirit of God are, yet
   nobody doubts but that divine and eternal things, as they may be
   discovered, would overpower the nature of man in its present weak
   state; and that therefore the body, in its weakness, is not fitted for
   the views, and pleasures, and employments of heaven. Were God to
   discover but a little of that which is seen by saints and angels in
   heaven, our frail natures would sink under it. Let us rationally
   consider what we profess to believe of the infinite greatness of divine
   wrath, divine glory, the divine infinite love and grace in Jesus
   Christ, and the infinite importance of eternal things; and then how
   reasonable it is to suppose, that if God a little withdraw the veil, to
   let light into the soul--and give a view of the great things of another
   world in their transcendent and infinite greatness--that human nature,
   which is as the grass, a shaking leaf, a weak withering flower, should
   totter under such a discovery! Such a bubble is too weak to bear a
   weight so vast. Alas! What is man that he should support himself under
   a view of the awful wrath or infinite glory and love of jehovah! No
   wonder therefore that it is said, Exodus xxi. 20 "No man can see me and
   live;" and, 1 Corinthians xv. 50. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
   kingdom of God." That external glory and majesty of Christ which Daniel
   saw, when "there remained no strength in him, and his comeliness was
   turned in him into corruption," Dan. x. 6-8. and which the apostle John
   saw, when he fell at his feet as dead; was but a shadow of that
   spiritual majesty of Christ which will be manifested in the souls of
   the saints in another world, and which is sometimes, in a degree,
   manifested to the soul in this world. And if beholding the image of
   this glory did so overpower human nature, is it unreasonable to suppose
   that a sight of the spiritual glory itself should have as powerful an
   effect? The prophet Habakkuk, speaking of the awful manifestations God
   made of his majesty and wrath, at the Red sea, and in the wilderness,
   and at mount Sinai, where he gave the law; and of the merciful
   influence and strong impression God caused it to have upon him, to the
   end that he might be saved from that wrath, and rest in the day of
   trouble; says, Hab. iii. 16. "When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips
   quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones. I trembled in
   myself that I might rest in the day of trouble.". This is an effect
   similar to what the discovery of the same majesty and wrath has had
   upon many in these days; and to the same purposes, viz. to give them
   rest in the day of trouble, and save them from that wrath. The psalmist
   also speaks of such an effect as I have often on persons under
   religious affections of late, Psal. cxix. 131.

   God is pleased sometimes, in dealing forth spiritual blessings to his
   people, in some respects to exceed the capacity of the vessel in its
   present scantiness; so that he not only fills it, but makes their cup
   to run over; Psal. xxiii. 5.) and pours out a blessing, sometimes, in
   such manner and measure that there is not room enough to receive it.
   (Mal. iii. 10.) He gives them riches more than they can carry away; as
   he did to Jehoshaphat and his people in a time of great favour, by the
   word of his prophet Jahaziel in answer to earnest prayer, when the
   people blessed the Lord in the valley of Berachah, 2 Chron. xx. 25, 26.
   It has been with the disciples of Christ, for a long season, a time of
   great emptiness on spiritual accounts. They have gone hungry, and
   having been toiling in vain, during a dark night with the church of
   God; as it was with the disciples of old, when they had toiled all
   night for something to eat, and caught nothing, Luke v. 5. And John
   xxi. 3. But now, the morning being come, Jesus appears to his
   disciples, and takes a compassionate notice of their wants, and says to
   them, Children, have ye any meat? And gives some of them such abundance
   of food, that they are not able to draw their net; yea, so that their
   vessel is overloaded, and begins to sink; as it was with the disciples
   of old, Luke v. 6,7. and John xxi. 6.

   We cannot determine that God never shall give any person so much of a
   discovery of himself, not only as to weaken their bodies, but to take
   away their lives. It is supposed by very learned and judicious divines,
   that Moses' life was taken away after this manner; and this has also
   been supposed to be the case with some other saints. Yea, I do not see
   any solid sure grounds any have to determine, that God shall never make
   strong impressions on the mind by his Spirit, that shall be an occasion
   of so impairing the frame of the body, that persons shall be deprived
   of the use of reason. As I said before, it is too much for us to
   determine that God will not bring an outward calamity in bestowing
   spiritual and eternal blessings; so it is too much for us to determine
   how great an outward calamity he will bring. If God gives a great
   increase of discoveries of himself, and of love to him, the benefit is
   infinitely greater than the calamity, thought the life should presently
   after be taken away; yea, though the soul should lie for years in a
   deep sleep, and then be taken to heaven: or, which is much the same
   thing, if it be deprived of the use of its faculties, and be as
   inactive and unserviceable, as if it lay in a deep sleep for some
   years, and then should pass into glory. We cannot determine how great a
   calamity distraction is, considered with all its consequences; and all
   that might have been consequent if the distraction had not happened;
   nor indeed whether, thus considered, it be any calamity at all, or
   whether it be not a mercy, by preventing some great sin, &c. It is a
   great fault in us to limit a sovereign all-wise God, whose judgements
   are a great deep, and his ways past finding out, where he has not
   limited himself, and in things concerning which he has not told us what
   his way shall be. It is remarkable, considering in what multitudes of
   instances, and to how great a degree, the frame of the body has been
   overpowered of late, that persons' lives have, notwithstanding, been
   preserved. The instances of those who have been deprived of reason,
   have been very few, and those, perhaps all of them, persons under the
   peculiar disadvantage of a weak, vaporous habit of body. A merciful and
   careful divine hand is very manifest in it that the ship, though in so
   many instances it has begun to sink, yet has been upheld, and has not
   totally sunk. The instances of such as have been deprived of reason are
   so few, that certainly they are not enough to cause alarm, as though
   this work was like to be of baneful influence; unless we are disposed
   to gather up all that we can to darken it, and set it forth in
   frightful colours.

   There is one particular kind of exercise by which many have been
   overpowered, that has been especially stumbling to some: and that is,
   their deep distress for the souls of others. I am sorry that any put us
   to the trouble of defending such a thing as this. It seems like mere
   trifling in so plain a case, to enter into a particular debate, in
   order to determine whether there be any thing in the greatness and
   importance of the case that will bear a proportion to the greatness of
   the concern manifested. Men may be allowed, from no higher a principle
   than common humanity, to be very deeply concerned, and greatly
   exercised in mind, at seeing others in great danger of, or being burnt
   up in a house on fire. And it will be allowed to be equally reasonable,
   if they saw them in danger of a calamity ten times greater, to be still
   much more concerned; and so much more still, if the calamity was still
   vastly greater. Why then should it be thought unreasonable, and looked
   on with a suspicious eye, as if it must come from some bad cause, when
   persons are extremely concerned at seeing others in a very great danger
   of suffering the fierceness and wrath of almighty God to all eternity?
   Besides, it will doubtless be allowed that those who have great degrees
   of the Spirit of God, which is a Spirit of love, may well be supposed
   to have vastly more love and compassion to their fellow-creatures, than
   those who are influenced only by common humanity. Why should it be
   thought strange that those who are full of the Spirit of Christ should
   be proportionally, in their love to souls, like to Christ? He had so
   strong a love and concern for them, as to be willing to drink the dregs
   of the cup of God's fury; and, at the same time that he offered up his
   blood for souls, he offered up also, as their high priest, strong
   crying and tears, with an extreme agony, wherein the soul of Christ was
   as it were in travail for the souls of the elect; and therefore, in
   saving them, he is said to see of the travail of his soul. As such a
   spirit of love and concern for souls was the spirit of Christ, so it is
   that of the church. Therefore the church, in desiring and seeking that
   Christ might be brought forth in the souls of men, is represented, Rev.
   xii. as a "woman crying, travailing in birth, and pained to be
   delivered." The spirit of those who have been in distress for the souls
   of others, so far as I can discern, seems not to be different from that
   of the apostle, who travailed for souls, and was ready to wish himself
   accursed from Christ, for others; and that of the psalmist, Psal. cxix.
   53. "Horror hath taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake
   thy law." and Psal. cxix 136. "Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,
   because they keep not thy law." And that of the prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
   iv. 19. "My bowels! My bowels! I am pained at my very heart! My heart
   maketh a noise in me! I cannot hold my peace! Because thou hast heard,
   O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war!" And so chap.
   ix. 1. and xiii 17. xiv. 17. and Isa. xvii. 4. We read of Mordecai,
   when he saw his people in danger of being destroyed with a temporal
   destruction, that "he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with
   ashes, and went out in the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and
   bitter cry." And why then should persons be thought to be distracted,
   when they cannot forbear crying out, at the consideration of the misery
   of those who are going to eternal destruction.

   III. Another thing that some make their rule to judge of this work by,
   instead of the Holy Scriptures, is history, or former observation.
   Herein they err two ways:

   First, If there be any thing extraordinary in the circumstances of this
   work, which was not observed in former times, theirs is a rule to
   reject this work which God has not given them, and they limit God,
   where he has not limited himself. And this is especially unreasonable
   in this case: for whosoever has well weighed the wonderful and
   mysterious methods of divine wisdom in carrying on the work of
   redemption, from the first promise of the seed of woman to this
   time--may easily observe that it has all along been God's manner to
   open new scenes, and to bring forth to view things new and
   wonderful--such as eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into
   the heart of man or angels--to the astonishment of heaven and earth,
   not only in the revelations he makes of his mind and will, but also in
   the works of his hands. As the old creation was carried on through six
   days, and appeared all complete, settled in a state of rest, on the
   seventh; so the new creation, which is immensely the greatest and most
   glorious work, is carried on in a gradual progress, from the fall of
   man, to the consummation of all things. And as in the progress of the
   old creation, there were still new things accomplished; new wonders
   every day in the sight of the angels, the spectators of that
   work--while those morning-stars sang together, new scenes were opened,
   till the whole was finished--so it is in the progress of the new
   creation. So that that promise, Isa. lxiv. 4. "For since the beginning
   of the world, men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither
   hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he hath prepared for him
   that waiteth for him." Though it had a glorious fulfillment in the days
   of Christ and his apostles, as the words are applied, 1 Cor. ii. 9. yet
   it always remains to be fulfilled, in things that are yet behind, till
   the new creation is finished, at Christ's delivering up the kingdom to
   the Father. And we live in those latter days, wherein we may be
   especially warranted to expect that things will be accomplished,
   concerning which it will be said, Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath
   seen such things?

   Besides, those things in this work, which have been chiefly complained
   of as new, are not so new as has been generally imagined. Though they
   have been much more frequently lately, in proportion to the uncommon
   degree, extent, and swiftness, and other extraordinary circumstances,
   of the work, yet they are not new in their kind; but are of the same
   nature as have been found, and well approved of, in the church of God
   before, from time to time.--We have a remarkable instance in Mr.
   Bolton, that noted minister of the church of England, who after being
   awakened by the preaching of the famous Mr. Perkins, minister of Christ
   in the university of Cambridge, was the subject of such terrors as
   threw him to the ground, and caused him to roar with anguish. The pangs
   of the new birth in him were such, that he lay pale and without sense,
   like one dead; as we have an account in the fulfillment of the
   Scripture, the 5th edition, p. 103, 104. We have an account in the same
   page of another, whose comforts under the sun-shine of God's presence
   were so great, that he could not forbear crying out in a transport, and
   expressing in exclamations the great sense he had of forgiving mercy
   and his assurance of God's love. And we have a remarkable instance, in
   the life of Mr. George Trosse, written by himself, (who, of a
   notoriously vicious profligate liver, became an eminent saint and
   minister of the gospel,) of terrors occasioned by awakenings of
   conscience, so overpowering the body, as to deprive him, for some time,
   of the use of reason.

   Yea, such extraordinary external effects of inward impressions have not
   been found merely in here and there a single person, but there have
   been times wherein many have been thus affected, in some particular
   parts of the church of God; and such effects have appeared in
   congregations, in many at once. So it was in the year 1625, in the west
   of Scotland, on a time of great outpouring of the Spirit of God. It was
   then a frequent thing for many to be so extraordinarily seized with
   terror in hearing the word, by the Spirit of God convincing them of
   sin, that they fell down, and were carried out of the church, and they
   afterwards proved most solid and lively Christians; as the author of
   the Fulfilling of the Scripture informs us, p. 185. The same author in
   the preceding page, informs of many in France that were so wonderfully
   affected with the preaching of the gospel, in the time of those famous
   divines Farel and Viret, that for a time they could not follow their
   secular business: and, p. 186. of many in Ireland, in a time of great
   outpouring of the Spirit there, in the year 1628, that were so filled
   with divine comforts, and a sense of God, that they made but little use
   of either meat, drink, or sleep; and professed that they did not feel
   the need thereof. The same author gives a similar account of Mrs.
   Katharine Brettergh, of Lancashire, in England, (p. 391, 392.) After
   great distress, which very much affected her body, God did so break in
   upon her mind with light and discoveries of himself, that she was
   forced to burst out, crying, "O the joys, the joys, the joys that I
   feel in my soul! O they be wonderful, they be wonderful! The place
   where I now am is sweet and pleasant! How comfortable is the sweetness
   I feel, that delights my soul! The taste is precious; do you not feel
   it? Oh so sweet as it is!" And at other times, "O my sweet Saviour,
   shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with the Father? And dost
   thou so love me that am but dust, to make me partaker of glory with
   Christ? O how wonderful is thy love! And O that my tongue and heart
   were able to sound forth they praises as I ought!" At another time she
   burst forth thus; "Yea, Lord, I feel thy mercy, and I am assured of thy
   love! And so certain am I thereof, as thou art that God of truth; even
   so certainly do I know myself to be thine, O Lord my God; and this my
   soul knoweth right well!" Which last words she again doubled. To a
   grave minister, one Mr. Harrison, then with her, she said, "My soul
   hath been compassed with the terrors of death, the sorrows of hell were
   upon me, and a wilderness of woe was in me; but blessed, blessed,
   blessed be the Lord my God! He hath brought me to a place of rest, even
   to the sweet running waters of life. The way I now go in is a sweet and
   easy way, strewed with flowers; he hath brought me into a place more
   sweet than the Garden of Eden, O the joy, the joy, the delights and joy
   that I feel! O how wonderful!"

   Great outcries under awakenings were more frequently heard of in former
   times in the country than they have been of late, as some aged persons
   now living do testify: particularly I think fit here to insert a
   testimony of my honoured father, of what he remembers formerly to have
   heard.--"I well remember that one Mr. Alexander Allen, a Scots
   gentleman of good credit, that dwelt formerly in this town, showed me a
   letter that came from Scotland, that gave an account of a sermon
   preached in the city of Edinburgh (as I remember) in the time of the
   sitting of the general assembly of divines in that kingdom, that so
   affected the people, that there was a great and loud cry made
   throughout the assembly. I have also been credibly informed, and how
   often I cannot now say, that it was a common thing, when the famous Mr.
   John Rogers of Dedham, in England, was preaching, for some of his
   hearers to cry out; and, by what I have heard, I conclude that it was
   usual for many that heard that very awakening and rousing preacher of
   God's word, to make a great cry in the congregation.

   (Signed)

   timothy edwards."

   Windsor, May 5, 1742

   Mr. Flavel gives a remarkable instance of a man whom he knew, that was
   wonderfully overcome with divine comforts; which it is supposed he
   knew, as the apostle Paul knew the man that was caught up to the third
   heaven. He relates, that "As the person was travelling alone, with his
   thoughts closely fixed on the great and astonishing things of another
   world, his thoughts began to swell higher and higher, like the water in
   Ezekiel's vision, till at last they became an overflowing flood. Such
   was the intenseness of his mind, such the ravishing tastes of heavenly
   joys, and such his full assurance of his interest therein, that he
   utterly lost all sight and sense of this world, and the concernments
   thereof; and for some hours knew not where he was, nor what he was
   about; but, having lost a great quantity of blood at the nose, he found
   himself so faint, that it brought him a little more to himself. And
   after he had washed himself at a spring, and drank of the water for his
   refreshment, he continued to the end of his journey, which was thirty
   miles; and all this while was scarce sensible: and says, he had several
   trances of considerable continuance. The same blessed frame was
   preserved all that night, and, in a lower degree, great part of the
   next day; the night passed without one wink of sleep; and yet he
   declares he never had a sweeter night's rest in all his life. Still,
   adds the story, the joy of the Lord overflowed him, and he seemed to be
   an inhabitant of another world. And he used for many years after to
   call that day one of the days of heaven; and professed that he
   understood more of the life of heaven by it, than by all the books he
   ever read, or discourses he ever entertained about it."

   There have been instances before now, of persons crying out in
   transports of divine joy in New England. We have an instance in Capt.
   Clap's memoirs, (published by the Rev. Mr. Prince,) not of a silly
   woman or child, but a man of solid understanding, that, in a high
   transport of spiritual joy, was made to cry out aloud on his bed. His
   words, p. 9. are, "God's Holy Spirit did witness (I do believe)
   together with my spirit, that I was a child of God; and did fill my
   heart and soul with such full assurance that Christ was mine, that it
   did so transport me, as to make me cry out upon my bed, with a loud
   voice, He is come, he is come!"

   There has, before now, been both crying out and falling, even in this
   town, under awakenings of conscience, and in the pangs of the new
   birth; and also in once of the neighbouring towns, more than seven
   years ago, a great number together cried out and fell down under
   conviction; and in most of whom there was an abiding good issue. And
   the Rev. Mr. Williams of Deerfield gave me an account of an aged man in
   that town, many years before that, who being awakened by his preaching
   cried out aloud in the congregation. There have been many instances,
   before now, of persons in this town fainting with joyful discoveries
   made to their souls, and once several together. And there have been
   several instances here of persons waxing cold and benumbed, with their
   hands clinched, yea, and their bodies in convulsions, being overpowered
   with a strong sense of the astonishingly great and excellent things of
   God and the eternal world.

   Secondly, Another way that some err in making history and former
   observation their rule instead of the Holy Scripture, is in comparing
   some external, accidental circumstances of this work, with what has
   appeared sometimes in enthusiasts. They find an agreement in some such
   things, and so they reject the whole work, or at least the substance of
   it, concluding it to be enthusiasm. Great use has been made to this
   purpose of many things that are found amongst the Quakers; however
   totally and essentially different in its nature this work is, and the
   principles upon which it is built, from the whole religion of the
   Quakers. To the same purpose, some external appearances that were found
   amongst the French prophets, and other enthusiasts in former times,
   have been of late trumped up with great assurance and triumph.

   IV. I would propose it to be considered, whether or no some, instead of
   making the Scriptures their only rule to judge of this work, do not
   make their own experience the rule, and reject such and such things as
   are now professed and experienced, because they themselves never felt
   them. Are there not many, who, chiefly on this ground, have entertained
   and vented suspicions, if not peremptory condemnations, of those
   extreme terrors, and those great, sudden, and extraordinary discoveries
   of the glorious perfections of God, and of the beauty and love of
   Christ? Have they not condemned such vehement affections, such high
   transports of love and joy, such pity and distress for the souls of
   others, and exercises of mind that have such great effects, merely, or
   chiefly, because they knew nothing about them by experience? Persons
   are very ready to be suspicious of what they have not felt themselves.
   It is to be feared that many good men have been guilty of this error,
   which however does not make it the less unreasonable. And perhaps there
   are some who upon this ground do not only reject these extraordinary
   things, but all such conviction of sin, discoveries of the glory of
   God, excellency of Christ, and inward conviction of the truth of the
   gospel, by the immediate influence of the Spirit of God, now supposed
   to be necessary to salvation.--These persons who thus make their own
   experiences their rule of judgement, instead of bowing to the wisdom of
   God, and yielding to his word as an infallible rule, are guilty of
   casting a great reflection upon the understanding of the Most High.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   We should distinguish the good from the bad, and not judge of the whole
   by a part.

   Another foundation-error of those who reject this work, is, their not
   duly distinguishing the good from the bad, and very unjustly judging of
   the whole by a part; and so rejecting the work in general, or in the
   main substance of it, for the sake of some accidental evil in it. They
   look for more in men because subject to the operations of a good
   spirit, than is justly to be expected from them for that reason, in
   this imperfect state, where so much blindness and corruption remains in
   the best. When any profess to have received light and comforts from
   heaven, and to have had sensible communion with God, many are ready to
   expect that now they appear like angels, and not still like poor,
   feeble, blind, and sinful worms of the dust. There being so much
   corruption left in the hearts of God's own children, and its prevailing
   as it sometimes does, is indeed a mysterious thing, and always was a
   stumbling-block to the world; but will not be so much wondered at by
   those who are well versed in, and duly mindful of, two things, viz.
   First, The word of God, which teaches the state of true Christians in
   this world; and, Secondly, Their own hearts, at least if they have any
   grace, and have experience of its conflicts with corruption. True
   saints are the most inexcusable, in making a great difficulty of much
   blindness and many sinful errors in those who profess godliness. If all
   our conduct, both open and secret, should be known, and our hearts laid
   open to the world; how should we be even ready to flee from the light
   of the sun, and hide ourselves from the view of mankind! And what great
   allowance would we need that others should make for us? Perhaps much
   greater than we are willing to make for others.

   The great weakness of the greater part of mankind, in any affair that
   is new and uncommon, appears in not distinguishing, but either
   approving or condemning all in the lump. They who highly approve of the
   affair in general, cannot bear to have any thing at all found fault
   with; and, on the other hand, those who fasten their eyes upon some
   things in the affair that are amiss, and appear very disagreeable to
   them, at once reject the whole. Both which errors oftentimes arise from
   the want of persons having a due acquaintance with themselves. It is
   rash and unjust when we proceed thus in judging either of a particular
   person, or a people. Many, if they see any thing very ill in a
   particular person, a minister or private professor, will at once brand
   him as a hypocrite. And, if there be two or three of a people or
   society that behave themselves very irregularly, the whole must bear
   the blame of it. And if there be a few, though it may not be above one
   in a hundred, that professed, and had a show of being the happy
   partakers of what are called they saying benefits of this work, but
   afterwards give the world just grounds to suspect them, the whole work
   must be rejected on their account; and those in general, that make the
   like profession, must be condemned for their sakes.

   So careful are some persons lest this work should be defended, that now
   they will hardly allow that the influences of the Spirit of God on the
   heart can so much as indirectly, and accidentally, be the occasion of
   the exercise of corruption, and the commission of sin. Thus far is
   true, that the influence of the Spirit of God in his saving operations
   will not be an occasion of increasing the corruption of the heart in
   general; but on the contrary of weakening it: but yet there is nothing
   unreasonable in supposing, that, at the same time that it weakens
   corruption in general, it may be an occasion of turning what is left
   into a new channel. There may be more of some kinds of the exercise of
   corruption than before; as that which tends to stop the course of a
   stream, if it do it not wholly, may give a new course to so much of the
   water as gets by the obstacle. The influences of the Spirit, for
   instance, may be an occasion of new ways of the exercise of pride, as
   has been acknowledged by orthodox divines in general. That spiritual
   discoveries and comforts may, through the corruption of the heart, be
   an occasion of the exercise of spiritual pride, was not used to be
   doubted, till now it is found to be needful to maintain the war against
   this work.

   They who will hardly allow that a work of the Spirit of God can be a
   remote occasion of any sinful behaviour or unchristian conduct, I
   suppose will allow that the truly gracious influences of the Spirit of
   God, yea, and a high degree of love to God, is consistent with these
   two things, viz. A considerable degree of remaining corruption, and
   also many errors in judgment in matters of religion. And this is all
   that need to be allowed, in order to its being most demonstratively
   evident, that a high degree of love to God may accidentally move a
   person to that which is very contrary to the mind and will of God. For
   a high degree of love to God will strongly move a person to do that
   which he believes to be agreeable to God's will; and therefore, if he
   be mistaken, and be persuaded that that is agreeable to the ill of God,
   which indeed is very contrary to it, then his love will accidentally,
   but strongly, incline him to that, which is indeed very contrary to the
   will of God.--They who are studied in logic have learned, that the
   nature of the cause is not to be judged of by the nature of the effect,
   not the nature of the effect from the nature of the cause, when the
   cause is only causa sine qua num, or an occasional cause; yea, that, in
   such a case, oftentimes the nature of the effect is quite contrary to
   the nature of the cause.

   True disciples of Christ may have a great deal of false zeal, such as
   the disciples had of old, when they would have fire called for from
   heaven to come down on the Samaritans, because they did not receive
   them. And even so eminently holy, and great, and divine a saint as
   Moses--who conversed with God as a man speaks with his friend, and
   concerning whom God gives his testimony, that he was very meek, above
   any man upon the face of the earth-- may be rash and sinful in his
   zeal, when his spirit is stirred by the hard-heartedness and opposition
   of others. He may speak very unadvisedly with his lips, and greatly
   offend God, and shut himself out from the possession of the good things
   that God is about to accomplish for his church on earth; as Moses was
   excluded Canaan, though he had brought the people out of Egypt, Psal.
   cvi. 32, 33. And men, even in those very things wherein they are
   influenced by a truly pious principle, may, though error and want of
   due consideration and caution, be very rash with their zeal. It was a
   truly good spirit which animated that excellent generation of Israel in
   Joshua's time. Josh. xxii. And yet they were rash and heady with their
   zeal, to gather all Israel together to go so furiously to war with
   their brethren of the two tribes and half, about their building the
   altar without first inquiring into the matter, or so much as sending a
   messenger to be informed. So the Christians of the circumcision, with
   warmth and contention condemned Peter for receiving Cornelius, Acts xi.
   Thus their heat and censure was unjust, and Peter was wronged in it;
   but there is every appearance in the story, that they acted from a real
   zeal and concern for the will and honour of God. So the primitive
   Christians, from their zeal for and against unclean meats, censured and
   condemned one another. This was a bad effect, and yet the apostle bears
   them witness, or at least expresses his charity towards them, that both
   sides acted from a good principle, and true respect to the Lord, Rom.
   xiv. 6. The zeal of the Corinthians with respect to the incestuous man,
   though the apostle highly commends it, yet he at the same time saw that
   they needed a caution, lest they should carry it too far, to an undue
   severity, so as to fail of Christian meekness and forgiveness, 2 Cor.
   ii. 6-11. And chapter vii. 11, to the end.--Luther, that great
   reformer, had a great deal of bitterness with his zeal.

   It surely cannot be wondered at by considerate persons, when multitudes
   all over the land have their affections greatly moved, that great
   numbers should run into many errors and mistakes with respect to their
   duty, and consequently, into many practices that are imprudent and
   irregular. I question whether there be a man in New England, of the
   strongest reason and greatest learning, but what would be put to it to
   keep master of himself, thoroughly to weigh his words, and to consider
   all the consequences of his behaviour, so as to conduct himself in all
   respects prudently, if he were so strongly impressed with a sense of
   divine and eternal things, and his affections so exceedingly moved, as
   has been frequent of late among the common people. How little do they
   consider human nature, who look upon it so insuperable a
   stumbling-block, when such multitudes of all kinds of capacities,
   natural tempers, educations, customs, and manners of life, are so
   greatly and variously affected, that imprudences and irregularities of
   conduct should abound; especially in a state of things so uncommon, and
   when the degree, extent, swiftness, and power of the operation is so
   very extraordinary, and so new, that there has not been time and
   experience enough to give birth to rules for people's conduct, and the
   writings of divines do not afford rules to direct us in such a state of
   things!

   A great deal of noise and tumult, confusion and uproar, darkness mixed
   with light, and evil with good, is always to be expected in the
   beginning of something very glorious in the state of things in human
   society, or the church of God. After nature has long been shut up in a
   cold dead state, when the sun returns in the spring, there is, together
   with the increase of the light and heat of the sun, very tempestuous
   weather, before all is settled calm and serene, and all nature rejoices
   in its bloom and beauty. It is in the new creation as it was in the
   old; the Spirit of God first moved upon the face of the waters, which
   was an occasion of great uproar and tumult. Things were then gradually
   brought to a settled state, till at length all stood forth in that
   beautiful, peaceful order, when the heavens and the earth were
   finished, and God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
   very good. When God is about to bring to pass something great and
   glorious in the world, nature is in a ferment and struggle, and the
   world as it were in travail. When God was about to introduce the
   Messiah into the world, and a new, glorious dispensation, he shook the
   heavens and the earth, and he shook all nations. There is nothing that
   the church of God is in Scripture more frequently represented by than
   vegetables; as a tree, a vine, corn, &c. which gradually bring forth
   their fruit, and are first green before they are ripe. A great revival
   of religion is expressly compared to this gradual production of
   vegetables, Isa. lxi. 11. "As the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as
   the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so
   the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before
   all the nations." The church is in a special manner compared to a
   palm-tree, (Cant. vii. 7, 8. Exod. xv. 27. 1 Kings vi. 29. Psal. xcii.
   12.) of which it is observed, That the fruit of it, though very sweet
   and good when ripe, has, while unripe, a mixture of poison.

   The weakness of human nature has always appeared in times of great
   revival of religion, by a disposition to run to extremes, and get into
   confusion; and especially in these three things, enthusiasm,
   superstition, and intemperate zeal. So it appeared in the time of the
   reformation very remarkably, and even in the days of the apostles. Many
   were exceedingly disposed to lay weight on those things that were very
   chimerical, giving heed to fables, (1 Tim. I. 4. and iv. 7 2 Tim. ii.
   16. and ver. 23. and Tit. i. 14. and Tit. iii. 9.) Many, as
   ecclesiastical history informs us, fell off into the most wild
   enthusiasm, and extravagant notions of spirituality, and extraordinary
   illumination from heaven beyond others; and many were prone to
   superstition, will-worship, and a voluntary humility, giving heed to
   the commandments of men, being fond of an unprofitable bodily exercise,
   as appears by many passages in the apostles' writings. And what a
   proneness then appeared among professors to swerve from the path of
   duty, and the spirit of the gospel, in the exercises of a rash
   indiscreet zeal, censuring and condemning ministers and people; one
   saying, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos; another, I am of
   Cephas.--They judged one another for differences of opinion about
   smaller matters, unclean meats, holy days and holy places, and their
   different opinions and practices respecting civil intercourse and
   communication with their heathen neighbours. And how much did vain
   jangling, disputing, and confusion prevail, through undue heat of
   spirit, under the name of a religious zeal! (1 Tim. vi. 4, 5. 2 Tim ii.
   16. and Tit. iii. 9.) And what a task had the apostles to keep them
   within bounds, and maintain good order in the churches! How often do
   they mention their irregularities! The prevailing of such like
   disorders seems to have been the special occasion of writing many of
   their epistles. The church in that great effusion of the Spirit, and
   under strong impressions, had the care of infallible guides, that
   watched over them day and night; but yet, so prone were they, through
   the weakness and corruption of human nature, to get out of the way,
   that irregularity and confusion arose in some churches, where there was
   an extraordinary outpouring of the Spirit, to a very great height, even
   in the apostles' lifetime, and under their eye. And though some of the
   apostles lived long to settle the state of things, yet, presently after
   their death the Christian church ran into many superstitions and
   childish notions and practices, and in some respects into a great
   severity in their zeal. And let any wise person that has not in the
   midst of the disputes of the present day got beyond the calmness of
   consideration, impartially consider, to what lengths we may reasonably
   suppose many of the primitive Christians, in their heat of zeal, and
   under their extraordinary impressions, would soon have gone, if they
   had not had inspired guides. Is it not probable, that the church of
   Corinth in particular, by an increase of their irregularities and
   contentions, would in a little time have been broken to pieces, and
   dissolved in a state of the utmost confusion? And yet this would have
   been no evidence that there had not been a most glorious and remarkable
   outpouring of the Spirit in that city. But as for us, we have no
   infallible apostle to guide and direct us, to rectify disorders, and
   reclaim us when we are wandering; but every one does what is right in
   his own eyes; and they that err in judgment, and are got into a wrong
   path, continue to wander, till experience of the mischievous issue
   convinces them of their error.

   If we look over this affair, and seriously weigh it in its
   circumstances, it will appear a matter of no great difficulty to
   account for the errors that have been gone into, supposing the work in
   general to be from a very great outpouring of the Spirit of God. It may
   easily be accounted for, that many have run into just such errors as
   they have. It is known that some who have been great instruments to
   promote this work were very young. They were newly awaked out of sleep,
   and brought out of that state of darkness, insensibility, and spiritual
   death, in which they had been ever since they were born. A new and
   wonderful scene opens to them; and they have in view the reality, the
   vastness, the infinite importance, and nearness of spiritual and
   eternal things; and at the same time are surprised to see the world
   asleep about them. They have not the advantage of age and experience,
   and have had but little opportunity to study divinity, or to converse
   with aged experienced Christians and divines. How natural is it then
   for such to fall into many errors with respect to the state of mankind,
   with which they are so surprised, and with respect to the means and
   methods of their relief? Is it any wonder that they have not at once
   learned how to make allowances, and that they do not at once find out
   that method of dealing with the world, which is adapted to the
   mysterious state and nature of mankind? Is it any wonder that they
   cannot at once foresee the consequences of things, what evils are to be
   guarded against, and what difficulties are like to arise?

   We have been long in a strange stupor: The influences of the Spirit of
   God upon the heart have been but little felt, and the nature of them
   but little taught; so that they are in many respects new to great
   numbers of those who have lately fallen under them. And is it any
   wonder that they who never before had experience of the supernatural
   influence of the Divine spirit upon their souls, and never were
   instructed in the nature of these influences, do not so well know how
   to distinguish one extraordinary new impression from another, and so
   (to themselves insensibly) run into enthusiasm, taking every strong
   impulse or impression to be divine? How natural is it to suppose, that
   among the multitudes of illiterate people who find themselves so
   wonderfully changed, and brought into such new circumstances, many
   should pass wrong and very strange judgments of both persons and things
   about them! Now they behold them in a new light, and in their surprise
   they go further from the judgment that they were wont to make of them
   than they ought, and, in their great change of sentiments, pass from
   one extreme to another. And shy should it be thought strange, that
   those who scarce ever heard of any such thing as an outpouring of the
   Spirit of God before; or, if they did, had no notion of it; do not know
   how to behave themselves in such a new and strange state of things? And
   is it any wonder that they are ready to hearken to those who have
   instructed them, who have been the means of delivering them from such a
   state of death and misery as they were in before, or have a name for
   being the happy instruments of promoting the same work among others? Is
   it unaccountable that persons in these circumstances are ready to
   receive every thing they say, and to drink down error as well as truth
   from them? And why should there be all indignation, and no compassion,
   towards those who are thus misled?

   These persons are extraordinarily affected with a new sense, and recent
   discovery, of the greatness and excellency of the Divine Being, the
   certainty and infinite importance of eternal things, the preciousness
   of souls, and the dreadful danger and madness of mankind, together with
   a great sense of God's distinguishing kindness and love to them. Is it
   any wonder that now they think they must exert themselves, and do
   something extraordinary for the honour of God and the good of souls?
   They know not how to sit still, and forbear speaking and acting with
   uncommon earnestness and vigour. And in these circumstances, if they be
   not persons of more than common steadiness and discretion, or have not
   some person of wisdom to direct them, it is a wonder if they do not
   proceed without due caution, and do things that are irregular, and that
   will, in the issue, do much more hurt than good.

   Censuring others is the worst disease with which this affair has been
   attended. But this is indeed a time of great temptation to this sinful
   error. When there has been a long-continued deadness, and many are
   brought out of a state of nature in so extraordinary a manner, and
   filled with such uncommon degrees of light, it is natural for such to
   form their notions of a state of grace wholly from what they
   experience. Many of them know no other way; for they never have been
   taught much about a state of grace, the different degrees of grace, and
   the degrees of darkness and corruption with which grace is compatible,
   nor concerning the manner of the influences of the Spirit in converting
   a soul, and the variety of the manner of his operations. They therefore
   forming their idea of a state of grace only by their own experience, no
   wonder that it appears an insuperable difficulty to them to reconcile
   such a state, professors about them. It is indeed in itself a very
   great mystery, that grace should be compatible with so much and such
   kind of corruption as sometimes prevails in the truly godly; and no
   wonder that it especially appears so to uninstructed new converts, who
   have been converted in an extraordinary manner.

   Though censoriousness is very sinful, and is most commonly found in
   hypocrites and persons of a pharisaical spirit, yet it is not so
   inconsistent with true godliness as some imagine. We have remarkable
   instances of it in those holy men of whom we have an account in the
   book of Job. Not only were Job's three friends, who seem to have been
   eminently holy men, guilty of it, in very unreasonably censuring the
   best man on earth--very positively determining that he was an
   unconverted man--but Job himself, who was not only a man of true piety,
   but excelled all men in piety, and particularly excelled in an humble,
   meek, and patient spirit, was guilty of bitterly censuring his three
   friends, as wicked, vile hypocrites, Job xvi. 9-11. "He teareth me in
   his wrath who hateth me, he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy
   sharpeneth his eyes upon me: they have gaped upon me with their
   mouth.--God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into
   the hands of the wicked." He is very positive that they are hypocrites,
   and shall be miserably destroyed as such, Job xvii. 2-4. "Are there not
   mockers with me! and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation?
   Lay down now, put me in surety with thee; who is he that will strike
   hands with me? For thou hast hid their heart from understanding,
   therefore shalt thou not exalt them." And again, Job xvii. 8-10.
   "Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir
   up himself against they hypocrite; the righteous also shall hold on his
   way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. But
   as for you all, do you return and come now, for I cannot find one wise
   man (i.e. one good man) among you."

   Thus, I think, the errors and irregularities that attend this work may
   be accounted for, from the consideration of the infirmity and common
   corruption of mankind, together with the circumstances of the work,
   though we should suppose it to be the work of God. And it would not be
   a just objection in any to say, if these powerful impressions and great
   affections are from the Spirit give strength of understanding and
   capacity in proportion, to those persons who are the subjects of them;
   so that strong affections may not, through their error, drive them to
   an irregular and sinful conduct? I do not know that God has anywhere
   obliged himself to do it. The end of the influences of God's Spirit is,
   to make men spiritually wise to salvation, which is the most excellent
   wisdom; and he has also appointed means for our gaining such degrees of
   other knowledge as we need, to conduct ourselves regularly, which means
   should be carefully used. But the end of the influence of the Spirit of
   God is not to increase men's natural capacities, nor has God obliged
   himself immediately to increase civil prudence in proportion to the
   degrees of spiritual light.

   If we consider the errors that attend this work, not only as from man
   and his infirmity, but also as from God and by his permission and
   disposal, they are not strange, upon the supposition of its being, as
   to the substance of it, a work of God. If God intends this great
   revival of religion to be the dawning of a happy state of his church on
   earth, it may be an instance of the divine wisdom, in the beginning of
   it, to suffer so many irregularities and errors in conduct, to which he
   knew men in their present weak state were most exposed, under great
   religious affections, and when animated with great zeal. For it is very
   likely to be of excellent benefit to his church, in the continuance and
   progress of the work afterwards. Their experience, in the first setting
   out, of the mischievous consequences of these errors, and smarting for
   them in the beginning, may be a happy defence to them afterwards for
   many generations, from these errors, which otherwise they might
   continually be exposed to. As when David and all Israel went about to
   bring back the ark into the midst of the land, after it had been long
   absent, first in the land of the Philistines, and then in
   Kiriath-jearim, in the utmost borders of the land; they at first sought
   not the Lord after the due order, and they smarted for their error: but
   this put them upon studying the law, and more thoroughly acquainting
   themselves with the mind and will of God, and seeking and serving him
   with greater circumspection. The consequence was glorious, viz. Their
   seeking God in such a manner as was accepted of him. The ark of God
   ascended into the heights of Zion, with great and extraordinary
   rejoicings of the king and all the people, without any frown or rebuke
   from God intermixed; and God any frown or rebuke from God intermixed;
   and God dwelt thenceforward in the midst of the people for those
   glorious purposes expressed in the 66th Psalm.

   It is very analogous to the manner of God's dealing with his people, to
   permit a great deal of error, and suffer the infirmity of his people to
   appear, in the beginning of a glorious work of his grace, for their
   felicity, to teach them what they are, to humble them, and fit them for
   that glorious prosperity to which he is about to advance them, and the
   more to secure to himself the honour of such a glorious work. For, by
   man's exceeding weakness appearing in the beginning of it, it is
   evident that God does not lay the foundation of it in man's strength or
   wisdom.--And as we need not wonder at the errors that attend this work,
   if we look at the hand of men who are guilty of them, and the hand of
   God in permitting them: so neither shall we see cause to wonder if we
   consider them with regard to the hand that Satan has in them. For, as
   the work is much greater than any other that ever has been in New
   England; so, no wonder that the devil is more alarmed and enraged, that
   he exerts himself more vigorously against it, and more powerfully
   endeavours to tempt and mislead the subjects and promoters of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   The nature of the work in general.

   Whatever imprudences there have been, and whatever sinful
   irregularities; whatever vehemence of the passions, and heats of the
   imagination, transports, and ecstasies: whatever error in judgment, and
   indiscreet zeal; and whatever outcries, faintings, and agitations of
   body; yet, it is manifest and notorious, that there has been of late a
   very uncommon influence upon the minds of a very great part of the
   inhabitants of New England, attended with the best effects. There has
   been a great increase of seriousness, and sober consideration of
   eternal things; a disposition to hearken to what is said of such
   things, with attention and solemnity, and as of great importance; to
   make these things the subject of conversation; to hear the word of God
   preached, and to take all opportunities in order to it; to attend on
   the public worship of God, and all external duties of religion, in a
   more solemn and decent manner; so that there is a remarkable and
   general alteration in the face of New England in these respects.
   Multitudes in all parts of the land, of vain, thoughtless, regardless
   persons, are quite changed, and become serious and considerate. There
   is a vast increase of concern for the salvation of the precious soul,
   and that inquiry, What shall I do to be saved? The hearts of multitudes
   had been greatly taken off from the things of the world, its profits,
   pleasures, and honours. Multitudes in all parts have had their
   consciences awakened, and have been made sensible of the pernicious
   nature and consequences of sin, and what a dreadful thing it is to be
   under guilt and the displeasure of God, and to live without peace and
   reconciliation with him. They have also been awakened to a sense of the
   shortness and uncertainty of life, and the reality of another world and
   future judgment, and of the necessity of an interest in Christ. They
   are more afraid of sin, more careful and inquisitive that they may
   avoid it, and what he requires of them, that they may do it, more
   careful to guard against temptations, more watchful over their own in
   the use of the means that God has appointed in his word, in order to
   salvation. Many very stupid, senseless sinners, and persons of a vain
   mind, have been greatly awakened.

   There is a strange alteration almost all over New England amongst young
   people: by a powerful invisible influence on their minds, they have
   been brought to forsake, in a general way, as it were at once, those
   things of which they were extremely fond, and in which they seemed to
   place the happiness of their lives, and which nothing before could
   induce them to forsake; as their frolicking, vain company-keeping,
   night-walking, their mirth and jollity, their impure language, and lewd
   songs. In vain did ministers preach against those things before, in
   vain were laws made to restrain them, and in vain was all the vigilance
   of magistrates and civil officers; but now they have almost every where
   dropt them as it were of themselves. And there is great alteration
   amongst old and young as to drinking, tavern-haunting, profane
   speaking, and extravagance in apparel. Many notoriously vicious persons
   have been reformed, and become externally quite new creatures. Some
   that are wealthy, and of a fashionable, gay education; some great beaus
   and fine ladies, that seemed to have their minds swallowed up with
   nothing but the vain shows and pleasures of the world, have been
   wonderfully altered, have relinquished these vanities, and are become
   serious, mortified, and humble in their conversation. It is astonishing
   to see the alteration there is in some towns, where before there was
   but little appearance of religion or any thing but vice and vanity. And
   now they are transformed into another sort of people; their former
   vain, worldly, and vicious conversation and dispositions seem to be
   forsaken, and they are, as it were, gone over to a new world. Their
   thoughts, their talk, and their concern, affections, and inquiries are
   now about the favour of God, an interest in Christ, a renewed
   sanctified heart, and a spiritual blessedness, acceptance, and
   happiness in a future world.

   Now, through the greatest part of New England, the holy Bible is in
   much greater esteem and use than before. The great things contained in
   it are much more regarded, as things contained in it are much more
   regarded, as things of the greatest consequence, and are much more the
   subjects of meditation and conversation; and other books of piety that
   have long been of established reputation, as the most excellent, and
   most tending to promote true godliness, have been abundantly more in
   use. The Lord's day is more religiously and strictly observed. And much
   has been lately done at making up differences, confessing faults one to
   another, and making restitution; probably more within two years, than
   was done in thirty years before. It has been undoubtedly so in many
   places. And surprising has been the power of this spirit, in many
   instances, to destroy old grudges, to make up long-continued breaches,
   and to bring those who seemed to be in a confirmed irreconcilable
   alienation, to embrace each other in a sincere and entire amity. Great
   numbers under this influence have been brought to a deep sense of their
   own sinfulness and vileness; the sinfulness of their lives, the
   heinousness of their disregard of the authority of the great God, and
   of their living in contempt of a Saviour. They have lamented their
   former negligence of their souls, and their neglecting and losing
   precious time. The sins of their life have been extraordinarily set
   before them; and they have had a great sense of their hardness of
   heart, their enmity against that which is good, and proneness to all
   evil; and also of the worthlessness of their own religious
   performances, how unworthy of God's regard were their prayers, praises,
   and all that they did in religion. It has been a common thing, that
   persons have had such a sense of their own sinfulness, that they have
   thought themselves to be the worst of all, and that none ever was so
   vile as they. And many seem to have been greatly convinced that they
   were utterly unworthy of any mercy at the hands of God, however
   miserable they were, and though they stood in extreme necessity of
   mercy; and that they deserved nothing but eternal burnings. They have
   been sensible that God would be altogether just and righteous in
   inflicting endless damnation upon them, at the same time that they have
   had an exceedingly affecting sense of the dreadfulness of such endless
   torments, and apprehended themselves to be greatly in danger of it. And
   many have been deeply affected with a sense of their own ignorance and
   blindness, and exceeding helplessness, and so of their extreme need of
   the divine pity and help.

   Multitudes in New England have lately been brought to a new and great
   conviction of the truth and certainty of the things of the gospel; to a
   firm persuasion that Christ Jesus is the Son of God, and the great and
   only Saviour of the world; and that the great doctrines of the gospel
   touching reconciliation by his blood, and acceptance in his
   righteousness, and eternal life and salvation through him are matters
   of undoubted truth. They have had a most affecting sense of the
   excellency and sufficiency of this Saviour, and the glorious wisdom and
   grace of God shining in this way of salvation; and of the wonders of
   Christ's dying love, and the sincerity of Christ in the invitations of
   the gospel. They have experienced a consequent affiance and sweet rest
   of soul in Christ, as a glorious Saviour, a strong rock and high tower;
   accompanied with an admiring and exalted apprehension of the glory of
   the divine perfections, God's majesty, holiness, sovereign grace,
   &c.--with a sensible, strong, and sweet love to God, and delight in
   him, far surpassing all temporal delights, or earthly pleasures; and a
   rest of soul in him, as a portion and the fountain of all good. And
   this has been attended with an abhorrence of sin, and self-loathing for
   it, and earnest longings of soul after more holiness and conformity to
   God, with a sense of the great need of God's help in order to holiness
   of life; together they have had a most dear love to all that are
   supposed to be the children of God, and a love to mankind in general,
   and a most sensible and tender compassion for the souls of sinners, and
   earnest desires of the advancement of Christ's kingdom in the world.
   And these things have appeared with an abiding concern to live a holy
   life, and great complaints of remaining corruption, and a longing to be
   more free from the body of sin and death. And not only do these effects
   appear in converts, but great numbers of those who were formerly
   esteemed the most sober and pious people, have, under the influence of
   this work, been greatly quickened, and their hearts renewed with
   greater degrees of light, renewed repentance and humiliation, and more
   lively exercises of faith, love, and joy in the Lord. Many have been
   remarkably engaged to watch, and strive, and fight against sin; to cast
   out every idol, sell all for Christ, give up themselves entirely to
   God, and make a sacrifice of every worldly and carnal thing to the
   welfare and prosperity of their souls. And there has of late appeared
   in some places an unusual disposition to bind themselves to it in a
   solemn covenant with God. And now, instead of meetings at taverns and
   drinking-houses, and of young people in frolics and vain company, the
   country is full of meetings of all sorts and ages of persons--young and
   old, men, women, and little children--to read and pray, and sing
   praises, and to converse of the things of God and another world. In
   very many places the main of the conversation in all companies turns of
   religion, and things of a spiritual nature. Instead of vain mirth among
   young people, there is now either mourning under a sense of the guilt
   of sin, or holy rejoicing in Christ Jesus: and, instead of their lewd
   songs, there are now to be heard from them songs of praise to God, and
   the Lamb that was slain to redeem them by his blood. And there has been
   this alteration abiding on multitudes all over the land, for a year and
   a half, without any appearance of a disposition to return to former
   vice and vanity.

   And, under the influences of this work, there have been many of the
   remains of those wretched people and dregs of mankind, the poor
   Indians, that seemed to be next to a state of brutality, and with whom,
   till now, it seemed to be to little more purpose to use endeavours for
   their instruction and awakening, than with the beasts. Their minds have
   now been strangely to receive instruction, and been deeply affected
   with the concerns of their precious souls; they have reformed their
   lives, and forsaken their former stupid, barbarous, and brutish way of
   living; and particularly that sin to which they have been so
   exceedingly addicted their drunkenness. Many of them to appearance
   brought truly and greatly to delight in the things of God, and to have
   their souls very much engaged and entertained with the great things of
   the gospel. And many of the poor Negroes also have been in like manner
   wrought upon and changed. Very many little children have been
   remarkably enlightened, and their hearts wonderfully affected and
   enlarged, and their mouths opened, expressing themselves in a manner
   far beyond their years, and to the just astonishment of those who have
   heard them. Some of them for many months, have been greatly and
   delightfully affected with the glory of divine things, and the
   excellency and love of the Redeemer, with their hearts greatly filled
   with love to and joy in him; and they have continued to be serious and
   pious in their behaviour.

   The divine power of this work has marvelously appeared in some
   instances I have been acquainted with; in supporting and fortifying the
   heart under great trials, such as the death of children, and extreme
   pain of body; and in wonderfully maintaining the serenity, calmness,
   and joy of the soul, in an immovable rest in God, and sweet resignation
   to him. And some under the blessed influences of this work have, in a
   calm, bright, and joyful frame of mind, been carried through the valley
   of the shadow of death.

   And now let us consider:--Is it not strange that in a Christian
   country, and such a land of light as this is, there are many at a loss
   to conclude whose work this is, whether the work of God or the work of
   the devil? Is it not a shame to New England that such a work should be
   much doubted of here? Need we look over the histories of all past
   times, to see if there be not some circumstances and external
   appearances that attend this work, which have been formerly found
   amongst enthusiasts? Whether the Montanists had not great transports of
   joy, and whether the French prophets had not agitations of body?
   Blessed be God! He does not put us to the toil of such inquiries. We
   need not say, Who shall ascend into heaven, to bring us down something
   whereby to judge of this work? Nor does God send us beyond the seas,
   nor into past ages, to obtain a rule near at hand, a sacred book that
   God himself has put into our hands, with clear and infallible marks,
   sufficient to resolve us in things of this nature; which book I think
   we must reject, not only in some particular passages, but in the
   substance of it, if we reject such a work as has now been described, as
   not being the work of God. The whole tenor of the gospel proves it; all
   the notion of religion that the Scripture gives us confirms it.

   I suppose there is scarcely a minister in this land, but from Sabbath
   to Sabbath is used to pray that God would pour out his Spirit, and work
   a reformation and revival of religion in the country, and turn us from
   our intemperance, profaneness, uncleanness, worldliness, and other
   sins; and we have kept from year to year, days of public fasting and
   prayer to God, to acknowledge our backslidings, and humble ourselves
   for our sins, and to seek of God forgiveness and reformation: and now
   when so great and extensive a reformation is so suddenly and
   wonderfully accomplished, in those very things that we have sought to
   God for, shall we not acknowledge it? Or, do it with great coldness,
   caution, and reserve, and scarcely take any notice of it in our public
   prayers and praises, or mention it but slightly and cursorily, and in
   such a manner as carries an appearance as though we would contrive to
   say as little of it as ever we could, and were glad to pass from it?
   And that because the work is attended with a mixture of error,
   imprudences, darkness, and sin; because some persons are carried away
   with impressions, and are indiscreet, and too censorious with their
   zeal; and because there are high transports of religious affections;
   and some effects on their bodies of which we do not understand the
   reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   The nature of the work in a particular instance.

   I have been particularly acquainted with many persons who have been the
   subjects of the high and extraordinary transports of the present day.
   But in the highest transports I have been acquainted with, and where
   the affections of admiration, love, and joy, so far as another could
   judge, have been raised to the highest pitch, the following things have
   been united, viz. A very frequent dwelling for some considerable time
   together, in views of the glory of the divine perfections and Christ's
   excellencies; so that the soul has been as it were perfectly
   overwhelmed, and swallowed up with light and love, a sweet solace, and
   a rest and joy of soul altogether unspeakable. The person has more than
   once continued for five or six hours together, without interruption, in
   a clear and lively view or sense of the infinite beauty and amiableness
   of Christ's person, and the heavenly sweetness of his transcendent
   lobe. So that (to use the person's own expressions) the soul remained
   in a kind of heavenly Elysium, and did as it were swim in the rays of
   Christ's love, like a little mote swimming in the beams of the sun that
   come in at a window. The heart was swallowed up in a kind of glow of
   Christ's love coming down as a constant stream of sweet light, at the
   same time the soul all flowing out in love to him; so that there seemed
   to be a constant flowing and reflowing from heart to heart. The soul
   dwelt on high, was lost in God, and seemed almost to leave the body.
   The mind dwelt in a pure delight that fed and satisfied it, enjoying
   pleasure without the least sting, or any interruption. And, (so far as
   the judgment and word of a person of discretion may be taken, speaking
   upon the most deliberate consideration,) what was enjoyed in a single
   minute of the whole space, which was many hours, was worth more than
   all the outward comfort and pleasure of the whole life put together;
   and this without being in any trance, or at all deprived of the
   exercise of the bodily senses. And this heavenly delight has been
   enjoyed for years together, though not frequently so long together to
   such a height. Extraordinary views of divine things, and the religious
   affections, were frequently attended with very great effects on the
   body. Nature often sunk under the weight of divine discoveries, and the
   strength of the body was taken away. The person was deprived of all
   ability to stand or speak. Sometimes the hands were clinched, and the
   flesh cold, but the senses remaining. Animal nature was often in a
   great emotion and agitation, and the soul so overcome with admiration,
   and a kind of omnipotent joy, as to cause a person, unavoidably, to
   leap with all the might, with joy and mighty exultation. The soul at
   the same time was so strongly drawn towards God and Christ in heaven,
   that it seemed to the person as though soul and body would, as it were
   of themselves, of necessity mount up, leave the earth, and ascend
   thither.

   These effects on the body were not owing to the influence of example,
   but began about seven years ago, when there was no such enthusiastical
   season as many account this, but it was a very dead time through the
   land. They arose from no distemper catched from Mr. Whitefield, or Mr.
   Tennant, because they began before either of them came into the
   country.--Near three years ago, they greatly increased, upon an
   extraordinary self-dedication, renunciation of the world, and
   resignation of all to God; which were made, in a great view of God's
   excellency, in high exercise of love to him, and rest and joy in him.
   Since that time they have been very frequent; and began in a yet higher
   degree, and greater frequency, about a year and a half ago, upon
   another new resignation of all to God, with a yet greater fervency and
   delight of soul; the body often fainting with the love of
   Christ.--These effects appeared in a higher degree still, the last
   winter, upon another resignation to and acceptance of God, as the only
   portion and happiness of the soul, wherein the whole world, with the
   dearest enjoyments in it, were renounced as dirt and dung. All that is
   pleasant and glorious, and all that is terrible in this world, seemed
   perfectly to vanish into nothing, and nothing to be left but God, in
   whom the soul was perfectly swallowed up, as in an infinite ocean of
   blessedness.--Since this time there have often been great agitations of
   body, and an unavoidable leaping for joy; and the soul as it were
   dwelling, almost without interruption, in a kind of paradise; and very
   often, in high transports, disposed to speak to others concerning the
   great and glorious things of God, and Christ, and the eternal world, in
   a most earnest manner, and with a loud voice, so that it is next to
   impossible to avoid it. These effects on the body did not arise from
   any bodily distemper or weakness, because the greatest of all have been
   in a good state of health.

   This great rejoicing has been with trembling, i.e. attended with a deep
   and lively sense of the greatness and majesty of God, and the person's
   own exceeding littleness and vileness. Spiritual joys in this person
   never were attended with the least appearance of laughter, or
   lightness, either of countenance or manner of speaking, but with a
   peculiar abhorrence of such appearances in spiritual rejoicings. These
   high transports, when past, have had abiding effects in the increase of
   sweetness, rest, and humility which they have left upon the soul; and a
   new engagedness of heart to live to God's honour, and watch and fight
   against sin. And these things took place not in the giddy age of youth,
   nor in a new convert, or unexperienced Christian, but in one that was
   converted above twenty-seven years ago; and neither converted not
   educated in that enthusiastic town of North Hampton, (as some may be
   ready to call it,) but in a town and family which none, that I know of,
   suspected of enthusiasm. And these effects were found in a Christian
   that has been long, in an uncommon manner, growing in grace, and
   rising, by very sensible degrees, to higher love to God, weanedness
   from the world, mastery over sin and temptation, through great trials
   and conflicts, long-continued strugglings and fighting with sin,
   earnest and constant prayer and labour in religion, and engagedness of
   mind in the use of all means, attended with a great exactness of
   life.--Which growth has been attended, not only with a great increase
   of religious affections, but with a wonderful alteration of outward
   behaviour, in many things, visible to those who are most intimately
   acquainted, so as lately to have become as it were a new person; and
   particularly in living so much more above the world, and in a greater
   degree of steadfastness and strength in the way of duty and
   self-denial, maintaining the Christian conflict against temptations,
   and conquering from time to time under great trials; persisting in an
   unmoved, untouched calm and rest, under the changes and accidents of
   time. The person had formerly, in lower degrees of grace, been subject
   to unsteadiness, and many ups and downs, in the frame of mind, being
   under great disadvantages, through a vaporous habit of body, and often
   subject to melancholy, and at times almost over-borne with it, it
   having been so even from early youth; but strength of grace and divine
   light has of a long time wholly conquered these disadvantages, and
   carried the mind, in a constant manner, quite above all such
   effects.--Since that resignation spoken of before, made near three
   years ago, every thing of that nature seems to be overcome and crushed
   by the power of faith and trust in God, and resignation to him; the
   person has remained in a constant uninterrupted rest, humble joy in
   God, and assurance of his favour, without one hour's melancholy or
   darkness, from that day to this; vapours have had great effects on the
   body, such as they used to have before, but the soul has been always
   out of their reach. And this steadfastness and constancy has remained
   through great outward changes and trials, such as times of the most
   extreme pain, and apparent hazard of immediate death.

   These transporting views and rapturous affections are not attended with
   any enthusiastic disposition to follow impulses, or any supposed
   prophetical revelations; nor have they been observed to be attended
   with any appearance of spiritual pride, but very much of a contrary
   disposition, and increase of humility and meekness, and a disposition
   in honour to prefer others. And it is worthy to be remarked, that when
   these discoveries and holy affections were evidently at the greatest
   height--which began early in the morning of the holy Sabbath, and
   lasted for days together, melting all down in the deepest humility and
   poverty of spirit, reverence and resignation, and the sweetest
   meekness, and universal benevolence--these two things were felt in a
   remarkable manner, viz. First, a peculiar aversion to judging other
   professing Christians of good standing in the visible church, with
   respect to their conversion or degrees of grace; or at all
   intermeddling with that matter, so much as to determine against and
   condemn others in the thoughts of the heart. Such want of candour
   appeared hateful, as not agreeing with that lamb-like humility,
   meekness, gentleness, and charity, which the soul then, above other
   times, saw to be beautiful. The disposition then felt was, on the
   contrary, to prefer others to self, and to hope that they saw more of
   God and loved him better; though before, under smaller discoveries, and
   feebler exercises of divine affection, there had been a disposition to
   censure and condemn others. Secondly, another thing that was felt at
   that time, was a very great sense of the importance of moral social
   duties, and how great a part of religion lay in them. There was such a
   new sense and conviction of this, beyond what had been before, that it
   seemed to be as it were a clear discovery then made to the soul. But,
   in general, there has been a very great increase of a sense of these
   two things, as divine views and divine love have increased.

   The things already mentioned have been attended also with the following
   things, viz. An extraordinary sense of the awful majesty, greatness,
   and holiness of God, so as sometimes to overwhelm soul and body, a
   sense of the ineffable misery of sinners who are exposed to this wrath.
   Sometimes the exceeding pollution of the person's own heart, as a sink
   of all manner of abomination, and the dreadfulness of an eternal hell
   of God's wrath, opened to view both together. There was a clear view of
   a desert of that misery, and that by the pollution of the best duties;
   yea, only by the irreverence, and want of humility, that attended once
   speaking of the holy name of God, when done in the best manner that
   ever it was done. The strength of the body was very often taken away
   with a deep mourning for sin, as committed against so holy and good a
   God; sometimes with an affecting sense of actual sin, sometimes
   especially indwelling sin, and sometimes the consideration of the sin
   of the heart as appearing in a particular thing, as for instance, in
   that there was no greater forwardness and readiness to self-denial for
   God and Christ, who had so denied himself for us. Yea, sometimes the
   consideration of sin that was in only speaking one word concerning the
   infinitely great and holy God, has been so affecting as to overcome the
   strength of nature. There has been a very great sense of the certain
   truth of the great things revealed in the gospel; an overwhelming sense
   of the glory of the work of redemption, and the way of salvation by
   Jesus Christ; of the glorious harmony of the divine attributes
   appearing therein, as that wherein mercy and truth are met together,
   and righteousness and peace have kissed each other. A sight of the
   fullness and glorious sufficiency of Christ has been so affecting as to
   overcome the body. A constant immovable trust in God through Christ,
   with a great sense of his strength and faithfulness, the sureness of
   his covenant and the immutability of his promises, made the everlasting
   mountains and perpetual hills to appear as mere shadows to these
   things.

   Sometimes the sufficiency and faithfulness of God, as the covenant God
   of his people, appeared in these words, i am that i am, in so affecting
   a manner as to overcome the body. A sense of the glorious,
   unsearchable, unerring wisdom of God in his works, both of creation and
   providence, was such as to swallow up the soul, and overcome the
   strength of the body. There was a sweet rejoicing of soul at the
   thoughts of God being infinitely and unchangeably happy, and an
   exulting gladness of heart that God is self-sufficient, and infinitely
   above all dependence, and reigns over all, and does his will with
   absolute and uncontrollable power and sovereignty. A sense of the glory
   of the Holy Spirit, as the great Comforter, was such as to overwhelm
   both soul and body; only mentioning the word the comforter, has
   immediately taken away all strength; that word, as the person expressed
   it, seemed great enough to fill heaven and earth. There was a most
   vehement and passionate desire of the honour and glory of God's name; a
   sensible, clear, and constant preference of it, not only to the
   person's own temporal interest, but to his spiritual comfort in this
   world. There was a willingness to suffer the hidings of God's face, and
   to live and die in darkness and horror, if God's honour should require
   it, and to have no other reward for it but that God's name should be
   glorified, although so much of the sweetness of the light of God's
   countenance had been experienced. A great lamenting of ingratitude and
   the defect of love to God, took away bodily strength; and there were
   very often vehement longings and faintings after more love to Christ,
   and greater conformity to him; especially longing after these two
   things, viz. To be more perfect in humility and adoration. The flesh
   and heart seem often to cry out for lying low before God, and fall down
   before his throne, have often overcome the body, and set it into a
   great agitation. The person felt a great delight in singing praises to
   God and Jesus Christ, and longing that this present life may be, as it
   were, one continued song of praise to God. There was a longing, as the
   person expressed it, to sit and sing this life away; and an overcoming
   pleasure in the thoughts of spending an eternity in that exercise.
   Together with living by faith to a great degree, there was a constant
   and extraordinary distrust of our own strength and wisdom; a great
   dependence on God for his help in order to the performance of any thing
   to God's acceptance, and being restrained from the most horrid sins.

   A sense of the black ingratitude of true saints, as to coldness and
   deadness in religion, and their setting their hearts on the things of
   this world, has overcome the bodily frame. There was an experience of
   great longing that all the children of God might be lively in religion,
   fervent in their love, and active in the service of God; and, when
   there have been appearances of it in others, rejoicing so in beholding
   the pleasant sight, that the joy of soul has been too great for the
   body.--The person took pleasure in the thoughts of watching and
   striving against sin, fighting through the way to heaven, and filling
   up this life with hard labour, and bearing the cross for Christ, as an
   opportunity to give God honour; not desiring to rest from labours till
   arrived in heaven, but abhorring the thoughts of it, and seeming
   astonished that God's own children should be backward to strive and
   deny themselves for God. There were earnest longings that all God's
   people might be clothed with humility and meekness, like the Lamb of
   God, and feel nothing in their hearts but love and compassion to all
   mankind; and great grief when any thing to the contrary appeared in any
   of the children of God, as bitterness, fierceness of zeal,
   censoriousness, or reflecting uncharitably on others, or disputing with
   any appearance of heat of spirit; a deep concern for the good of
   others' souls; a melting compassion to those that looked on themselves
   as in a state of nature, and to saints under darkness, so as to cause
   the body to faint. There was found an universal benevolence to mankind,
   with a longing as it were to embrace the whole world in the arms of
   pity and love; and ideas of suffering from enemies the utmost
   conceivable rage and cruelty, with a disposition felt to fervent love
   and pity in such a case, so far as it could be realized in thought.
   Sometimes a disposition was felt to a life given up to mourning alone
   in a wilderness over a lost and miserable world; compassion towards
   them being often to that degree, that would allow of no support or
   rest, but in going to God, and pouring out the soul in prayer for them.
   Earnest desires were felt that the work of God, now in the land, may be
   carried on, and that with greater purity, and freedom from all bitter
   zeal, censoriousness, spiritual pride, hot disputes, &c. and a vehement
   and constant desire for the setting up of Christ's kingdom through the
   earth, as a kingdom of holiness, purity, love, peace, and happiness to
   mankind.

   The soul often entertained, with unspeakable delight, the thoughts of
   heaven, as a world of love; where love shall be the saints' eternal
   food, where they shall dwell in the light, and swim in an ocean of
   love, and where the very air and breath will be nothing but love; love
   to the people of God, or God's true saints, as having the image of
   Christ, and as those who will in a very little time shine in his
   perfect image. The strength was very often taken away with longings
   that others might love God more, and serve God better, and have more of
   his comfortable presence, than the person that was the subject of these
   longings; desiring to follow the whole world to heaven, or that every
   one should go before, and be higher in grace and happiness, not by this
   person's diminution, but by others' increase. This experience included
   a delight in conversing on religious subjects, and in seeing Christians
   together, talking of the most spiritual and heavenly things in
   religion, in a lively and feeling manner; and very frequently the
   person was overcome with the pleasure of such conversation. A great
   sense was often expressed of the importance of the duty of charity to
   the poor, and how much the generality of Christians come short in the
   practice of it. There was also a great sense of the need ministers have
   of much of the Spirit of God, at this day especially; and there were
   most earnest longings and wrestlings with God for them, so as to take
   away the bodily strength. It also included the greatest, fullest,
   longest continued, and most constant assurance of the favour of God and
   of a title to future glory, that ever I saw any appearance of in any
   person, enjoying, especially of late, (to use the person's own
   expression,) the riches of full assurance. Formerly there was a longing
   to die with something of impatience; but lately, since that resignation
   forementioned, about three years ago, an uninterrupted entire
   resignation to God with respect to life or death, sickness or health,
   ease or pain, which has remained unchanged and unshaken, when actually
   under extreme and violent pains, and in times of threatenings of
   immediate death. But notwithstanding this patience and submission, the
   thoughts of death and the day of judgment are always exceeding sweet to
   the soul. This resignation is also attended with a constant resignation
   of the lives of dearest earthly friends, and sometimes when some of
   their lives have been imminently threatened; the person often
   expressing the sweetness of the liberty of having wholly left the
   world, and renounced all for God, and having nothing but God, in whom
   is an infinite fullness. These things have been attended with a
   constant sweet peace and calm, and serenity of soul, without any cloud
   to interrupt it; a continual rejoicing in all the works of God's hands,
   the works of nature, and God's daily works of providence, all appearing
   with a sweet smile upon them; a wonderful access to God by prayer, as
   it were seeing him, and immediately conversing with him, as much
   oftentimes (to use the person's own expressions) as if Christ were here
   on earth, sitting on a visible throne, to be approached to and
   conversed with.

   There have been frequent, plain, sensible, and immediate answers of
   prayer, all tears wiped away, all former troubles and sorrows of life
   forgotten, and all sorrow and sighing fled away--excepting grief for
   past sins, and for remaining corruption, and that Christ is loved no
   more, and that God is no more honoured in the world; and a
   compassionate grief towards fellow creatures--a daily sensible doing
   and suffering every thing for God, for a long time past, eating,
   working, sleeping, and bearing pain and trouble for God, and doing all
   as the service of love, with a continual uninterrupted cheerfulness,
   peace, and joy. Oh how good, said the person once, is it to work for
   God in the day-time, and at night to lie down under his smiles! High
   experiences and religious affections in this person have not been
   attended with any disposition at all to neglect the necessary business
   of a secular calling, to spend the time in reading and prayer, and
   other exercises of devotion; but worldly business has been attended
   with great alacrity, as part of the service of God; the person
   declaring that, it being done thus, it was found to be as good as
   prayer. These things have been accompanied with exceeding concern and
   zeal for moral duties, and that all professors may with them adorn the
   doctrine of God their Saviour; and an uncommon care to perform relative
   and social duties, and a noted eminence in them; a great
   inoffensiveness of life and conversation in the sight of others; a
   great meekness, gentleness, and benevolence of spirit and behaviour;
   and a great alteration in those things that formerly used to be the
   person's failings; seeming to be much overcome and swallowed up by the
   late great increase of grace, to the observation of those who are most
   conversant and most intimately acquainted.

   In times of the brightest light and highest flights of love and joy,
   there was found no disposition to the opinion of being now perfectly
   free from sin, (according to the notion of the Wesleys and their
   followers, and some other high pretenders to spirituality in these
   days,) but exceedingly the contrary. At such times especially, it was
   seen how loathsome and polluted the soul is; soul and body, and every
   act and word, appearing like rottenness and corruption in the pure and
   holy light of God's glory. The person did not slight instruction or
   means of grace any more for having had great discoveries; on the
   contrary, never was more sensible of the need of instruction than now.
   And one thing more may be added, viz. That these things have been
   attended with a particular dislike of placing religion much in dress,
   and spending much zeal about those things that in themselves are
   matters of indifference, or an affecting to show humility an devotion
   by a mean habit, or a demure and melancholy countenance, or any thing
   singular and superstitious.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   This work is very glorious.

   Now if such things are enthusiasm, and the fruits of a distempered
   brain, let my brain be evermore possessed of that happy distemper! If
   this be distraction, I pray God that the world of mankind may be all
   seized with this benign, meek, beneficent, beatifical, glorious
   distraction! If agitations of body were found in the French prophets,
   and ten thousand prophets more, it is little to their purpose who bring
   it as an objection against such a work as this, unless their purpose be
   to disprove the whole of the Christian religion. The great affections
   and high transports, that others have lately been under, are in general
   of the same kind with those in the instance that has been given, though
   not to so high a degree, and many of them not so pure and unmixed, and
   so well regulated. I have had opportunity to observe many instances
   here and elsewhere; and though there are some instances of great
   affections in which there has been a great mixture of nature with
   grace, and, in some, a sad degenerating of religious affections; yet
   there is that uniformity observable, which makes it easy to be seen,
   that in general it is the same spirit from whence the work in all parts
   of the land has originated. And what notions have they of religion,
   that reject what has been described, as not true religion! What shall
   we find to answer those expressions in Scripture, "The peace of God
   that passeth all understanding; rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full
   of glory, in believing in and loving an unseen Saviour;--All joy and
   peace in believing; God's shining into our hearts, to give the light of
   the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; With
   open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and being
   changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit
   of the Lord;--Having the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, by the
   Holy Ghost given to us;--Having the Spirit of God and of glory rest
   upon us;--A being called out of darkness into marvellous light; and
   having the day-star arise in our hearts:"--I say, if those things which
   have been mentioned, do not answer these expressions, what else can we
   find out that does answer them? Those that do not think such things as
   these to be the fruits of the true Spirit, would do well to consider
   what kind of spirit they are waiting and praying for, and what sort of
   fruits they expect he should produce when he comes. I suppose it will
   generally be allowed, that there is such a thing as a glorious
   outpouring of the Spirit of God to be expected, to introduce very
   joyful and glorious times upon religious accounts; times wherein holy
   love and joy will be raised to a great height in true Christians: but,
   if those things be rejected, what is left that we can find wherewith to
   patch up a notion, or form and idea, of the high, blessed, joyful
   religion of these times? What is there sweet, excellent, and joyful, of
   a religious nature, that is entirely of a different nature from these
   things?

   Those who are waiting for the fruits, in order to determine whether
   this be the work of God or no, would do well to consider, what they are
   waiting for; whether it be not to have this wonderful religious
   influence subside, and then to see how they will behave themselves?
   That is, to have grace subside, and the actings of it in a great
   measure to cease, and to have persons grow cold and dead; and then to
   see whether, after that, they will behave themselves with that
   exactness and brightness of conversation, that is to be expected of
   lively Christians, or those that are in the vigorous exercises of
   grace. There are many that will not be satisfied with any exactness of
   laboriousness in religion now, while persons have their minds much
   moved, and their affections are high; for they lay it to their flash of
   affection, and heat of zeal, as they call it; they are waiting to see
   whether they will carry themselves as well when these affections are
   over; that is, they are waiting to have persons sicken and lose their
   strength, that they may see whether they will then behave themselves
   like healthy strong men. I would desire that they would also consider,
   whether they be not waiting for more than is reasonably to be expected,
   supposing this to be really a great work of God, and much more than has
   been found in former great outpourings of the Spirit of God, that have
   been universally acknowledged in the Christian church? Do not they
   expect fewer instances of apostasy and evidences of hypocrisy in
   professors, than were after that great outpouring of the Spirit in the
   apostles' days, or that which was in the time of the reformation? And
   do not they stand prepared to make a mighty argument of it against this
   work, if there should be half so many? And, they would do well to
   consider how long they will wait to see the good fruit of this work,
   before they will determine in favour of it. Is not their waiting
   unlimited? The visible fruit that is to be expected of a pouring out of
   the Spirit of God on a country, is a visible reformation in that
   country. What reformation has lately been brought to pass in New
   England, by this work, has been before observed. And has it not
   continued long enough already, to give reasonable satisfaction? If God
   cannot work on the hearts of a people after such a manner, as
   reasonably to expect it should be acknowledged in a year and a half, or
   two years' time; yet surely it is unreasonable that our expectations
   and demands should be unlimited, and our waiting without any bounds.

   As there is the clearest evidence, from what has been observed, that
   this is the work of God; so it is evident that it is a very great and
   wonderful and exceeding glorious work.--This is certain, that it is a
   great and wonderful event, a strange revolution, an unexpected,
   surprising overturning of things, suddenly brought to pass; such as
   never has been seen in New England, and scarce ever has been heard of
   in any land. Who that saw the state of things in New England a few
   years ago, would have thought that in so short time there would be such
   a change? This is undoubtedly either a very great work of God, or a
   great work of the devil, as to the main substance of it. For though,
   undoubtedly, God and the devil may work together at the same time, and
   in the same land; and Satan will do his utmost endeavour to intrude,
   and, by intermingling his work, to darken and hinder God's work; yet
   God and the devil do not work together in producing the same event, and
   in effecting the same change in the hearts and lives of men. But it is
   apparent that as to some things wherein the main substance of this work
   consists, there is a likeness and agreement every where: now this is
   either a wonderful work of God, or a mighty work of the devil; and so
   is either a most happy event, greatly to be admired and rejoiced in, or
   a most awful calamity. Therefore, if what has been said before be
   sufficient to determine it to be, as to the main, the work of God, then
   it must be acknowledged to be a very wonderful and glorious work of
   God.

   Such a work is, in its nature and kind, the most glorious of any work
   of God whatsoever, and is always so spoken of in Scripture. It is the
   work of redemption (the great end of all the other works of God, and of
   which the work of creation was but a shadow) in the event, success, and
   end of it: it is the work of new creation, which is infinitely more
   glorious than the old. I am bold to say, that the work of God in the
   conversion of one soul, considered together with the source,
   foundation, and purchase of it, and also the benefit, end, and eternal
   issue of it, is a more glorious work of God than the creation of the
   whole material universe. It is the most glorious of God's works, as it
   above all others manifests the glory of God; it is spoken of in
   Scripture, as that which shows the exceeding greatness of God's power,
   and the glory and riches of divine grace, and wherein Christ has the
   most glorious triumph over his enemies, and wherein God is mightily
   exalted. And it is a work above all others glorious, as it concerns the
   happiness of mankind; more happiness, and a greater benefit to man, is
   the fruit of each single drop of such a shower, than all the temporal
   good of the most happy revolution, or all that a people could gain by
   the conquest of the world.

   This work is very glorious both in its nature, and in its degree and
   circumstances. It will appear very glorious, if we consider the
   unworthiness of the people who are the subjects of it; what obligations
   God has laid us under by the special privileges we have enjoyed for our
   souls' good, and the great things God did for us at our first
   settlement in the land; how he has followed us with his goodness to
   this day, and how we have abused his goodness; how long we have been
   revolting more and more, (as all confess,) and how very corrupt we were
   become at last; in how great a degree we had forsaken the fountain of
   living waters; how obstinate we have been under all manner of means
   that God has used to reclaim us; how often we have mocked God with
   hypocritical pretences of humiliation, as in our annual days of public
   fasting, and other things, while, instead of reforming, we only grew
   worse and worse; and how dead a time it was every where before this
   work began. If we consider these things, we shall be most stupidly
   ungrateful, if we do not acknowledge God's visiting us as he has done,
   as an instance of the glorious triumph of free and sovereign grace.

   The work is very glorious, if we consider the extent of it; being in
   this respect vastly beyond any that ever was known in New England.
   There has formerly sometimes been a remarkable awakening and success of
   the means of grace, in some particular congregations; and this used to
   be much noticed, and acknowledged to be glorious, though but now God
   has brought to pass a new thing, he has wrought a great work, which has
   extended from one end of the land to the other, besides what has been
   wrought in other British colonies in America.

   The work is very glorious in the great members that have, to
   appearance, been turned from sin to God, and so, delivered from a
   wretched captivity to sin and Satan, saved from everlasting burnings,
   and made heirs of eternal glory. How high an honour and great a reward
   of their labours, have some eminent persons of note in the church of
   God signified that they should esteem it, if they should be made the
   instruments of the conversion and eternal salvation of but one soul!
   And no greater event than that, is thought worthy of great notice in
   haven among the hosts of glorious angels, who rejoice and sing on such
   an occasion. Now, when there are many thousands of souls thus converted
   and saved, shall it be esteemed worth but little notice, and be
   mentioned with coldness and indifference here on earth, by those among
   whom such a work is wrought.

   The work has been very glorious and wonderful in many circumstances and
   events of it, wherein God has in an uncommon manner made his hand
   visible and his power conspicuous; as in the extraordinary degrees of
   awakening, and the suddenness of conversions in innumerable instances.
   How common a thing has it been for a great part of a congregation to be
   at once moved by a mighty invisible power! And for six, eight, or ten
   souls to be converted to God (to all appearance) in an exercise, in
   whom the visible change still continues! How great an alteration has
   been made in some towns, yea, some populous towns, the change still
   abiding! And how many very vicious persons have been wrought upon, so
   as to become visibly new creatures! God has also made his hand very
   visible, and his work glorious, in the multitudes of little children
   that have been wrought upon. I suppose there have been some hundreds of
   instances of this nature of late, any one of which formerly would have
   been looked upon so remarkable, as to be worthy to be recorded, and
   published through the land. The work is very glorious in its influences
   and effects on many who have been very ignorant and barbarous, as I
   before observed of the Indians and Negroes.

   The work is also exceeding glorious in the high attainments of
   Christians, in the extraordinary degrees of light, love, and spiritual
   joy that God has bestowed upon great multitudes. In this respect also,
   the land in all parts has abounded with such instances, any one of
   which, if they had happened formerly, would have been thought worthy to
   be noticed by God's people throughout the British dominions. The New
   Jerusalem in this respect has begun to come down from heaven, and
   perhaps never were more of the prelibations of heaven's glory given
   upon earth.

   There being a great many errors and sinful irregularities mixed with
   this work of God, arising from our weakness, darkness, and corruption,
   does not hinder this work of God's power and grace from being very
   glorious. Our follies and sins in some respects manifest the glory of
   it. The glory of divine power and grace is set off with the greater
   lustre, by what appears at the same time of the weakness of the earthen
   vessel. It is God's pleasure to manifest the weakness and unworthiness
   of the subject, at the same time that he displays the excellency of his
   power and the riches of his grace. And I doubt not but some of these
   things which make some of us here on earth to be out of humour, and to
   look on this work with a sour displeased countenance, heighten the
   songs of the angels, when they praise God and the Lamb for what they
   see of the glory of God's all-sufficiency, and the efficacy of Christ's
   redemption. And how unreasonable is it that we should be backward to
   acknowledge the glory of what God has done, because the devil, and we
   in hearkening to him, has done a great deal of mischief!
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   SHOWING THE OBLIGATIONS THAT ALL ARE UNDER TO ACKNOWLEDGE, REJOICE IN,
   AND PROMOTE THIS WORK; AND THE GREAT DANGER OF THE CONTRARY.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   The danger of lying still, and keeping long silence, respecting any
   remarkable work of God.

   There are many things in the word of God, showing that when God
   remarkably appears in any great work for his church, and against his
   enemies, it is a most dangerous thing, and highly provoking to God, to
   be slow and backward to acknowledge and honour God in the work.
   Christ's people are in Scripture represented as his army; he is the
   Lord of hosts, the Captain of the host of the Lord, as he called
   himself when he appeared to Joshua, with a sword drawn in his hand,
   Joshua v. 13-15. the Captain of his people's salvation; and therefore
   it may well be highly resented, if they do not resort to him when he
   orders his banner to be displayed; or if they refuse to follow him when
   he blows the trumpet, and gloriously appears going forth against his
   enemies. God expects that every living soul should have his attention
   roused on such and occasion, and should most cheerfully yield to the
   call, and heedfully and diligently obey it. Isa. xviii. 3. "All ye
   inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye when he
   lifteth up an sign on the mountains; and when he bloweth the trumpet,
   hear ye." Especially should all Israel be gathered after their Captain,
   as we read they were after Ehud, when he blew the trumpet in mount
   Ephraim, when he had slain Eglon king of Moab, Judges iii. 27, 28. How
   severe is the martial law in such a case, when any of the army refuses
   to obey the sound of the trumpet, and follow his general to the battle!
   God at such a time appears in peculiar manifestations of his glory; and
   therefore, not to be affected and animated, and to lie still, and
   refuse to follow God, will be resented as a high contempt of him.
   Suppose a subject should stand by, and be a spectator of the solemnity
   of his prince's coronation, and should appear silent and sullen, when
   all the multitude were testifying their loyalty and joy with loud
   acclamations; how greatly would he expose himself to be treated as a
   rebel, and quickly to perish by the authority of the prince that he
   refuses to honour!

   At a time when God manifests himself in such a great work for his
   church, there is no such thing as being neuters; there is a necessity
   of being either for or against the king that then gloriously appears.
   When a king is crowned, and there are public manifestations of joy on
   that occasion, there is no such thing as standing by as an indifferent
   spectator; all must appear as loyal subjects, and express their joy on
   that occasion, or be accounted enemies. So when God, in any great
   dispensation of his providence, remarkably sets his King on his holy
   hill of Zion, Christ in an extraordinary manner comes down from heaven
   to the earth, and appears in his visible church in a great work of
   salvation for his people. When Christ came down from heaven in his
   incarnation, and appeared on earth in his human presence, there was no
   such thing as being neuters, neither on his side nor against him. Those
   who sat still and said nothing, and did not declare for him, and come
   and join with him, after he, by his word and works, had given
   sufficient evidence who he was, were justly looked upon as his enemies.
   Matt. xii. 30. "He that is not with me is against me; and he that
   gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad." So it is when Christ comes
   to carry on the work of redemption in the application of it, as well as
   in its revelation and purchase. If a king should come into one of his
   provinces, which had been oppressed by its foes, where some of his
   subjects had fallen off to the enemy, and joined with them against
   their lawful sovereign and his loyal subjects; I say, if the royal
   sovereign himself should come into the province, and should ride forth
   there against his enemies, and should call upon all who were on his
   side to come and gather themselves to him; there would be no such
   thing, in such a case, as standing neuter. They who lay still and staid
   at a distance would undoubtedly be looked upon and treated as rebels.
   So in the day of battle, when two armies join, there is no such thing
   for any present as being of neither party, all must be on one side or
   the other; and they who are not found with the conqueror in such a
   case, must expect to have his weapons turned against them, and to fall
   with the rest of his enemies.

   When God manifests himself with such glorious power in a work of this
   nature, he appears especially determined to put honour upon his Son,
   and to fulfil his oath that he has sworn to him, that he would make
   every knee to bow, and every tongue to confess to him. God hath had it
   much on his heart, from all eternity, to glorify his dear and
   only-begotten Son; and there are some special seasons that he appoints
   to that end, wherein he comes forth with omnipotent power to fulfil his
   promise and oath to him. Now these are times of remarkable pouring out
   of his Spirit, to advance his kingdom; such is a day of his power,
   wherein his people shall be made willing, and he shall rule in the
   midst of his enemies; these especially are the times wherein God
   declares his firm decree, that his Son shall reign on his holy hill of
   Zion. And therefore those who at such a time do not kiss the Son, as he
   then manifests himself, and appears in the glory of his majesty and
   grace, expose themselves to perish from the way, and to be dashed in
   pieces with a rod of iron.

   As such is a time wherein God eminently sets his King on his holy hill
   of Zion, so it is a time wherein he remarkably fulfils that in Isa.
   xxviii. 16. "Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion
   for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a
   sure foundation." Which the two apostles Peter and Paul (1 Pet. ii.
   6-8. And Rom. ix. 33.) join with that prophecy, Isa. viii. 14,15. "And
   he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a
   rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare
   to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble and
   fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken." As signifying that
   both are fulfilled together. Yea, both are joined together by the
   prophet Isaiah himself, as you may see in the context of that
   forementioned place, Isa. xxviii. 16. In ver. 13. Preceding, it is
   said, Isaiah 28:13 "But the word of the Lord was unto them, precept
   upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and
   there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken,
   and snared, and taken." And accordingly, when Christ is in a peculiar
   and eminent manner manifested and magnified, by a glorious work of God
   in his church, as a foundation and a sanctuary for some, he is
   remarkably a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, a gin and a
   snare, to others. They who continue long to stumble and to be offended
   and ensnared in their minds, at such a great and glorious work of
   Christ, in God's account, stumble at Christ, and are offended in him;
   for the work is that by which he makes the stone that the builders
   refused, to become the head of the corner. This shows how dangerous it
   is to continue always stumbling at such a work, for ever doubting of
   it, and forbearing fully to acknowledge it, and give God the glory of
   it. Such persons are in danger to go, and fall backward, and be broken,
   and snared, and taken, and to have Christ a stone of stumbling to them,
   that shall be an occasion of their ruin; while he is to others a
   sanctuary, and a sure foundation.

   The prophet Isaiah (Isa. xxix. 14.) speaks of God's proceeding to do a
   marvellous work and a wonder, which should stumble and confound the
   wisdom of the wise and prudent; which the apostle in Acts xiii. 41.
   Applies to the glorious work of salvation wrought in those days by the
   redemption of Christ, and that glorious outpouring of the Spirit to
   apply it which followed. The prophet in the context of that place in
   Isa. xxix. Speaking of the same thing, and of the prophets and rulers
   and seers, those wise and prudent whose eyes God had closed, says to
   them, ver. 9. "Stay yourselves and wonder." In the original it is, "Be
   ye slow and wonder." I leave it to others to consider whether it be not
   natural to interpret it thus, "Wonder at this marvellous work; let it
   be a strange thing, a great mystery that you know not what to make of,
   and that you are slow and backward to acknowledge, long delaying to
   come to a determination concerning it." And what persons are in danger,
   and are thus slow to acknowledge God in such a work, we learn from the
   apostle in that forementioned place, Acts xiii. 41. "Behold, ye
   despisers, and wonder and perish; for I work a work in your days, a
   work which you shall in nowise believe, though a man declare it unto
   you."

   The church of Christ is called upon greatly to rejoice, when at any
   time Christ remarkably appears, coming to his church, to carry on the
   work of salvation, to enlarge his own kingdom, and to deliver poor
   souls out of the pit wherein there is not water. Zech. ix. 9, 10, 11.
   "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem;
   behold, the King cometh unto thee; he is just, and having
   salvation:--His dominion shall be from sea to sea.--As for thee also,
   by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of
   the pit wherein is no water." Christ was pleased to give a notable
   typical or symbolical representation of such a great event as is spoken
   of in that prophecy, in his solemn entry into the literal Jerusalem,
   which was a type of the church or daughter of Zion; probably intending
   it as a figure and prelude of that great actual fulfillment of this
   prophecy, that was to be after his ascension, by the pouring out of the
   Spirit in the days of the apostles, and that more full accomplishment
   that should be in the latter ages of the Christian church. We have an
   account, that when Christ made this solemn entry into Jerusalem, and
   the whole multitude of the disciples were rejoicing and praising God,
   with loud voices, for all the mighty works that they had seen, the
   Pharisees from among the multitude said to Christ, Master, rebuke thy
   disciples; but we are told, Luke xix. 39, 40. "Christ answered and said
   unto them, I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the
   stones would immediately cry out." Signifying, that if Christ's
   professing disciples should be unaffected on such an occasion, and
   should not appear openly to acknowledge and rejoice in the glory of God
   therein appearing, it would manifest such fearful hardness of heart
   that the very stones would condemn them. Should not this make those
   consider, who have held their peace so long since Christ has come to
   our Zion having salvation, and so wonderfully manifested his glory in
   this mighty work of his Spirit, and so many of his disciples have been
   rejoicing and praising God with loud voices?

   It must be acknowledged, that so great and wonderful a work of God's
   Spirit, is a work wherein God's hand is remarkably lifted up, and
   wherein he displays his majesty, and shows great favour and mercy to
   sinners, in the glorious opportunity he gives them, and by which he
   makes our land to become much more a land of uprightness. Therefore
   that place, Isa. xxvi. 10, 11. Shows the great danger of not seeing
   God's hand, and acknowledging his glory and majesty, in such a work;
   "Let favour be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
   righteousness: In the land of uprightness he will deal unjustly, and
   will not behold the majesty of the Lord. Lord, when they hand is lifted
   up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their
   envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   The latter-day glory, is probably to begin in America.

   It is not unlikely that this work of God's Spirit, so extraordinary and
   wonderful, is the dawning, or, at least, a prelude of that glorious
   work of God, so often foretold in Scripture, which, in the progress and
   issue of it, shall renew the world of mankind. If we consider how long
   since the things foretold as what should precede this great event, have
   been accomplished; and how long this event has been expected by the
   church of God, and thought to be nigh by the most eminent men of God in
   the church; and withal consider what the state of things now is, and
   has for a considerable time been, in the church of God, and the world
   of mankind; we cannot reasonably think otherwise, than that the
   beginning of this great work of God must be near. And there are many
   things that make it probable that this work will begin in America.--It
   is signified that it shall begin in some very remote part of the world,
   with which other parts have no communication but by navigation, in Isa.
   lx. 9. "Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish
   first, to bring my sons from far." It is exceeding manifest that this
   chapter is a prophecy of the prosperity of the church, in its most
   glorious state on earth, in the latter days; and I cannot think that
   any thing else can be here intended but America by the isles that are
   far off, from whence the first-born sons of that glorious day shall be
   brought. Indeed, by the isles, in prophecies of gospel-times, is very
   often meant Europe. It is so in prophecies of that great spreading of
   the gospel that should be soon after Christ's time, because it was far
   separated from that part of the world where the church of God had till
   then been, by the sea. But this prophecy cannot have respect to the
   conversion of Europe, in the time of that great work of God, in the
   primitive ages of the Christian church; for it was not fulfilled then.
   The isles and ships of Tarshish, thus understood, did not wait for God
   first; that glorious work did not begin in Europe, but in Jerusalem,
   and had for a considerable time been very wonderfully carried on in
   Asia, before it reached Europe. And as it is not that work of God which
   is chiefly intended in this chapter, but some more glorious work that
   should be in the latter ages of the Christian church; therefore, some
   other part of the world is here intended by the isles, that should be,
   as Europe then was, far separated from that part of the world where the
   church had before been, and with which it can have no communication but
   by the ships of Tarshish. And what is chiefly intended is not the
   British isles, nor any isles near the other continent; for they are
   spoken of as at a great distance from that part of the world where the
   church had till then been. This prophecy therefore seems plainly to
   point out America, as the first-fruits of that glorious day.

   God has made as it were tow worlds here below, two great habitable
   continents, far separated one from the other: The latter is as it were
   now but newly created; it has been, till of late, wholly the possession
   of Satan, the church of God having never been in it, as it has been in
   the other continent, from the beginning of the world. This new world is
   probably now discovered, that the new and most glorious state of God's
   church on earth might commence there; that God might in it begin a new
   world in a spiritual respect, when he creates the new heavens and new
   earth.

   God has already put that honour upon the other continent, that Christ
   was born there literally and there made the purchase of redemption. So,
   as Providence observes a kind of equal distribution of things, it is
   not unlikely that the great spiritual birth of Christ, and the most
   glorious application of redemption, is to begin in this. The elder
   sister brought forth Judah, of whom Christ came, and so she was the
   mother of Christ; but the younger sister, after long barrenness,
   brought forth Joseph and Benjamin, the beloved children. Joseph who had
   the most glorious apparel, the coat of many colours; who was separated
   from his brethren, and was exalted to great glory out of a dark
   dungeon--who fed and saved the world when ready to perish with famine,
   and was as fruitful bough by a well, whose branches ran over the wall,
   and was blessed with all manner of blessings and precious things of
   heaven and earth, through the good-will of him that dwelt in the
   bush--was, as by the horns of an unicorn, to push the people together,
   to the ends of the earth, i. e. conquer the world. See Gen. xlix. 22,
   &c. and Deut. xxxiii. 13, &c. And Benjamin, whose mess was five times
   so great as that of any of his brethren, and to whom Joseph, that type
   of Christ, gave wealth and raiment far beyond all the rest, Gen. xlv.
   22.

   The other continent hath slain Christ, and has from age to age shed the
   blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus, and has often been as it were
   deluged with the church's blood. God has therefore probably reserved
   the honour of building the glorious temple to the daughter that has not
   shed so much blood, when those times of the peace, prosperity, and
   glory of the church, typified by the reign of Solomon, shall commence.

   The Gentiles first received the true religion from the Jews: God's
   church of ancient times had been among them, and Christ was of them.
   But, that there may be a kind of equality in the dispensations of
   providence, God has so ordered it, that when the Jews come to be
   admitted to the benefits of the evangelical dispensation, and to
   receive their highest privileges of all, they should receive the gospel
   from the Gentiles. Though Christ was of them, yet they have been guilty
   of crucifying him; it is therefore the will of God, that the Jews
   should not have the honour of communicating the blessing of the kingdom
   of God in its most glorious state to the Gentiles; but on the contrary,
   they shall receive the gospel in the beginning of that glorious day
   from the Gentiles. In some analogy to this, I apprehend, God's dealings
   will be with the two continents. America has received the true religion
   of the old continent; the church of ancient times has been there, and
   Christ is from thence. But that there may be an equality, and inasmuch
   as that continent has crucified Christ, they shall not have the honour
   of communicating religion in its most glorious state to us, but we to
   them.

   The old continent has been the source and original of mankind, in
   several respects. The first parents of mankind dwelt there; and there
   dwelt Noah and his sons; there the second Adam was born, and crucified
   and raised again: and tis probable that, in some measure to balance
   these things, the most glorious renovation of the world shall originate
   from the new continent, and the church of God in that respect be from
   hence. And so it is probable that will come to pass in spirituals,
   which has taken place in temporals, with respect to America; that
   whereas, till of late, the world was supplied with its silver, and
   gold, and earthly treasures from the old continent, now it is supplied
   chiefly from the new; so the course of things in spiritual respects
   will be in like manner turned.--And it is worthy to be noted, that
   America was discovered about the time of the reformation, or but little
   before: which reformation was the first thing that God did towards the
   glorious renovation of the world, after it had sunk into the depths of
   darkness and ruin, under the great anti-Christian apostacy. So that, as
   soon as this new world stands forth in view, God presently goes about
   doing some great thing in order to make way for the introduction of the
   church's latter-day glory--which is to have its first seat in, and is
   to take its rise from, that new world.

   It is agreeable to God's manner, when he accomplishes any glorious work
   in the world, in order to introduce a new and more excellent state of
   his church, to begin where no foundation had been already laid, that
   the power of God might be the more conspicuous; that the work might
   appear to be entirely God's, and be more manifestly a creation out of
   nothing; agreeable to Hos. i. 10. "And it shall come to pass, that in
   the place where it was said unto the, Ye are not my people, there it
   shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God." When God
   is about to turn the earth into a paradise, he does not begin his work
   where there is some good growth already, but in the wilderness, where
   nothing grows, and nothing is to be seen but dry sand and barren rocks;
   that the light may shine out of darkness, the world be replenished from
   emptiness, and the earth watered by springs from a droughty desert;
   agreeable to many prophecies of Scripture, as Isa. xxxii. 15. "Until
   the Spirit be poured from on high, and the wilderness become a fruitful
   field." And chap. xli. 18, 19. "I will open rivers in high places, and
   fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a
   pool of water, and the dry land springs of water. I will plant in the
   wilderness the cedar, the shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and oil-tree: I
   will set in the desert the fir-tree, and the pine, and the box-tree
   together." And chap. xliii. 20. "I will give waters in the wilderness,
   and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen." And
   many other parallel scriptures might be mentioned. Now as, when God is
   about to do some great work for his church, his manner is to begin at
   the lower end; so, when he is about to renew the whole habitable earth,
   it is probable that he will begin in this utmost, meanest, youngest,
   and weakest part of it, where the church of God has been planted last
   of all; and so the first shall be last: and that will be fulfilled in
   an eminent manner in Isa. xxiv. 19. "From the uttermost part of the
   earth have we heard songs, even glory to the righteous."

   There are several things that seem to me to argue, that the Sun of
   righteousness, the Sun of the new heavens and new earth, when he
   rises--and comes forth as the bridegroom of his church, rejoicing as a
   strong man to run his race, having his going forth from the end of
   heaven, and his circuit to the end of it, that nothing may be hid from
   the light and heat of it, [555] --shall rise in the west, contrary to
   the course of things in the old heavens and earth. The movements of
   Providence shall in the day be so wonderfully altered in many respects,
   that God will as it were change the course of nature, in answer to the
   prayers of his church; as he caused the sun to go from the west to the
   east, when he promised to do such great things for his church; a
   deliverance out of the hand of the king of Assyria, is often used by
   the prophet Isaiah, as a type of the glorious deliverance of the church
   from her enemies in the latter days. The resurrection as it were of
   Hezekiah, the king and captain of the church, (as he is called, 2 Kings
   xx. 5.) is given as an earnest of the church's resurrection and
   salvation, Isa. xxxviii. 6. And is a type of the resurrection of
   Christ. At the same time there is a resurrection of the sun, or coming
   back and rising again from the west, whither it had gone down, which is
   also a type of the sun of righteousness. The sun was brought back ten
   degrees; which probably brought it to the meridian. The Sun of
   righteousness has long been going down from east to west; and probably
   when the time comes of the church's deliverance from her enemies, so
   often typified by the Assyrians, the light will rise in the west, till
   it shines through the world like the sun in its meridian brightness.

   The same seems also to be represented by the course of the waters of
   the sanctuary, Ezek. xlvii. Which was from west to east; which waters
   undoubtedly represented the Holy spirit, in the progress of his saving
   influences, in the latter ages of the world: for it is manifest, that
   the whole of those last chapters of Ezekiel treat concerning the
   glorious state of the church at that time. And if we may suppose that
   this glorious work of God shall begin in any part of America, I think,
   if we consider the circumstances of the settlement of New England, it
   must needs appear the most likely, of all American colonies, to be the
   place whence this work shall principally take its rise. And, if these
   things be so, it gives us more abundant reason to hope that what is now
   seen in America, and especially in New England, may prove the dawn of
   that glorious day; and the very uncommon and wonderful circumstances
   and events of this work, seem to me strongly to argue that God intends
   it as the beginning or forerunner of something vastly great.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [555] It is evident that the Holy Spirit, in those expressions in Psal.
   xix. 4, 6. has respect to something else besides the natural sun, and
   that a regard is had to the Sun of righteousness, who by his light
   converts the soul, makes wise the simple, enlightens the eyes, and
   rejoices the heart; and by his preached gospel enlightens and warms the
   world of mankind; by the psalmist's own application in ver. 7, and the
   apostle's application of ver. 4. in Rom. x. 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   The danger of not acknowledging and encouraging, and especially of
   deriding, this work.

   I have thus long insisted on this point, because, if these things are
   so, it greatly manifest how much it behooves us to encourage and
   promote this work, and how dangerous it will be to forbear so doing. It
   is very dangerous for help of the Lord, whenever he remarkably pours
   out his Spirit, to carry on the work of redemption in the application
   of it; but above all, when he comes forth, to introduce that happy day
   of God's power and salvation, so often spoken of. That is especially
   the appointed season of the application of redemption, the appointed
   time of Christ's reign. The reign of Satan as god of this world lasts
   till then; but afterwards will be the proper time of actual redemption,
   or new creation, as is evident by Isa. lxv. 17, 18, &c. and Isa. lxvi.
   12. and Rev. xxi. 1. All the outpourings of the Spirit of God before
   this are as it were by way of anticipation. There was indeed a glorious
   season of the application of redemption in the first ages of the
   Christian church, which began at Jerusalem, on the day of Pentecost;
   but that was not the proper time of ingathering. It was only as it were
   the feast of first-fruits; the ingathering is at the end of the year,
   or in the last ages of the Christian church, as is represented, Rev.
   xiv. 14-16. And will probably as much exceed what was in the first ages
   of the Christian church, though that filled the Roman empire, as that
   exceeded all that had been before, under the Old Testament, confined
   only to the land of Judea.

   The great danger of not appearing openly to acknowledge, rejoice in,
   and promote that great work of God, in bringing in that glorious
   harvest, is represented in "And it shall come to pass, that every one
   that is left, of all the nations which came against Jerusalem, shall
   even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts,
   and to keep the feast of tabernacles. And it shall be, that whoso will
   not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem, to worship
   the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain. And if
   the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain; there
   shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come
   not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. This shall be the punishment
   of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep
   the feast of tabernacles." It is evident by all the context that the
   glorious day of the church of God in the latter ages of the world is
   the time spoken of. The feast of tabernacles here seems to signify that
   glorious spiritual feast which God shall then make for his church, the
   same that is spoken of, Isa. xxv. 6. And the great spiritual rejoicings
   of God's people at that time. There were three great feasts in Israel
   at that time. There were three great feasts in Israel at which all the
   males were appointed to go up to Jerusalem; the feast of the Passover;
   and the feast of the first-fruits, or the feast of Pentecost; and the
   feast of ingathering, at the end of the year, or the feast of
   tabernacles. In the first of these viz. The feast of the Passover, was
   represented the purchase of redemption by Jesus Christ; for the paschal
   lamb was slain at the time of that feast. The other two that followed
   it were to represent the two great seasons of the application of the
   purchased redemption. In the former of them, viz. The feast of the
   first-fruits, which was called the feast of Pentecost, was represented
   that time of the outpouring of the Spirit in the first ages of the
   Christian church, for the bringing in the first-fruits of Christ's
   redemption, which began at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. The
   other, which was the feast of ingathering, at the end of the
   year--which the children of Israel were appointed to keep on occasion
   of their gathering in their corn and their wine, and all the fruit of
   their land, and was called the feast of tabernacles--represented the
   other more joyful and glorious season of the application of Christ's
   redemption, which is to be in the latter days. Then will be the great
   day of ingathering of the elect, the proper and appointed time of
   gathering in God's fruits, when the angel of the covenant shall thrust
   in his sickle, and gather the harvest of the earth; and the clusters of
   the vine of the earth shall also be gathered. This was upon many
   accounts the greatest feast of the three. There were much greater
   tokens of rejoicings in this feast than any other. The people dwelt in
   booths of green boughs, and were commanded to take boughs of goodly
   trees, branches of palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
   willows of the brook, and to rejoice before the Lord their God. This
   represents the flourishing, beautiful, pleasant state of the church,
   rejoicing in God's grace and love, and triumphing over all her enemies.
   The tabernacle of God was first set up among the children of Israel, at
   the time of the feast of tabernacles; but, in that glorious time of the
   Christian church, God will above all other times set up his tabernacle
   amongst men, Rev. xxi. 3. "And I heard a great voice out of heaven,
   saying: The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
   and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and
   be their God."

   The world is supposed to have been created about the time of year
   wherein the feast of tabernacles was appointed; so, in that glorious
   time God will create a new heaven and a new earth. The temple of
   Solomon was dedicated at the time of the feast of tabernacles, when God
   descended in a pillar of cloud, and dwelt in the temple; so, at this
   happy time, the temple of God shall be gloriously built up in the
   world, and God shall in a wonderful manner come down from heaven to
   dwell with his church. Christ is supposed to have been born at the
   feast of tabernacles; so, at the commencement of that glorious day,
   Christ shall be born; then, above all other times, shall "the woman
   clothed with the sun with the moon under her feet, that is in travail,
   and pained to be delivered, bring forth her son, to rule all nations,"
   Rev. xii. The feast of tabernacles was the last feast that Israel had
   in the whole year, before the face of the earth was destroyed by the
   winter; presently after the rejoicings of that feast were past, a
   tempestuous season began, Acts xxvii. 9. "Sailing was now dangerous,
   because the feast was now already past." So this great feast of the
   Christian church will be the last feast she shall have on earth; soon
   after it is past, this lower world will be destroyed. At the feast of
   tabernacles, Israel left their houses to dwell in booths or green
   tents; which signifies the great weanedness of God's people from the
   world, as pilgrims and strangers on the earth, and their great joy
   therein. Israel were prepared for the feast of tabernacles by the feast
   of trumpets, and the day of atonement, both in the same month; so, way
   shall be made for the joy of the church of God, in its glorious state
   on earth, by the extraordinary preaching of the gospel, deep repentance
   and humiliation for past sins, and for the great and long-continued
   deadness and carnality of the visible church. Christ, at the great
   feast of tabernacles, stood in Jerusalem, and John vii. 37, 38. "cried,
   saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: he that
   believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall
   flow rivers of living waters:" signifying the extraordinary freedom and
   riches of divine grace towards sinners at that day, and the
   extraordinary freedom and riches of divine grace towards sinners at
   that day, and the extraordinary measures of the Holy Spirit that shall
   be then given; agreeable to Rev. xxi. 6. And xxii. 17.

   It is threatened (Zech. xiv.) that those who at that time shall not
   come to keep this feast, i.e. that shall not acknowledge God's glorious
   works, praise his name, and rejoice with his people--but who should
   stand at a distance, as unbelieving and disaffected--upon them shall be
   no rain; they shall then descend on earth, the spiritual rain spoken
   of, Isa. xliv. 3. But God would give them over to hardness of heart and
   blindness of mind. The curse is denounced against such, in a manner
   still more awful, ver. xliv. 12. "And this shall be the plague
   wherewith the Lord shall smite all the people that have fought against
   Jerusalem: their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their
   feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their
   tongue shall consume away in their mouth." Here also, in all
   probability, is intended a spiritual judgment, or a plague and curse
   from God upon the soul, rather than upon the body; that such persons,
   who at that time shall oppose God's people in his work, shall in an
   extraordinary manner be given over to a state of spiritual death and
   ruin, that they shall remarkably appear dead while alive, and shall be
   as walking rotten corpses while they go about amongst men. The great
   danger of not joining with God's people at that glorious day is also
   represented, Isa. lx. 12. "For the nation and kingdom that will not
   serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted."

   Most of the great temporal deliverances wrought for Israel of old, were
   typical of the great spiritual works of God for the salvation of souls,
   and the deliverance and prosperity of his church, in gospel days; and
   especially they represented that greatest of all deliverances of God's
   church in the latter days; which is above all others the proper season
   of actual redemption of men's souls. But it may be observed, that if
   any appeared to oppose God's work in those great temporal deliverances;
   or if there were any of his professing people, who on such occasions
   lay still, stood at a distance, or did not arise and acknowledge God in
   his work, and appear to promote it; it was what n a remarkable manner
   incensed God's anger, and brought his curse upon such persons.--When
   God wrought that great work of bringing the children of Israel out of
   Egypt, (which was a type of God's delivering his church out of the
   spiritual Egypt at the time of the fall of Antichrist, as is evident by
   Rev. xi. 8. And xv. 3.) how highly did he resent it, when the
   Amalekites appeared as opposers in that affair! And how dreadfully did
   he curse them for it! Exod. xvii. 14, 15, 16. And accordingly we find
   that God remembered it a long time after, 1 Sam. xv. 3. And how highly
   did God resent it in the Moabites and Ammonites, that they did not lend
   a helping hand, and encourage and promote the affair! Deut. xxiii.3, 4.
   "An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the
   Lord; even to their tenth generation, shall they not enter into the
   congregation of the Lord for ever; because they met you not with bread
   and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt." And how
   were the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the
   half-tribe of Manasseh threatened, if they did not go and help their
   brethren in their wars against the Canaanites! Num. xxxii. 20-23. "And
   Moses said unto them, if ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed
   before the Lord to war, and will go all of you armed over the Jordan
   before the Lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him,
   and the land be subdued before the lord; then afterward ye shall
   return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel; and this
   land shall be your possession before the Lord. But if ye will not do
   so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord; and be sure your sin will
   find you out."

   That was a glorious work which God wrought for Israel, when he
   delivered them from the Canaanites, by the hand of Deborah and Barak.
   Almost every thing about it showed a remarkable hand of God. It was a
   prophetess, one immediately inspired by God, that called the people to
   the battle, and conducted them in the whole affair. The people seem to
   have been miraculously animated and encourage in the matter, when they
   willingly offered themselves, and gathered together to the battle; they
   jeoparded their lives in the high places of the field, without being
   pressed or hired, when one would have thought they should have but
   little courage for such an undertaking. For what could a number of
   poor, weak, defenceless slaves do, without a shield or spear to be seen
   among forty thousand of them, to go against a great prince, with his
   mighty host, and nine hundred chariots of iron? And the success
   wonderfully showed the hand of God; which makes Deborah exultingly to
   say, Judg. v. 3. "O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength!" Christ
   with his heavenly host was engaged in that battle; and therefore it is
   said, ver. 20. "They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses
   fought against Sisera." The work of God therefore, in this victory and
   deliverance which Christ and his host wrought for Israel, was a type of
   what he will accomplish for his church in that great last conflict of
   the church with her open enemies, that shall introduce the church's
   latter-day glory; as appears by Rev. xvi. 16. (speaking of the great
   battle,) "And he gathered them together into a place, called n the
   Hebrew tongue, Armageddon," i.e. the mountain of Megiddo; alluding, as
   is supposed by expositors, to the place where the battle was fought
   with the host of Sisera, Judg. v. 19. "The kings came and fought, the
   kings of Canaan, in Taanach, by the waters of Megiddo." Which can
   signify nothing else than that this battle, which Christ and his church
   shall have with their enemies, is the antitype of the battle that was
   fought there. But what a dreadful curse from Christ did some of God's
   professing people Israel bring upon themselves, by lying still at that
   time, and not putting to a helping hand! Judg. v. 23. "Curse ye Meroz,
   said the angel of the Lord, cruse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof:
   because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
   against the mighty." The angel of the Lord was the captain of the host;
   he that had led Israel, and fought for them in that battle, who is very
   often called the angel of the Lord, in Scripture; the same that
   appeared to Joshua with a sword drawn in his hand, and told him that he
   was come as the captain of the host of the Lord: and the same glorious
   captain who is represented as leading forth his hosts to that battle,
   of which this was the type, Rev. xix. 11, &c. It seems the inhabitants
   of Meroz were unbelieving concerning this great work; they would not
   hearken to Deborah's pretences, nor did it enter into them that such a
   poor defenceless company should ever prevail against those that were so
   mighty. They did not acknowledge the hand of God, and therefore stood
   at a distance, and did nothing to promote the work; but what a bitter
   curse from God did they bring upon themselves by it!--It is very
   probable that one great reason why the inhabitants of Meroz were so
   unbelieving concerning this work, was, that they argued a priori; they
   did not like the beginning of it, it being a woman that first led the
   way, and had the chief conduct in the affair; or could they believe
   that such despicable instruments, as a company of unarmed slaves, were
   ever like to effect so great a thing; and pride and unbelief wrought
   together, in not being willing to follow Deborah to the battle.

   It was another glorious work of God that he wrought for Israel, in the
   victory that was obtained by Gideon over the Midianites and Amalekites,
   and the children of the east, when they came up against Israel like
   grasshoppers, a multitude that could not be numbered. This also was a
   remarkable type of the victory of Christ and his church over his
   enemies, by the pouring out of the Spirit with the preached gospel; as
   is evident by the manner in which Gideon was immediately directed of
   God, which was not by human sword or bow, but by blowing of trumpets,
   and by lights in earthen vessels. We read that, on this occasion,
   Gideon called the people together to help in this great affair; and
   that accordingly great numbers resorted to him, and came to the help of
   the lord, Judg. vii. 23, 24. But the inhabitants of Succoth and Penuel
   were unbelieving, and would not acknowledge the hand of God in that
   work, though it was so great and wonderful, nor would they join to
   promote it. Gideon desired their help, when he was pursuing after Zeba
   and Zalmunna; but they despised his pretences, and his confidence of
   the Lord being on his side, to deliver those two great princes into the
   hands of such a despicable company as he and his three hundred men, and
   would not own the work of God, nor afford Gideon any assistance. God
   proceeded in this work in a way that was exceeding cross to their
   pride. And they also refused to own the work, because they argued a
   priori; they could not believe that God would do such great things by
   such a despicable instrument, on of such a poor, mean family in
   Manasseh, and he the least in his father's house; and the company that
   was with him appeared very wretched, being but three hundred men, and
   they weak and faint. But we see how they suffered for their folly, in
   not acknowledging and appearing to promote this work of God: Gideon,
   when he returned from the victory, took them, and taught them with the
   briers and thorns of the wilderness, and beat down the tower of Penuel,
   (he brought down their pride and their false confidence,) and slew the
   men of the city, Judg. viii. This in all probability Gideon did, as
   moved and directed by the angel of the Lord, that is Christ, who first
   called him, and sent him forth in this battle, and instructed and
   directed him in the whole affair.

   The return of the ark of God to dwell in Zion, in the midst of the land
   of Israel, after it had been long absent--first in the land of the
   Philistines, and then in Kiriath-jearim, in the utmost borders of the
   land--strikingly represented the return of God to a professing people,
   in the spiritual tokens of his presence, after long absence from them.
   The ark ascending up into a mountain typified Christ's ascension into
   heaven. It is evident by the psalms that were penned on that occasion,
   especially the 68th Psalm, that the exceeding rejoicings of Israel on
   that occasion represented the joy of the church of Christ on his
   returning to it, after it has been in a low and dark state, to revive
   his work, bringing his people back, as it were, from Bashan, and from
   the depth of the sea; scattering their spiritual enemies, and causing
   that though they had lien among the pots, yet they should be as the
   wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
   gold; and giving the blessed tokens of his presence in his house, that
   his people may see the goings of God their King in the sanctuary. The
   gifts of which David, with such royal bounty, distributed amongst the
   people on that occasion, (2 Sam. vi. 18, 19. and 1 Chron. xvi. 2, 3.)
   represent spiritual blessings that Christ liberally sends down on his
   church, by the outpourings of the Spirit. See Ps. lxviii. 1, 3, 13,
   18-24. And we have an account how that all the people, from Shihor of
   Egypt, even unto the entering in of Hemath, gathered together, and
   appeared to join and assist in that great affair; and that all Israel 1
   Chron. xv. 28."brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord, with
   shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with
   cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps," 1 Chron. xiii. 2,
   5. and 1 Chron. xv. 28. And not only the men, but the women of Israel,
   the daughters of Zion appeared, as publicly joining in the praises and
   rejoicings on that occasion, 2 Sam. vi. 19. But we read of one of
   David's wives, even Michal, Saul's daughter, whose heart was not
   engaged in the affair, and did not appear with others to rejoice and
   praise God on this occasion, but kept away, and stood at a distance, as
   disaffected, and disliking the management. She despised and ridiculed
   the transports and extraordinary manifestations of joy; and the curse
   that she brought upon herself by it was that of being barren to the day
   of her death. Let this be a warning to us: let us take heed, in this
   day of the bringing up of the ark of God, that, while we are in
   visibility and profession the spouse of the spiritual David, we do not
   show ourselves to be indeed the children of false-hearted and
   rebellious Saul, by our standing aloof, and our not joining in the joy
   and praises of the day, disliking and despising the joys and affections
   of God's people because they are so high in degree, and so bring the
   curse of perpetual barrenness upon our souls.

   Let us take heed that we be not like the son of the bond-woman, born
   after the flesh, that persecuted him that was born after the Spirit,
   and mocked at the feasting and rejoicings that were made for Isaac when
   he was weaned; let we should be cast out of the family of Abraham, as
   he was, Gen. xxi. 8, 9. That affair contained spiritual mysteries, and
   was typical of things that come to pass in these days of the gospel; as
   is evident by the apostle's testimony, Gal. lv. 22, &c. And
   particularly it seems to have been typical of two things;

   First, The weaning of the church form its milk of carnal ordinances,
   ceremonies, shadows, and beggarly elements upon the coming of Christ,
   and pouring out of the Spirit in the days of the apostles. The church
   of Christ, in the times of the Old Testament, was in its minority, even
   as a babe: and the apostle tells us that babes must be fed with milk,
   and not with strong meat: but when God weaned his church from these
   carnal ordinances, on the ceasing of the legal dispensation, a glorious
   gospel-feast was provided for souls, and God fed his people with
   spiritual dainties, filled them with the Spirit, and gave them joy in
   the Holy Ghost. Ishmael in mocking at the time of Isaac's feast, by the
   apostle's testimony, represented the carnal Jews, the children of the
   literal Jerusalem, who, when they beheld the rejoicings of Christians
   in their spiritual and evangelical privileges, were filled with envy,
   deriding, contradicting, and blaspheming, (Acts ii. 13. and chap. xiii.
   45. and xviii. 6.) and therefore were cast out of the family of
   Abraham, and out of the land of Canaan, to wander through the earth.

   Secondly, This weaning of Isaac seems also to represent the conversion
   of sinners, which is several times represented in Scripture by the
   weaning of a child; as in Ps. cxxxi. and Isa. xxviii. 9. Because in
   conversion the soul is weaned from the enjoyments of the world, which
   are as it were the breast of our mother earth; and is also weaned from
   the covenant of our first parents, which we as naturally hang upon, as
   a child on its mother's breast. And the great feast that Abraham made
   on that occasion represents the spiritual feast, the heavenly
   privileges, and holy joys and comforts, which God gives to souls at
   their conversion. Now is a time when God in a remarkable manner is
   bestowing the blessings of such a feast: let every one take heed that
   he do not now show himself to be the son of the bond-woman, and born
   after the flesh, by standing and deriding, with mocking Ishmael; lest
   they be case out as he was, and it be said concerning them, "These sons
   of the bond-woman shall not be heirs with the sons of the free-woman."
   Do not let us stumble at these things, because they are so great and
   extraordinary; for if we "have run with the footmen, and they have
   wearied us, how shall we contend with horses?" There is doubtless a
   time coming when God will accomplish things vastly greater and more
   extraordinary than these.

   And that we may be warned not to continue doubting and unbelieving
   concerning this work, because of the extraordinary degree of it, and
   the suddenness and swiftness of the accomplishment of the great things
   that pertain to it; let us consider the example of the unbelieving lord
   in Samaria, who could not believe so extraordinary a work of God to be
   accomplished so suddenly as was declared to him. The prophet Elisha
   foretold that the great famine in Samaria should very suddenly, even in
   one day, be turned into an extraordinary plenty; but the work was too
   great and too sudden for him to believe; says he, "If the Lord should
   make windows in heaven, might this thing be?" And the curse that he
   brought upon himself by it his eyes, and did not eat thereof, but
   miserably perished, and was trodden down as the mire of the streets,
   when others were feasting and rejoicing, 2 Kings vii.

   When God redeemed his people from their Babylonish captivity, and they
   rebuilt Jerusalem, it was, as is universally owned, a remarkable type
   of the spiritual redemption of God's church; and particularly of the
   great deliverance of the Christian church from spiritual Babylon, and
   their rebuilding the spiritual Jerusalem, in the latter days; and
   therefore they are often spoken of as one by the prophets. And this
   probably was the main reason that it was so ordered in Providence, and
   particularly noted in Scripture, that the children of Israel, on that
   occasion, kept the greatest feast of tabernacles that ever had been
   kept in Israel since the days of Joshua, when the people were first
   settled in Canaan. (Neh. viii. 16, 17.) For at that time happened that
   restoration of Israel, which had the greatest resemblance of the great
   restoration of the church of God, of which the feast of tabernacles was
   the type, of any that had been since Joshua first brought the people
   out of the wilderness, and settled them in the good land. But we read
   of some that opposed the Jews in that affair, weakened their hands,
   ridiculed God's people, the instruments employed in that work, despised
   their hopes, and made as though their confidence was little more than a
   shadow, and would utterly fail them: "What do these feeble Jews? (say
   they,) will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they
   make an end in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of
   the rubbish which are burnt? Even that which they build, if a fox go
   up, he shall even break down their stone wall." Let not us be in any
   measure like them, lest it be said to us, as Nehemiah said to them,
   Neh. ii. 20. "We his servants will arise and build; but you have no
   portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem." And lest we bring
   Nehemiah's imprecations upon us, chap. iv. 5. "Cover not their
   iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee; for
   they have provoked thee to anger before the builders."

   As persons will greatly expose themselves to the curse of God, by
   opposing, or standing at a distance, and keeping silence at such a time
   as this; so for persons to arise, and readily to acknowledge God, and
   honour him in such a work, and cheerfully and vigorously to exert
   themselves to promote it, will be to put themselves much in the way of
   the divine blessing. What a mark of honour does God put upon those in
   Israel, that willingly offered themselves, and came to the help of the
   Lord against the mighty, when the angel of the Lord led forth his
   armies, and they fought from heaven against Sisera! Judg. v. 2, 9,
   14-18. And what a great blessing is pronounced on Jael, the wife of
   Heber the Kenite, for her appearing on the Lord's side, and for what
   she did to promote that work! Judges v. 24. "Blessed above women shall
   Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women
   in the tent." And what a blessing is pronounced on those which shall
   have any hand in the destruction of Babylon, which was the head city of
   the kingdom of Satan, and of the enemies of the church of God! Psal.
   cxxxvii. 9. "Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones
   against the stones." What a particular and honourable notice is taken,
   in the records of God's work, of those that arose and appeared as
   David's helpers, to introduce him into the kingdom of Israel! 1 Chron.
   xii. The host of those who thus came to the help of the Lord, in that
   glorious revolution in Israel, by which the kingdom of that great type
   of the Messiah was set up in Israel, is compared to the host of God,
   (ver. 22.) "At that time, day by day, there came to David to help him,
   until it was a great host, like the host of God." And doubtless it was
   intended to be a type of the host that shall appear with the spiritual
   David, as his helpers, when he shall come to set up his kingdom in the
   world; the same host that we read of, Rev. xiv. 14. The Spirit of God
   then pronounced a special blessing on David's helpers, as co-workers
   with God, ( ver. 18. "Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief
   of the captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side,
   thou son of Jesse: Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine
   helpers; for they God helpeth thee." So we may conclude, that God will
   much more give his blessing to such as come to the help of the Lord,
   when he sets his own dear Son as King on his holy hill of Zion. They
   shall be received by Christ, and he will put peculiar honour upon them,
   as David did on those his helpers; as we have an account in the
   following words, ( ver. 18. "Then David received them, and made them

   captains of the band." It is particularly noted of those that came to
   David to Hebron, ready armed to the war, to turn the kingdom of Saul to
   him, according to the word of the Lord, that "they were men that had
   understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do," ver. 23,
   and 32. Wherein they differed from the Pharisees and other Jews, who
   did not come to the help of the Lord, at the time that the great Son of
   David appeared to set up his kingdom in the world. These Christ
   condemns, because they had not "understanding of those times," Luke
   xii. 56. "Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the
   earth; but how is it that ye do not discern these times;" so it will
   always be, when Christ remarkably appears on earth, on a design of
   setting up his kingdom here; many will not understand the times, nor
   what Israel ought to do, and so will not come to turn about the kingdom
   to David.

   The favourable notice that God will take of such as appear to promote
   the work of God, at such a time as this, may also be argued from such a
   very particular notice being taken in the sacred records, of those that
   helped in rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, upon the return from the
   Babylonian captivity, Nehem. Chap. iii.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   The obligations of rulers, ministers, and all sorts to promote this
   work.

   At such a time as this, when God is setting his King on his holy hill
   of Zion, or establishing his dominion, or showing forth his regal glory
   from thence, he expects that his visible people, without exception,
   should openly appear to acknowledge him in such a work, and bow before
   him, and join with him. But especially does he expect this of civil
   rulers: God's eye is especially upon them, to see how they behave
   themselves on such occasions. When a new king comes to the throne, if
   he comes from abroad, and enters into his kingdom, and makes his solemn
   entry into the royal city, it is expected that all sorts should
   acknowledge him; but above all others is it expected that the great
   men, and public officers of the nation, should then make their
   appearance, and attend on their sovereign, with suitable
   congratulations, and manifestations of respect and loyalty. If such as
   these stand at a distance at such a time, it will be much more noticed;
   and will awaken the prince's jealousy and displeasure much more, than
   such a behaviour in the common people. And Thus it is, when that
   eternal Son of God, and heir of the world--by whom kings reign, and
   princes decree justice, and whom his Father has appointed to be King of
   kings--comes as it were from far, and in the spiritual tokens of his
   presence enters into the royal city of Zion. God has his eye at such a
   time, especially, upon those prices, nobles, and judges of the earth,
   spoken of, Prov. viii. 16. To see how they behave themselves, whether
   they bow to him, who is made the head of all principality and power.
   This is evident by Psal. ii. 6, 7, 10-12. "Yet have I set my King upon
   my holy hill of Zion. I will declare the decree; the Lord hat said unto
   me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.--Be wise now
   therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the
   Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be
   angry and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
   little." There seems to be in the words an allusion to a new king
   coming to the throne, and making his solemn entry into they royal city,
   when it is expected that all, especially men in public office and
   authority should manifest their loyalty, by some open and visible
   tokens of respect, by the way, as he passes along; and those that
   refuse or neglect it, are in danger of being immediately struck down,
   and perishing from the way, by which the king goes in solemn
   procession.

   The day wherein God, in an eminent manner, sends forth the rod of
   Christ's strength out of Zion, that he may rule in the midst of his
   enemies, the day of his power wherein his people shall be made willing,
   is also eminently a day of his wrath, especially to such rulers as
   oppose him, or will not bow to him. It will prove a day wherein he
   "shall strike through kings, and fill the places with the dead bodies,
   and wound the heads over many countries," Psal. cx. And thus it is,
   that when the Son of God Psalms xlv. 4."girds his sword upon his thigh,
   with his glory and his majesty, and in his majesty rides prosperously,
   because of truth, meekness, and righteousness, his right hand teaches
   him terrible things." They were the princes of Succoth especially who
   suffered punishment, when the inhabitants of that city refused to come
   to the help of the Lord. When Gideon was pursuing after Zeba and
   Zalmunna, we read that Gideon took the elders of the city, and thorns
   of the wilderness, and briers, and with them he taught the men of
   Succoth. It is especially noticed, that the rulers and chief men of
   Israel, were called upon to assist in the affair of bringing up the ark
   of God; they were chiefly consulted, and were principal in the
   management of the affair, 1 Chron. xiii. 1. "And David consulted with
   the captains of thousands and hundreds, and with every leader." And
   chap. xv. 25. "So David and the elders of Israel, and the captains over
   thousands, went to bring up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, out of
   the house of Obed-Edom, with joy." So 2 Sam. vi. 1. And so it was when
   the ark was brought into the temple, (1 Kings viii. 1, 3. and 2 Chron.
   v. 2, 4.)

   And as rulers, by neglecting their duty at such a time, will especially
   expose themselves to God's great displeasure; so by fully acknowledging
   God in such a work, and by cheerfully and vigorously exerting
   themselves to promote it, they will especially be in the way of
   receiving peculiar honours and rewards at God's hands. It is noted of
   the princes of Israel, that they especially appeared to honour God with
   their princely offering, on occasion of setting up the tabernacle of
   God in the congregation of Israel. I have observed already that this
   was done at the time of the feast of tabernacles, and was a type of the
   tabernacle of God being with men and his dwelling with men in the
   latter days. And with what abundant particularity is it noted of each
   prince, how much he offered to God on that occasion, for his
   everlasting honour, in the 7th chapter of Numbers! And so, with how
   much favour and honour does the Spirit of God take notice of those
   princes in Israel, who came to the help of the Lord, in the war against
   Sisera!Judg. v. 9. "My heart is towards the governors of Israel, that
   offered themselves willingly among the people." And, ( ver. 14.) "Out
   of Machir came down governors." ( ver. 15.) "and the princes of
   Issachar were with Deborah." And in the account we have of rebuilding
   the wall of Jerusalem, Neh. iii. It is particularly noted what a hand
   one and another of the rulers had in this affair; such a part of the
   wall was repaired by the ruler of the other half-part of Jerusalem, and
   such a part by the ruler of part of Beth Hakkerem, and such a part by
   the ruler of part of Beth Zur; and such a part by the ruler of Mizpah,
   ver. 9-19. And there it is particularly noted of the rulers of one of
   the cities, that they put not their necks to the work of the Lord,
   though the common people did; and they are stigmatized for it in the
   sacred records, to their everlasting reproach, ( ver. 5.). "And next
   unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not their necks
   to the work of the Lord." So the Spirit of God, with special honour,
   takes notice of princes and rulers of several tribes, who assisted in
   bringing up the ark, Psal. lxviii. 27.

   And I humbly desire it may be considered, whether we have not reason to
   fear, that God is provoked with this land, because no more notice has
   been taken of the late glorious work by the civil authority; that no
   more has been done by them as a public acknowledgment of God in this
   work, and no more improvement of their authority to promote it. This
   might have been done, either by appointing a day of public thanksgiving
   to God for so unspeakable a mercy, or a day of fasting and prayer, to
   humble ourselves before God for our past deadness and unprofitableness
   under the means of grace, and to seek the continuance and increase of
   the tokens of his presence. Can it be pleasing to God, that the civil
   authority have not so much as entered upon any public consultation,
   what should be done to advance the present revival of religion, and
   great reformation that is begun in the land? Is there not danger that
   such a behaviour, at such a time, will be interpreted by God, as a
   denial of Christ? If but a new governor comes into a province, how much
   is there done, especially by those who are in authority, to put honour
   upon him! They arise, appear publicly, and go forth to meet, to
   address, and congratulate him, and with great expense to attend and aid
   him! If the authority, or a refusing to receive and honour him as their
   governor? And shall the head of the angels, and Lord of the universe,
   come down from heaven, in so wonderful a manner, into a land; and shall
   all stand at a distance and be silent and inactive on such an occasion?
   I would humbly recommend it to our rulers to consider whether God does
   not now say to them, "Be wise now, ye rulers; be instructed, ye judges
   of New England: kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
   way."

   It is prophesied, Zech. xii. 8. That, in the glorious day of the
   Christian church, the house of David, or the rulers in God's "Israel,
   shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord, before his people." But how
   can such rulers expect to have any share in this glorious promise, who
   do not so much as openly acknowledge God in the work of that Spirit, by
   whom the glory of that day is to be accomplished? The days are coming,
   when the saints shall reign on earth, and all dominion and authority
   shall be given into their hands; but, if our rulers would partake of
   this honour, they ought, at such a day as this, to bring their glory
   and honour into the spiritual Jerusalem, agreeable to Rev. xxi. 24.

   But, above all others, is God's eye upon the ministers of the gospel,
   as expecting of them, that they should arise, acknowledge, and honour
   him in such a work as this, and do their utmost to encourage and
   promote it. For this is the very business to which they are called and
   devoted; it is the office to which they are appointed, as co-workers
   with Christ. They are his ambassadors and instruments, to awaken and
   convert sinners, and establish, build up, and comfort saints; it is the
   business they have been solemnly charged with, before God, angels, and
   men, and to which they have given up themselves by the most sacred
   vows. These especially are the officers of Christ's kingdom, who, above
   all other men upon earth, represent his person; into whose hands Christ
   has committed the sacred oracles, holy ordinances, and all his
   appointed means of grace, to be administered by them. They are the
   stewards of his household, into whose hands he has committed to them,
   as a flock of sheep are committed to the care of a shepherd, or as a
   master commits a treasure tot he care of a servant, of which he must
   give an account. It is expected of them, above all others, that they
   should have understanding of the times, and know what Israel ought to
   do; for it is their business to acquaint themselves with things
   pertaining to the kingdom of God, and to teach and enlighten others in
   the same. We who are employed in the sacred work of the gospel
   ministry, are the watchmen over the city, to whom God has committed the
   keys of the gates of Zion; and if, when the rightful King of Zion comes
   to deliver his people from the enemy that oppresses them, we refuse to
   open the gates to him, how greatly shall we expose ourselves to his
   wrath! We are appointed to be the captains of the host in this war; and
   if a general will highly resent it in a private soldier, if he refuses
   to follow him when his banner is displayed, and his trumpet blown; how
   much more will he resent it in the officers of his army! The work of
   the gospel-ministry, consisting in the administration of God's word and
   ordinances, is the principal means that God has appointed for carrying
   on his work on the souls of men; and it is his revealed will, that
   whenever that glorious revival of religion, and reformation of the
   world, so often spoken of in his word, is accomplished, it should be
   principally by the labours of his ministers. Therefore, how heinous
   will it be in the sight of God, if, when a work of that nature is
   begun, we appear unbelieving, slow, backward, and disaffected! There
   was no sort of persons among the Jews treated with such manifestations
   of God's great displeasure, and severe indignation, for not
   acknowledging Christ, and the work of his Spirit, in the days of Christ
   and his apostles, as the ministers of religion. See how Christ deals
   with them for it, Matt. xxiii. With what gentleness did Christ treat
   publicans and harlots, in comparison of them!

   When the tabernacle was erected in the camp of Israel, and God came
   down from heaven to dwell in it, the priests were above all others
   concerned, and busily employed in the solemn transactions of that
   occasion, Lev. viii. and ix. And so it was at the time of the
   dedication of the temple by Solomon, (1 Kings viii. and 2 Chron. v. vi.
   and vii.) which was at the time of the feast of tabernacles, the same
   as when the tabernacle was erected in the wilderness. And the Levites
   were primarily and most immediately concerned in bringing up the ark
   into mount Zion; the business properly belonged to them, and the ark
   was carried upon their shoulders, "Then David said, None ought to carry
   the ark of God but the Levites; for them hath the Lord chosen to carry
   the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever." and ( ver. 11, 12.)
   "And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the
   Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and
   Amminadab, and said unto the, Ye are the chief of the fathers of the
   Levites; sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that you may
   bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel, unto the place that I have
   prepared for it." So we have an account that the priests led the way in
   rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, after the Babylonish captivity, Neh.
   iii.

   Though ministers preach never so good doctrine, and be never so painful
   and laborious in their work, yet if they show to their people that they
   are not well-affected to this work, but are doubtful and suspicious of
   it, they will be very likely to do their people a great deal more hurt
   than good. For the very fame of such a great and extraordinary work of
   God, if their people were suffered to believe it to be his work, and
   the examples of other towns, together with what preaching they might
   hear occasionally, would be likely to have a much greater influence
   upon the minds of their people to awaken and animate them in religion,
   than all other labours with them. Besides, their ministers' opinion
   will not only beget in them a suspicion of the work they hear of
   abroad, whereby the mighty hand of God that appears in it loses its
   influence upon their minds; but it will also tend to create a suspicion
   of every thing of the like nature, that shall appear among themselves,
   as being something of the same distemper that is become so epidemical
   in the land. And what is this, in effect, but to create a suspicion of
   all vital religion, and to put the people upon talking against and
   discouraging it, wherever it appears, and knocking it on the head as
   fast as it rises. We, who are ministers, by looking on this work from
   year to year with a displeased countenance, shall effectually keep the
   sheep from their pasture, instead of doing the part of shepherds by
   feeding them; and our people had a great deal better be without any
   settled minister at all, at such a day as this.

   We who are in this sacred office had need to take heed what we do, and
   how we behave ourselves at this time: a less thing in a minister will
   hinder the work of God, than in others. If we are very silent, or say
   but little about the work, in our public prayers and preaching, or seem
   carefully to avoid speaking of it in our conversation, it will be
   interpreted by our people, that we, who are their guides, to whom they
   are to have their eye for spiritual instruction, are suspicious of it;
   and this will tend to raise the same suspicions in them; and so the
   formentioned consequences will follow. And if we really hinder and
   stand in the way of the work of God, whose business above all others it
   is to promote it, how can we expect to partake of the glorious benefits
   of it? And, by keeping others from the benefit, we shall keep them out
   of heaven; therefore those awful words of Christ to the Jewish
   teachers, should be considered by us, Matt. xxiii. 13. "Woe unto you,
   for you shut up the kingdom of heaven;--for ye neither go in
   yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go in." If we
   keep the sheep from their pasture, how shall we answer it to the great
   Shepherd, who has bought the flock with his precious blood, and has
   committed the care of them to us? I would humbly desire of every
   minister that has long remained disaffected to this work, and has had
   contemptible thoughts of it, to consider whether he has not hitherto
   been like Michal, without any child, or at least in a great measure
   barren and unsuccessful in his work: I pray God it may not be a
   perpetual barrenness, as hers was.

   The times of Christ's remarkably appearing in behalf of his church, to
   revive religion, and advance his kingdom in the world, are often spoken
   of in the prophecies of Scripture, as times wherein he will remarkably
   execute judgements on such ministers or shepherds as do not feed the
   flock, but hinder their being fed, and so will deliver his flock from
   them, (Jer. xxiii. throughout, and Ezek. xxxiv. throughout, and Zech.
   x. 3. and Isa. lvi. 7, 8, 9. , &c.) I observed before, that Christ's
   solemn, magnificent entry into Jerusalem, seems to be designed as a
   representation of his glorious coming into his church, the spiritual
   Jerusalem; and therefore it is worthy to be noted, to our present
   purpose, that Christ at that time cast out all them who sold and bought
   in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the
   seats of them that sold doves; signifying that, when he should come to
   set up his kingdom on earth, he would cast out those out of his house,
   who, instead of being faithful ministers, officiated there only for
   worldly gain. Not that I determine, that all ministers who are
   suspicious of this work, do so; but I mention these things to show why
   it is to be expected, that a time of a glorious outpouring of the
   Spirit of God to revive religion, will be a time of remarkable
   judgments on those ministers who do not serve the end of their
   ministry.

   The example of the unbelieving lord in Samaria should especially be for
   the warning of ministers and rulers. At the time when God turned an
   extreme famine into great plenty, by a wonderful work of his, the king
   appointed this lord to have the charge of the gate of the city; where
   he saw the common people, in multitudes, entering with great joy and
   gladness, laden with provision, to feed and feast their almost famished
   bodies; but he himself, though he saw it with his eyes, never had one
   taste of it, but, being weak with famine, sunk down in the crowd, and
   was trodden to death, as a punishment of God for his not giving credit
   to that great and wonderful work of God, when sufficiently manifested
   to him to require his belief.-- Ministers are those whom the King of
   the church has appointed to have the charge of the gate at which his
   people enter into the kingdom of heaven, there to be entertained and
   satisfied with an eternal feast, i.e. ministers have the charge of the
   house of God, which is the gate of heaven.

   They should especially take heed of a spirit of envy towards other
   ministers, whom God is pleased to use for carrying on this work more
   than they; and that they do not from such a spirit, reproach some
   preachers who have the true spirit, as though they were influenced by a
   false spirit--or were bereft of reason, were mad, and proud, false
   pretenders, and deserved to be put in prison or the stocks, as
   disturbers of the peace--lest they expose themselves to the curse of
   Shemaiah the Nehelamite, who envied the prophet Jeremiah, and in this
   manner reviled him, in his letter to Zephaniah the priest, Jer. xxix.
   26, 27. "The Lord hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the
   priest, that ye should be officers in the house of the Lord, for every
   man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put
   him in prison, and in the stocks. Now therefore, why hast thou not
   reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you?"
   His curse is denounced in the 32d ver. "Therefore thus saith the Lord,
   Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehemalite, and his seed; he shall
   not have a man to dwell among his people, saith the Lord, because he
   hath taught rebellion against the Lord." All superiors or elders should
   take heed, that at this day they be not like the elder brother, who
   could not bear that the prodigal should be sumptuously entertained, and
   would not join in the joy of the feast. He was like Michal, Saul's
   daughter, offended at the music and dancing that he hear; the
   transports of joy displeased him; it seemed to him to be an unseemly
   and unseasonable noise; and therefore stood at a distance, sullen, and
   much offended, and full of invectives against the young prodigal.

   It is our wisest and best way, fully, and without reluctance, to bow to
   the great God in this work, and to be entirely resigned to him, with
   respect to the manner in which he carries it on, and the instruments he
   is pleased to use. Let us not show ourselves out of humour, and
   sullenly refuse to acknowledge the work in its full glory, because we
   have not had so great a hand in promoting it, or have not shared so
   largely in its blessings, as some others. Let us not refuse to give all
   that honour which belongs to others as instruments, because they are
   young, or are upon other accounts much inferior to ourselves and
   others; and may appear to us very unworthy that God should put so much
   honour upon them. When God comes to accomplish any great work for his
   church, and for the advancement of the kingdom of his Son, he always
   fulfils that scripture, Isa. ii. 17. "And the loftiness of man shall be
   bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord
   alone shall be exalted in that day." If God has a design of carrying on
   this work, every one, whether he be great of small, must either bow to
   it, or be broken before it. It may be expected that God's hand will be
   upon every thing that is high, and stiff, and strong in opposition; as
   in Isa. ii. 12-15. "For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon
   every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted
   up, and he shall be brought low; and upon all the cedars of Lebanon ,
   that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, and upon
   all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and
   upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall."

   Not only magistrates and ministers, but every living soul, is now
   obliged to arise and acknowledge God in this work, and put to his hand
   to promote it, as they would not expose themselves to God's curse. All
   sorts of persons throughout the whole congregation of Israel, great and
   small, rich and poor, men and women, helped to build the tabernacle in
   the wilderness; some in one way, others in another; each one according
   to his capacity: every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one
   whom his spirit made willing; all sorts contributed and all sorts were
   employed in that affair, in labours of their hands, both men and women.
   Some brought gold and silver, others blue, purple, and scarlet, and
   fine linen; others offered an offering of brass; others, with whom was
   found shittim-wood, brought it an offering to the Lord; the rulers
   brought onyx-stones, and spice, and oil; and some brought goats' hair,
   some rams' skins, and others badgers' skins. (See Exod. xxxv. 20, &c.)
   And we are told, ver. 29. "The children of Israel brought a willing
   offering unto the Lord, every man and woman, whose heart made them
   willing." And thus it ought to be in this day of building the
   tabernacle of God; with such a willing and cheerful heart ought every
   man, woman, and child, to something to promote this work; those who
   have not onyx-stones, or are not able to bring gold or silver, yet may
   bring goats' hair.

   As all sorts of persons were employed in building the tabernacle in the
   wilderness, so the whole congregation of Israel were called together to
   set up the tabernacle in Shiloh, after they came into Canaan, Josh.
   xviii. 1. And the whole congregation of Israel was gathered together,
   to bring up the ark of God from Kirjath-jearim. Again, they were all
   assembled to bring it up out of the house of Obed-Edom into mount Zion;
   so again, all Israel met together to assist in the great affair of the
   dedication of the temple, and bring the ark into it. So we have and
   account, how that all sorts assisted in the rebuilding the wall of
   Jerusalem, not only the proper inhabitants of Jerusalem, but those that
   dwelt in other parts of the land; not only the priests and rulers, but
   the Nethinims and merchants, husbandmen and mechanics, and even women,
   Neh. iii. 5, 12, 26, 31, 32. And we have an account of one and another,
   that he repaired over against his house, ver. 10, 23, 28. And one that
   repaired over against his chamber, ver. 30. So now, at this time of the
   rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, every one ought to promote the work
   of God of Jerusalem, every one ought to promote the work of God within
   his own sphere, and by doing what belongs to him, in the place in which
   God has set him. Men in a private capacity may repair over against
   their houses; and even those that have not the government of families,
   and have but a part of a house belonging to them, should repair each
   one over against his chamber. Every one should be engaged to do the
   utmost that lies in his power, labouring with watchfulness, care, and
   diligence, with united hearts, and united strength, and the greatest
   readiness to assist one another in this work; as God's people rebuilt
   the wall of Jerusalem, who were so diligent in the work, that they
   wrought from break of day till the stars appeared, and did not so much
   as put off their clothes in the night. They wrought with great care and
   watchfulness; with one hand they laboured in the work, and with the
   other they held a weapon, besides the guard they set to defend them.
   They were so well united in it, that they appointed one to stand ready
   with a trumpet in his hand, that, if any were assaulted in one part,
   those in the other parts, at the sound of the trumpet, might resort to
   them, and help them. Neh. iv.

   Great care should be taken that the press should be improved to no
   purpose contrary to the interest of this work. We read, that when God
   fought against Sisera, for the deliverance of his oppressed church,
   they that handle the pen of the writer came to the help of the Lord in
   that affair, Judges v. 14. Whatever sort of men in Israel were
   intended, yet, as the words were indicted by a spirit that had a
   perfect view of all events to the end of the world, and had a special
   eve in this song, to that great event of the deliverance of God's
   church in the latter days, of which this deliverance of Israel was a
   type, it is not unlikely that they have respect to authors, who should
   fight against the kingdom of Satan with their pens. Those therefore
   that publish pamphlets to the disadvantage of this work, and tend
   either directly or indirectly to bring it under suspicion, and to
   discourage or hinder it, would do well thoroughly to consider whether
   this be not indeed the work of God; and whether, if it be, it is not
   likely that God will go forth as fire, to consume all that stand in his
   way; and whether there be not danger that the fire kindled in them will
   scorch the authors.

   When a people oppose Christ in the work of his Holy Spirit, it is
   because it touches them in something that is dear to their carnal
   minds, and because they see the tendency of it is to cross their pride,
   and deprive them of the objects of their lusts. We should take heed
   that at this day we be not like the Gadarenes, who--when Christ came
   into their country in the exercise of his glorious power and grace,
   triumphing over a legion of devils, and delivering a miserable creature
   that had long been their captive--were all alarmed, because they lost
   their swine by it; and a whole multitude of the country came, and
   besought him to depart out of their coasts. They loved their filthy
   swine better than Jesus Christ; and had rather have a legion of devils
   in their country with their herd of swine, than Jesus Christ without
   them.

   This work may be opposed in other ways, besides by directly speaking
   against the whole of it. Persons may say that they believe there is a
   good work carried on in the country; and may sometimes bless God, in
   their public prayers, in general terms, for any awakenings or revivals
   of religion there have lately been in any part of the land; and may
   pray that God would carry on his own work, and pour out his Spirit more
   and more; and yet, as I apprehend, be in the sight of God great
   opposers of his work. Some will express themselves after this manner,
   who are so far from acknowledging and rejoicing in the infinite mercy
   and glorious grace of God in causing so happy a change, that they look
   on the religious state of the country, take it on the whole, much more
   sorrowful than it was ten years ago; and whose conversation, to those
   who are well acquainted with them, evidently shows, that they are more
   out of humour with the state of things, and enjoy themselves less, than
   they did before ever this work began. If it be manifestly thus with us,
   and our talk and behaviour with respect to this work be such as has
   though but an indirect tendency to beget ill thoughts and suspicions in
   others concerning it, we are opposers of the work of God.

   Instead of coming to the help of the Lord, we shall actually fight
   against him, if we are abundant in insisting on and setting forth the
   blemishes of the work; so as to manifest that we rather choose and are
   more forward to take notice of what is amiss, than what is good and
   glorious in the work. Not but that the errors committed ought to be
   observed and lamented, and a proper testimony borne against them, and
   the most probable means should be used to have them amended; but
   insisting much upon them, as though it were a pleasing theme, or
   speaking of them with more appearance of heat of spirit, or with
   ridicule, or an air of contempt, than grief for them, has no tendency
   to correct the errors; but has a tendency to darken the glory of God's
   power and grace appearing in the substance of the work, and to beget
   jealousies and ill thoughts in the minds of others concerning the whole
   of it. Whatever errors many zealous persons have ran into, yet if the
   work, in the substance of it, be the work of God, then it is a joyful
   day indeed; it is so in heaven, and ought to be so among God's people
   on earth, especially in that part of the earth where this glorious work
   is carried on. It is a day of great rejoicing with Christ himself, the
   good Shepherd, when he finds his sheep that was lost, lays it on his
   shoulders rejoicing, and calls together his friends and neighbours,
   saying, Rejoice with me. If we therefore are Christ's friends, now it
   should be a day of great rejoicing with us. If we viewed things in a
   just light, so great an event as the conversion of such a multitude of
   sinners, would draw and engage our attention much more than all the
   imprudences and irregularities that have been; our hearts would be
   swallowed up with the glory of this event, and we should have no great
   disposition to attend to any thing else. The imprudences and errors of
   poor feeble worms do not prevent great rejoicing, in the presence of
   the angels of God, over so many poor sinners that have repented; and it
   will be an argument of something very ill in us, if they prevent our
   rejoicing.

   Who loves, in a day of great joy and gladness, to be much insisting on
   those things that are uncomfortable? Would it not be very improper, on
   a king's coronation day, to be much in taking notice of the blemishes
   of the royal family? Or would it be agreeable to the bridegroom, on the
   day of his espousals, the day of the gladness of his heart, to be much
   insisting on the blemishes of his bride? We have an account, how at the
   time of that joyful dispensation of Providence, the restoration of the
   church of Israel after the Babylonian captivity, and at the time of the
   feast of tabernacles, many wept at the faults which were found amongst
   the people, but were reproved for taking so much notice of the
   blemishes of that affair, as to overlook the cause of rejoicing. Neh.
   viii. 9-12. "And Nehemiah which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest
   the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people said unto all the
   people, This day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not nor weep:
   For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law. Then he
   said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send
   portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared; for this day is holy
   unto the Lord; neither be you sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your
   strength. So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your
   peace, for the day is holy, neither be you grieved. And all the people
   went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make
   great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared
   unto them."

   God doubtless now expects, that all sorts of persons in New England,
   rulers, ministers, and people, high and low, rich and poor, old and
   young, should take great notice of his hand in this mighty work of his
   grace, and should appear to acknowledge his glory in it, and greatly to
   rejoice in it, every one doing his utmost, in the place where God has
   set them in, to promote it. And God, according to his wonderful
   patience, seems to be still waiting to give us opportunity thus to
   acknowledge and honour him. But, if we finally refuse, there is not the
   least reason to expect any other than that his awful curse will pursue
   us, and that the pourings out of his wrath will be proportionable to
   the despised outpourings of his Spirit and grace.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   SHOWING, IN MANY INSTANCES, WHEREIN THE SUBJECTS, OR ZEALOUS PROMOTERS,
   OF THIS WORK HAVE BEEN INJURIOUSLY BLAMED.

   This work, which has lately been carried on in the land, is the work of
   God, and not the work of man. Its beginning has not been of man's power
   or device, and its being carried on depends no on our strength or
   wisdom; but yet God expects of all, that they should use their utmost
   endeavours to promote it, and that the hearts of all should be greatly
   engaged in this affair. We should improve our utmost strength in it,
   however vain human strength is without the power of god; and so he no
   less requires that we should improve our utmost care, wisdom, and
   prudence, though human wisdom, of itself, be as vain as human strength.
   Though God is wont to carry on such a work, in such a manner as many
   ways to show the weakness and vanity of means and human endeavours in
   themselves; yet, at the same time, he carries it on in such a manner as
   to encourage diligence and vigilance in the use of proper means and
   endeavours, and to punish the neglect of them. Therefore, in our
   endeavours to promote this great work, we ought to use the utmost
   caution, vigilance, and skill, in the measures we take in order to it.
   A great affair should be managed with great prudence. This is the most
   important affair that ever New England was called to be concerned in.
   When a people are engaged in war with a powerful and crafty nation, it
   concerns them to manage an affair of such consequence with the utmost
   discretion. Of what vast importance then must it be, that we should be
   vigilant and prudent in the management of this great war with so great
   a host of subtle and cruel enemies. We must either conquer or be
   conquered; and the consequence of the victory, on one side, will be our
   eternal destruction in both soul and body in hell, and on the other
   side, our obtaining the kingdom of heaven, and reigning in it in
   eternal glory! We had need always to stand on our watch, and to be well
   versed in the art of war, and not be ignorant of the devices of our
   enemies, and to take heed lest by any means we be beguiled through
   their subtlety.

   Though the devil be strong, yet, in such a war as this, he depends more
   on his craft than his strength. The course he has chiefly taken, from
   time to time, to clog, hinder, and overthrow revivals of religion in
   the church of God, has been by his subtle, deceitful management, to
   beguile and mislead those that have been engaged therein; and in such a
   course God has been pleased, in his holy and sovereign providence, to
   suffer him to succeed, oftentimes, in a great measure, to overthrow
   that which in its beginning appeared most hopeful and glorious. The
   work now begun, as I have shown, is eminently glorious, and, if it
   should go on and prevail, it would make New England a kind of heaven
   upon earth. Is it not therefore a thousand pities that it should be
   overthrown, through wrong and improper management, which we are led
   into by our subtle adversary, in our endeavours to promote it?--My
   present design is to take notice of some things at which offence has
   been taken beyond just bounds.

   I. One thing that has been complained of is, ministers addressing
   themselves rather to the affections of their hearers than to their
   understandings, and striving to raise their passions to the utmost
   height, rather by a very affectionate manner of speaking, and a great
   appearance of earnestness in voice and gesture, than by clear
   reasoning, and informing their judgment: by which means it is objected
   that the affections are moved, without a proportionable enlightening of
   the understanding.

   To which I would say, I am far from thinking that it is not very
   profitable for ministers, in their preaching, to endeavour clearly and
   distinctly to explain the doctrines of religion, and unravel the
   difficulties that attend them, and to confirm them with strength of
   reason and argumentation, and also to observe some easy and clear
   method in their discourses, for the help of the understanding and
   memory; and it is very probable that these things have been of late too
   much neglected by many ministers. Yet I believe that the objection
   made, of affections raised without enlightening the understanding, is
   in a great measure built on a mistake, and confused notions that some
   have about the nature and cause of the affections, and the manner in
   which they depend on the understanding. All affections are raised
   either by light in the understanding, or by some error and delusion in
   the understanding: for all affections do certainly arise from some
   apprehension in the understanding; and that apprehension must either be
   agreeable to truth, or else be some mistake or delusion; if it be an
   apprehension or notion that is agreeable to truth, then it is light in
   the understanding. Therefore the thing to be inquired into is, whether
   the apprehensions or notions of divine and eternal things, that are
   raised in people's minds by these affectionate preachers, whence their
   affections are excited, be apprehensions agreeable to truth, or whether
   they are mistakes. If the former, then the affections are raised the
   way they should be, viz. by informing the mind, or conveying light to
   the understanding. They go away with a wrong notion, who think that
   those preachers cannot affect their hearers by enlightening their
   understandings, except by such a distinct and learned handling of the
   doctrinal points of religion, as depends on human discipline, or the
   strength of natural reason, and tends to enlarge their hearers'
   learning, and speculative knowledge in divinity. The manner of
   preaching without this, may be such as shall tend very much to set
   divine and eternal things in a right view, and to give the hearers such
   ideas and apprehensions of them as are agreeable to truth, and such
   impressions on their hearts as are answerable to the real nature of
   things. And beside the words that are spoken, the manner of speaking
   has a great tendency to this. I think an exceeding affectionate way of
   preaching about the great things of religion, has in itself no tendency
   to beget false apprehensions of them; but on the contrary, a much
   greater tendency to beget true apprehensions of them, than a moderate,
   dull, indifferent way of speaking of them. An appearance of affection
   and earnestness in the manner of delivery, though very great indeed, if
   it be agreeable to the nature of the subject--and be not beyond a
   proportion to its importance, and worthiness of affection, and if there
   be no appearance of its being feigned or forced--has so much the
   greater tendency to beget true ideas or apprehensions in the minds of
   the hearers concerning the subject spoken of, and so to enlighten the
   understanding: and that for this reason, That such a way or manner of
   speaking of these things does, in fact, more truly represent them, than
   a more cold and indifferent way of speaking of them. If the subject be
   in its own nature worthy of very great affection, then speaking of it
   with very great affection is most agreeable to the nature of that
   subject, or is the truest representation of it, and therefore has most
   of a tendency to beget true ideas o fit in the minds of those to whom
   the representation is made. And I do not think ministers are to be
   blamed for raising the affections of their hearers too high, if that
   which they are affected with be only that which is worthy of affection,
   and their affections are not raised beyond a proportion to their
   importance, or worthiness of affection. I should think myself in the
   way of my duty, to raise the affections of my hearers as high as
   possibly I can, provided that they are affected with nothing but truth,
   and with affections that are not disagreeable to the nature of the
   subject. I know it has long been fashionable to despise a very earnest
   and pathetical way of preaching; and they only have been valued as
   preachers, who have shown the greatest extent of learning, strength of
   reason, and correctness of method and language. But I humbly conceive
   it has been for want of understanding or duly considering human nature,
   that such preaching has been thought to have the greatest tendency to
   answer the ends of preaching; and the experience of the present and
   past ages abundantly confirms the same. Though, as I said before,
   clearness of distinction and illustration, and strength of reason, and
   a good method, in the doctrinal handling of the truths of religion, is
   many ways needful and profitable, and not to be neglected; yet an
   increase in speculative knowledge in divinity is not what is so much
   needed by our people as something else. Men may abound in this sort of
   light, and have no heat. How much has there been of this sort of
   knowledge, in the Christian world, in this age! Was there ever an age,
   wherein strength and penetration of reason, extent of learning,
   exactness of distinction, correctness of style, and clearness of
   expression, did so abound? And yet, was there ever an age, wherein
   there has been so little sense of the evil of sin, so little love to
   God, heavenly-mindedness, and holiness of life, among the professors of
   the true religion? Our people do not so much need to have their heads
   stored, as to have their hearts touched; and they stand in the greatest
   need of that sort of preaching, which has the greatest tendency to do
   this.

   Those texts, Isa. lviii. 1. "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up they voice
   like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house
   of Jacob their sins." And, Ezek. vi. 11. "Thus saith the Lord God,
   Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas, for all
   the evil abominations of the house of Israel!" I say, these texts
   (however the use that some have made of them has been laughed at) will
   fully justify a great degree of pathos, and manifestation of zeal and
   fervency in preaching the word of God. They may indeed be abused, so as
   to countenance that which would be odd and unnatural amongst us, not
   making due allowance for difference of manners and customs in different
   ages and nations; but, let us interpret them how we will, they at least
   imply, that a most affectionate and earnest manner of delivery, in many
   cases, becomes a preacher of God's word.

   Preaching of the word of God is commonly spoken of in Scripture, in
   such expressions as seem to import a loud and earnest speaking; as in
   Isa. xl. 2. "Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that
   her iniquity is pardoned." And ver. 3. "The voice of him that crieth in
   the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,"-- ver. 6. "The voice
   said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all
   the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field." Jer. ii. 2. "Go and
   cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord, " &c. Jonah
   i. 2. "Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it." Isa.
   lxi. 1,2. "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath
   anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek--to proclaim liberty to
   the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: to
   proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of
   our God." Isa. lxii. 11. "Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end
   of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation
   cometh," &c. Rom. x. 18. "Their sound went into all the earth, and
   their words to the end of the world." Jer. xi. 6. "Proclaim all these
   words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying,
   Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them." So, chap. xix. 2. and
   vii. 2. "Doth not wisdom cry, and understanding put forth her voice?"
   ver. 3, 4. "She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the
   coming in at the doors. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the
   sons of men." and chap. i. 20. "Wisdom crieth without, she uttereth her
   voice in the streets." chap. ix. 3. "She hath sent forth her maidens,
   she crieth upon the high places of the city." John vii. 37. "In the
   last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying,
   If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink."

   It seems to be foretold that the gospel should be especially preached
   in a loud and earnest manner, at the introduction of the prosperous
   state of religion in the latter days. Isa. xl. 9. "O Zion, that
   bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain! O Jerusalem,
   that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength! Lift it
   up, and be not afraid! Say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!"
   Isa. lii. 7, 8. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
   that bringeth good tidings!--Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice."
   Isa. xxvii. 13. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great
   trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to
   perish."--And this will be one way by which the church of God will cry
   at that time like a travailing woman, when Christ mystical is going to
   be brought forth; as Rev. xii. At the beginning, It will be by
   ministers, as her mouth, that Christ will then cry like a travailing
   woman, as in Isa. xlii. 14. "I have long time holden my peace, I have
   been still and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing
   woman." Christ cries by his ministers, and the church cries by her
   officers. And it is to be noted, that the word commonly used in the New
   Testament which we translate preach, properly signifies to proclaim
   aloud like a crier.

   II. Another thing that some ministers have been greatly blamed for, and
   I think unjustly, is speaking terror to them who are already under
   great terrors, instead of comforting them. Indeed, if ministers in such
   a case go about to terrify persons with that which is not true, or to
   affright them by representing their case worse than it is, or in any
   respect otherwise than it is, they are to be condemned; but if they
   terrify them only by still holding forth more light to them, and giving
   them to understand more of the truth of their case, they are altogether
   to be justified. When consciences are greatly awakened by the Spirit of
   God, it is but light imparted, enabling men to see their case, in some
   measure, as it is; and, if more light be let in, it will terrify them
   still more. But ministers are not therefore to be blamed, that they
   endeavour to hold forth more light to the conscience, and do not rather
   alleviate the pain they are under, by intercepting and obstructing the
   light that shines already. To say any thing to those who have never
   believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, to represent their case any
   otherwise than exceeding terrible, is not to preach the word of God to
   them; for the word of God reveals nothing but truth; but this is to
   delude them. Why should we be afraid to let persons, who are in an
   infinitely miserable condition, know the truth, or bring them into the
   light, for fear it should terrify them? It is light that must convert
   them, if ever they are converted. The more we bring sinners into the
   light, while they are miserable, and the light is terrible to them, the
   more likely it is that afterward the light will be joyful to them. The
   ease, peace, and comfort, which natural men enjoy, have their
   foundation in darkness and blindness; therefore as that darkness
   vanishes, and light comes in, their peace vanishes, and they are
   terrified. But that is no good argument why we should endeavour to hold
   their darkness, that we may uphold their comfort. The truth is, that as
   long as men reject Christ, and do not savingly believe in him, however
   they may be awakened, and however strict, and conscientious, and
   laborious they may be in religion, they have the wrath of God abiding
   on them, they are his enemies, and the children of the devil; (as the
   Scripture calls all who are not savingly converted, Matt. xiii. 38. 1
   John iii. 10.) and it is uncertain whether they shall ever obtain
   mercy. God is under no obligation to show them mercy, nor will he, if
   they fast and pray and cry never so much: and they are then especially
   provoking to God, under those terrors, that they stand it out against
   Christ, and will not accept of an offered Saviour, though they see so
   much need of him. And seeing this is the truth, they should be told so,
   that they may be sensible what their case indeed is.

   To blame a minister for thus declaring the truth to those who are under
   awakenings, and not immediately administering comfort to them, is like
   blaming a surgeon, because when he has begun to thrust his lance,
   whereby he has already put his patient to great pain, and he shrinks
   and cries out with anguish, he is so cruel that he will not stay his
   hand, but goes on to thrust it in further, till he comes to the core of
   the wound. Such a compassionate physician, who as soon as his patient
   began to flinch, should withdraw his hand, and go about immediately to
   apply a plaster, to skin over the wound, and leave the core untouched,
   would heal the hurt slightly, crying, Peace, peace, when there is no
   peace.

   Indeed something besides terror is to be preached to them whose
   consciences are awakened. They are to be told that there is a Saviour
   provided, who is excellent and glorious; who has shed his precious
   blood for sinners, and is every way sufficient to save them; who stands
   ready to receive them, if they will heartily embrace him; for this is
   also the truth, as well as that they now are in an infinitely dreadful
   condition. This is the word of God. Sinners, at the same time that they
   are told how miserable their case is, should be earnestly invited to
   come and accept of a Saviour, and yield their hearts unto him, with all
   the winning, encouraging arguments, that the gospel affords. But this
   is to induce them to escape from the misery of their condition, not to
   make them think their present condition to be less miserable than it
   is, or to abate their uneasiness and distress, while they are in it.
   That would be the way to quiet the, and fasten them there, and not to
   excite them to flee from it. Comfort in one sense, is to be held forth
   to sinners under awakenings of conscience, i.e. comfort is to be
   offered to them in Christ, on their fleeing from their present
   miserable state to him. But comfort is not to be administered to them,
   in their present state, or while out of Christ. No comfort is to be
   administered to them, from any thing in them, any of their
   qualifications, prayers, or other performances, past, present, or
   future; but ministers should in such cases, strive to their utmost to
   take all such comforts from them, though it greatly increases their
   terror. A person who sees himself ready to sink into hell, is prone to
   strive, some way or other, to lay God under some obligation to him; but
   he is to be beat off from every thing of that nature, though it greatly
   increases his terror, to see himself wholly destitute of any refuge, or
   any thing of his own to lay hold of; as a man that sees himself in
   danger of drowning, is in terror, and endeavours to catch hold on every
   twig within his reach, and he that pulls away those twigs from him
   increases his terror; yet if they are insufficient to save him, and by
   being in his way prevents his looking to that which will save him, to
   pull away them is necessary to save his life.

   If sinners are in distress from any error they embrace, or mistake they
   are under, that is to be removed. For instance, if they are in terror,
   from an apprehension that they have committed the unpardonable sin, or
   that those things have happened to them which are certain signs of
   reprobation, or any other delusion, such terrors have no tendency to do
   them any good; for these terrors are from temptation, and not from
   conviction. But that terror which arises from conviction, or a sight of
   truth, is to be increased; for those who are most awakened, have great
   remaining stupidity. It is from remaining blindness and darkness that
   they see no more, and that remaining blindness is a disease which we
   should endeavour to remove. I am not afraid to tell sinners who are
   most sensible of their misery, that their case is indeed as miserable
   as they think it to be, and a thousand times more so; for this is the
   truth. Some may be ready to say, that though it be the truth, yet the
   truth is not to be spoken at all times, and seems not to be seasonable
   then. But it seems to me, such truth is never more seasonable than at
   such at time, when Christ is beginning to open the eyes of conscience.
   Ministers ought to act as co-workers with him; to take that
   opportunity, and to the utmost to improve that advantage, and strike
   while the iron is hot. When the light has begun to shine, then they
   should remove all obstacles, and use all proper means, that it may come
   in more fully. And experience abundantly shows, that to take this
   course is not of a hurtful tendency, but very much the contrary. I have
   seen, in very many instances, the happy effects of it, and oftentimes a
   very speedy happy issue; and never knew any ill consequence, in case of
   real conviction, and when distress has been only from thence.

   I know of but one case, wherein the truth ought to be withheld from
   sinners in distress of conscience, and that is the case of melancholy:
   and it is not to be withheld from them, as if the truth tends to do
   them hurt; but because, if we speak the truth to them, sometimes they
   will be deceived, and led into error by it, thought that strange
   disposition there is in them to take things wrong. So that, though what
   is spoken is truth, yet as it is heard, received, and applied by them,
   it is falsehood; as it will be, unless the truth be spoken with
   abundance of caution and prudence, and consideration of their
   disposition and circumstances. But the most awful truths of God's word
   ought not to be withheld from public congregations, because it may
   happen that some such melancholic persons may be in it: any more than
   the Bible is to be withheld from the Christian world, because it is
   manifest that there are a great many melancholic persons in Christendom
   that exceedingly abuse the awful things contained in the Scripture, to
   their own wounding. Nor do I think that to be of weight, which is made
   use of by some, as a great and dreadful objection against the
   terrifying preaching that has of late been in New England, viz. That
   there have been some instances of melancholic persons who have so
   abused it, that the issue has been the murder of themselves. The
   objection from hence is no stronger against awakening preaching, than
   it is against the Bible itself. There are hundreds, and probably
   thousands, of instances, of persons who have murdered themselves under
   religious melancholy. These murders probably never would have been, if
   the world had remained in a state of heathenish darkness. The Bible has
   not only been the occasion of these sad effects, but of thousands, and
   I suppose millions, of other cruel murders committed in the
   persecutions that have been raised, which never would have been if it
   had not been for the Bible. Many whole countries have been as it were
   deluged with innocent blood, which would not have been if the gospel
   never had been preached in the world. It is not a good objection
   against any kind of preaching that some men abuse it greatly to their
   hurt. It has been acknowledged by all divines, as a thing common in all
   ages, and all Christian countries, that a very great part of those who
   sit under the gospel abuse it. It proves an occasion of their far more
   aggravated damnation, and so of eternally murdering their souls; which
   is an effect infinitely more terrible than the murder of their bodies.
   It is as unjust to lay the blame of these self-murders to those
   ministers who have declared the awful truths of God's word in the most
   lively and affecting manner, as it would be to lay the blame of
   hardening men's hearts, and blinding their eyes, and their more
   dreadful eternal damnation, to the prophet Isaiah or Jesus Christ,
   because this was the consequence of their preaching with respect to
   many of their hearers; Isa. vi. 10. John ix. 39. Matt. xiii. 14. Though
   a few have abused the awakening preaching to their own temporal death;
   yet it may be to one such instance, there have been hundreds, yea
   thousands, who have been saved, by this means, from eternal death.

   What has more especially given offence to many, and raised a loud cry
   against some preachers, as though their conduct were intolerable, is
   their frightening poor innocent children with talk of hell-fire, and
   eternal damnation. But if those who complain so loudly of this, really
   believe what is the general profession of the country, viz. That all
   are by nature the children of wrath, and heirs of hell--and that every
   one that has not been born again, whether he be young or old, is
   exposed every moment to eternal destruction--then such a complaint and
   cry as this betrays a great deal of weakness and inconsideration.
   Innocent as children seem to us, yet, if they are out of Christ, they
   are not so in the sight of God; but are in a most miserable condition,
   as well as grown up persons: and they are naturally ver senseless and
   stupid, being born as the wild ass's colt, and need much to awaken
   them. Why should we conceal the truth from them? Will those children
   who have been dealt tenderly with in this respect, and lived and died
   insensible of their misery till they come to feel it in hell, ever
   thank parents and others or their tenderness, in not letting them know
   their danger? If parents' love towards their children were not blind,
   it would affect them much more to see their children every day exposed
   to eternal burnings, and yet senseless, than to see them suffer the
   distress of that awakening which is necessary in order to their escape,
   and that tends to their being eternally happy as the children of God. A
   child that has a dangerous wound may need the painful lance, as well as
   grown persons; and that would be a foolish pity, in such a case, that
   should hold back the lance, and throw away the life--I have seen the
   happy effects of dealing plainly and thoroughly with children in the
   concerns of their souls, without sparing them at all, in many
   instances; and never knew any ill consequence of it, in any one
   instance.

   III. Another thing, against which a great deal has been said, is having
   so frequent religious meetings, and spending so much time in religion.
   Indeed, there are none of the externals of religion but what are
   capable of excess; and I believe it is true, that there has not been a
   due proportion observed of late. We have placed religion too much in
   the external duties of the first table; we have abounded in religious
   meetings, in praying, reading, hearing, singing, and religious
   conference; and there has not been a proportionable increase of zeal
   for deeds of charity, and other duties of the second table; though it
   must be acknowledged that they are also much increased. But yet it
   appears to me, that this objection has been in the general groundless.
   Though worldly business must be done, and persons ought not to neglect
   that of their particular callings; yet it is to the honour of God, that
   a people should be so much in outward acts of religion, as to carry in
   it a visible, public appearance of a great engagedness of mind,
   especially at such an extraordinary time. When God appears unusually
   present with a people in wonderful works of power and mercy, they
   should spend more time than usual in religious exercises, to put honour
   upon that God who is then extraordinarily present, and to seek his
   face. Thus it was with the Christian church in Jerusalem, on occasion
   of that extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit, soon after Christ's
   ascension, Acts ii. 46. "And they continued daily with one accord in
   the temple, and breaking bread from house to house;" and at Ephesus,
   where the Christians attended public religious exercises, every day,
   for two years together, Acts xix. 8, 9, 10. "And he went into the
   synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing
   and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God. But when
   divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way
   before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the
   disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And this
   continued by the space of two years; so that all they that dwelt in
   Asia, heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks." And as to the
   grand objection of, six days shalt thou labour; all that can be
   understood by it, and all that they very objectors themselves
   understand by it, is, that we may follow our secular labours in those
   six days that are not the Sabbath, and ought to be diligent in them:
   not but that sometimes we may turn from them, even within those six
   days, to keep a day of fasting or thanksgiving, or attend a lecture;
   and that more frequently or rarely, as God's providence and the state
   of things shall call us, according to the best of our discretion.

   Though secular business, as I said before, ought not to be neglected;
   yet I cannot see how it can be maintained, that religion ought not to
   be attended, lest it should injure our temporal affairs, on any other
   principle than that of infidelity.--None object against injuring one
   temporal affair for the sake of another of much greater importance: And
   therefore, if eternal things are as real as temporal things, and are
   indeed of infinitely greater importance; then why may we not
   voluntarily suffer, in some measure, in our temporal concerns, while we
   are seeking eternal riches, and immortal glory? It is looked upon as no
   way improper for a whole nation to spend a considerable time, and much
   of their outward substance, on some extraordinary temporal occasion,
   for the sake only of the ceremonies of a public rejoicing; and it would
   be thought dishonourable to be very exact about what we spend, or
   careful lest we injure our estates, on such an occasion. And why should
   we be exact only with Almighty God, so that it should be a crime to be
   otherwise than scrupulously careful lest we injure ourselves in our
   temporal interest, to put honour upon him, and seek our own eternal
   happiness? We should take heed that none of us be in any wise like
   Judas, who greatly complained of needless expense, and waste of outward
   substance, to put honour upon Christ, when Mary broke her box, and
   poured the precious ointment on his head. He had indignation within
   himself on that account, and cries out, "Why was this waste of ointment
   made? For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence,
   and have been given to the poor," Mark xiv. 3, &c. and John xii. 4, &c.

   Besides, if the matter be justly examined, I believe it will be found,
   that the country has lost no time from their temporal affairs by the
   late revival of religion, but have rather gained; and that more time
   has been saved from frolicking and tavern-haunting, idleness and
   unprofitable visits, vain talk, fruitless pastimes, and needless
   diversions, than has lately been spent in extraordinary religion; and
   probably five times as much has been saved in various ways, as has been
   spent by religious meetings. The great complaint made against so much
   time being spent in religion, cannot be in general from a real concern
   that God may be honoured, and his will done, and the best good of men
   promoted; as is very manifest from this, that now there is a much more
   earnest and zealous outcry made in the country against this
   extraordinary religion, than was before against so much time spent in
   tavern-haunting, vain company-keeping, night-walking, and other thins,
   which wasted both our time and substance and injured our moral virtue.

   The frequent preaching that has lately obtained has in a particular
   manner been objected against as unprofitable and prejudicial. It is
   objected that, when sermons are heard so very often, one sermon tends
   to thrust out another; so that persons lose benefit of all. They say,
   tow or three sermons in a week is as much as they can remember and
   digest.--Such objections against frequent preaching, if they be not
   from an enmity against religion, are for want of duly considering the
   way that sermons usually profit an auditory. The main benefit obtained
   by preaching is by impression made upon the mind at the time, and not
   by an effect that arises afterwards by a remembrance of what was
   delivered. And though an after-remembrance of what was heard in a
   sermon is oftentimes very profitable; yet, for the most part, that
   remembrance is from an impression the words made on the heart at the
   time; and the memory profits, as it renews and increases that
   impression. A frequent inculcating the more important things of
   religion in preaching has no tendency to erase out such impressions,
   but to increase them, and fix them deeper and deeper in the mind, as is
   found by experience. It never used to be objected against, that persons
   upon the Sabbath, after they have heard two sermons on that day, should
   go home, and spend the remaining part of the Sabbath in reading the
   Scriptures, and printed sermons; which, in proportion as it has a
   tendency to affect the mind at all, tends as much to drive out what
   they have heard, as if they heard another the apostles to preach every
   day, in places where they went; yea, though sometimes they continued
   long in one place, Acts ii. 42, 46. and Act xix. 8, 9, 10. They did not
   avoid preaching one day, for fear they should thrust out of the minds
   of their hearers wheat they had delivered the day before; not did
   Christians avoid going every day to hear, for fear of any such bad
   effect; Act ii. 42, 46.

   There are some things in Scripture that seem to signify that there
   should be preaching in an extraordinary frequency, at the time when God
   should introduce the flourishing state of religion in the latter days;
   as Isa. lxii. 1, 2. "For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for
   Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go
   forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.
   And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory."
   And ver. 5,6. "For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons
   marry thee: And as a bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy
   God rejoice over thee. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,
   which shall never hold their peace day nor night." The destruction of
   the city of Jericho is evidently, in all its circumstances, intended by
   God as a great type of the overthrow of Satan's kingdom. The priests'
   blowing with trumpets represents ministers preaching the gospel. The
   people compassed the city seven days, the priests blowing the trumpets.
   But, when the day was come that the walls of the city were to fall, the
   priests were more frequent and abundant in blowing their trumpets;
   there was as much done in one day then, as had been done in seven days
   before; they compassed the city seven times that day, blowing their
   trumpets, till at length it came to one long and perpetual blast, and
   then the walls of the city fell down flat. The extraordinary preaching
   that shall be at the beginning of that glorious jubilee of the church
   is represented by the extraordinary sounding of trumpets, throughout
   the land of Canaan, at the beginning of the year of jubilee. And the
   reading of the law before all Israel, in the year of release, at the
   feast of tabernacles; and the crowing of the cock at break of day,
   which brought Peter to repentance; seem to me to be intended to signify
   the awakening of God's church out of their lethargy, wherein they had
   denied their Lord, by the extraordinary preaching of the gospel that
   shall be at the dawning of the day of the church's light and glory. And
   there seems at this day to be an uncommon hand of Divine Providence, in
   animating, enabling, and upholding some ministers in such abundant
   labours.

   IV. Another thing, wherein I think some ministers have been injured, is
   in being very much blamed for making so much of outcries, faintings,
   and other bodily effects; speaking of them as tokens of the presence of
   God, and arguments of the success of preaching; seeming to strive to
   their utmost to bring a congregation to that pass, and seeming to
   rejoice in it, yea, even blessing God for it when they see these
   effects.

   Concerning this I would observe, in the first place, That there are
   many things, with respect to cryings out, falling down, &c. charged on
   ministers, that they are not guilty of. Some would have it, that they
   speak of these things as certain evidences of a work of the Spirit of
   God on the hearts of their hearers, or that they esteem these bodily
   effects themselves to be the work of God, as though the Spirit of God
   took hold of and agitated the bodies of men; and some are charged with
   making these things essential, and supposing that persons cannot be
   converted without them; whereas I never yet could see the person that
   held either of these things.

   But for speaking of such effects as probable tokens of God's presence,
   and arguments of the success of preaching, it seems to me they are not
   to be blamed; because I think they are so indeed. And therefore when I
   see them excited by preaching the important truths of God's word, urged
   and enforced by proper arguments and motives, or as consequent on other
   means that are good, I do not scruple to speak of them, and for this
   reason, viz. That from time to time, upon proper inquiry and
   examination, and observation, of the consequences and fruits, I have
   found that these are all evidences of the persons in whom these effects
   appear, being under the influences of God's Spirit, in such cases.
   Crying out, in such a manner, and with such circumstances, as I have
   seen them from time to time, is as much an evidence to me, of the
   general cause it proceeds from, as language. I have learned the meaning
   of it the same way that persons learn the meaning of language, viz. By
   use and experience. I confess that when I see a great crying out in
   congregation, in the manner that I have seen it, when those things are
   held forth to them which are worthy of their being greatly affected by
   them, I rejoice in it, much more than merely in an appearance of solemn
   attention, and a show of affection by weeping; and that because when
   there have been those outcries, I have found from time to time a much
   greater and more excellent effect. To rejoice that the work of God is
   carried on calmly, without much ado, is in effect to rejoice that it is
   carried on with less power, or that there is not so much of the
   influence of God's Spirit.--For though the degree of the influence of
   the Spirit of God on particular persons, is by no means to be judged of
   by the degree of external appearances, because of the different
   constitutions, tempers, and circumstances of men; yet, if there be a
   very powerful influence of the Spirit of God on a mixed multitude, it
   will cause some way or other a great visible commotion.

   And as to ministers aiming at such effects, and striving by all means
   to bring a congregation to that pass, that there should be such an
   uproar among them; I suppose none aim at it any otherwise, than as they
   strive to raise the affections of their hearers to such a height as
   very often appears in these effects. And if those affections are
   commonly good, and it be found by experience that such a degree of them
   commonly has a good effect, I think they are to be justified in so
   doing.

   V. Again, some ministers have been blamed for keeping persons together
   that have been under great affections, which have appeared in such
   extraordinary outward manifestations.--Many think this promotes
   confusion; that persons in such circumstances do but discompose each
   others' minds, and disturb the minds of others; and that therefore it
   is best they should be dispersed; and that when any in a congregation
   are strongly seized, that they cannot forbear outward manifestations of
   it, they should be removed, that others' minds may not be diverted.

   I cannot but think that those who thus object go upon quite wrong
   notions of things. For though persons ought to take heed that they do
   not make an ado without necessity; for this will be the way in time to
   have such appearances lose all their effect; yet the unavoidable
   manifestations of strong religious affections tend to a happy influence
   on the minds of bystanders, and are found by experience to have an
   excellent and durable effect. And so to contrive and order things, that
   others may have opportunity and advantage to observe them, has been
   found to be blessed, as a great means to promote the work of God; and
   to prevent their being in the way of observation, is to prevent the
   effect of that which God makes use of as a principal means of carrying
   on his work at such and extraordinary time, viz. Example; which is
   often spoken of in Scripture, as one of the chief means by which God
   would carry on his work in the prosperity of religion in the latter
   days.--I have mentioned some texts already to this purpose, in what I
   published before, of the marks of a work of the true Spirit; but would
   here mention some others. In Zech. ix. 15, 16. Those that in the latter
   days should be filled in and extraordinary manner with the Holy Spirit,
   so as to appear in outward manifestations, and making a noise, are
   spoken of as those that God, in these circumstances, will set up to the
   view of others, as a prize or ensign, by their example and the
   excellency of their attainments, to animate and draw others, as men
   gather about an ensign, and run for a prize, a crown and precious
   jewels, set up in their view. The words are; "And they shall drink and
   make a noise as through wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, and
   as the corners of the altar. And the Lord their God shall save them in
   that day as the flock of his people; for they shall be as the stones of
   a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land." (I shall have occasion
   to say something more of this scripture afterwards.) Those that make
   the objection I am upon, instead of suffering this ensign to be in
   public view, are for having it removed, and hid in some corner. To the
   like purpose is that, "Thou shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of
   the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God." Here it is
   observable, that it is not said, thou shalt be a crown upon the head,
   but in the hand, of the Lord; i.e. held forth, in thy beauty and thy
   excellency, as a prize, to be bestowed upon others that shall behold
   thee, and be animated by the brightness and lustre which God shall
   endow thee with. The great influence of the example of God's people, in
   their bright and excellent attainments, to propagate religion in those
   days, is further signified in Isa. lx. 3. "And the Gentiles shall come
   to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising." Isa. lx. 22.
   With "A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
   nation." And Zech. x. 8, 9. "And they shall increase, as they have
   increased: and I will sow them among the people." And Hos. ii. 23. "And
   I will sow her unto me in the earth." So Jer. xxxi. 27.

   VI. Another thing that gives great disgust to many, is the disposition
   that persons show, under great affections, to speak so much; and, with
   such earnestness and vehemence, to be setting forth the greatness, and
   wonderfulness, and importance of divine and eternal things; and to be
   so passionately warning, inviting, and entreating others. Concerning
   which I would say, that I am far from thinking that such a disposition
   should be wholly without any limits or regulation (as I shall more
   particularly show afterwards); and I believe some have erred, in
   setting no bounds, and indulging and encouraging this disposition
   without any kind of restraint or direction. But yet it seems to me,
   that such a disposition is in general is what both reason and Scripture
   will justify. Those who are offended at such things, as though they
   were unreasonable are not just. Upon examination it will probably be
   found, that they have one rule of reasoning about temporal things, and
   another about spiritual things. They do not at all wonder, if a person
   on some very great and affecting occasion, an occasion of extraordinary
   danger or great joy, that eminently and immediately concerns him and
   others--is disposed to speak much, and with great earnestness,
   especially to those with whom he is united in the bonds of dear
   affection, and great concern for their good. And therefore, if they
   were just, why would not they allow it in spiritual things? And much
   more in them, agreeably to the vastly greater importance and more
   affecting nature of spiritual things, and the concern which true
   religion causes in men's minds for the good of others, and the
   disposition it gives and excites to speak God's praises, to show forth
   his infinite glory, and talk of all his glorious perfections and works?

   That a very great and proper sense of the importance of religion, and
   the danger sinners are in, should sometimes cause an almost insuperable
   disposition to speak and warn others is agreeable to Jer. vi. 10, 11.
   "To whom shall I speak and give warning, that they may hear? Behold,
   their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: Behold, the word
   of the Lord is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it.
   Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding
   in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly
   of the young men together; for even the husband with the wife shall be
   taken, the aged, with him that is full of days." And that true
   Christians, when they come to be as it were waked out of sleep, and to
   be filled with a sweet and joyful sense of the excellent things of
   religion, by the preaching of the gospel, or by other means of grace,
   should be disposed to be much in speaking of divine things, though
   before they were dumb, is agreeable to what Christ says to his church,
   Cant. vii. 9. "And the roof of they mouth is like the best wine, for my
   beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are
   asleep to speak." The roof of the church's mouth is the officers in the
   church, that preach the gospel; their word is to Christ's beloved like
   the best wine, that goes down sweetly; extraordinarily refreshing and
   enlivening the saints, causing them to speak, though before they were
   mute and asleep. It is said by some, that the subjects of this work,
   when they get together, talking loud and earnestly in their pretended
   great joys, several in a room talking at the same time, make a noise
   just like a company of drunken persons. On which I would observe, that
   it is foretold that God's people should do so, in that formentioned
   place, Zech. ix. 15-17. Of which I shall now take more particular
   notice. The words are as follows; "The Lord of hosts shall defend them,
   and they shall devour and subdue with sling stones, and they shall
   drink and make a noise as through wine, and they shall be filled like
   bowls, and as the corners of the altar. And the Lord their God shall
   save them in that day as the flock of his people; for they shall be as
   the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land. For how
   great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! Corn shall make the
   young men cheerful, and new wine the maids." The words are very
   remarkable: Here it is foretold, that at the time when Christ shall set
   up an universal kingdom upon earth (ver. 20.) the children of Zion
   shall drink, till they are filled like the vessels of the sanctuary.
   And, if we would know with what they shall be thus filled, the prophecy
   does in effect explain itself; they shall be filled as the vessels of
   the sanctuary that contained the drink offering, which was wine. And
   yet the words imply, that it shall not literally be wine that they
   shall drink, and make a noise, as through wine, as if they had drank
   wine; which the wine of the drink-offering typically represented, which
   is the Holy Spirit, as well as the blood of Christ, that new wine that
   is drank in our heavenly Father's kingdom. They shall be filled with
   the Spirit, which the Apostle sets in opposition to a being drunk with
   wine, Eph. v. 18. "This is the new wine spoken of, ver. 17. It is the
   same with that best wine, spoken of in Canticles, "that goes down
   sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak." It is
   here foretold, that the children of Zion, in the latter days, should be
   filled with that which should make them cheerful, and cause them to
   make a noise as through wine, and by which these joyful happy persons
   shall be as the stones of a crown lifted up as an ensign upon God's
   land, being made joyful in the extraordinary manifestations of the
   beauty and love of Christ; as it follows, "How great is his goodness!
   And how great is his beauty!" And it is further remarkable that, as is
   here foretold, it should be thus especially amongst young people; "Corn
   shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maid." It would be
   ridiculous to understand this of literal bread and wine. Without doubt,
   the same spiritual blessings are signified by bread and wine here,
   which were represented by Melchizedek's bread and wine and are
   signified by the bread and wine in the Lord's supper. One of the
   marginal readings is, "shall make the young men to speak;" which is
   agreeable to that in Canticles, of the "best wines causing the lips of
   those that are asleep to speak."

   We ought not to be, in any measure, like the unbelieving Jews in
   Christ's time, who were disgusted both with crying out with distress,
   and with joy. When the poor blind man cried out before all the
   multitude, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" and continued
   instantly thus doing, the multitude rebuked him, and charged him that
   he should hold his tongue, Mark x. 46-48. And Luke xviii. 38, 39. They
   looked upon it to be a very indecent noise that he made; a thing very
   ill becoming him, to cause his voice to be heard so much, and so loud,
   among the multitude. And when Christ made his solemn and triumphant
   entry into Jerusalem, (which, I have before observed, was a type of the
   glory and triumph of the latter days,) the whole multitude of the
   disciples, especially young people, began to rejoice and praise God
   with a loud voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen saying,
   "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord! Peace in
   heaven, and glory in the highest!" The Pharisees said to Christ,
   "Master, rebuke thy disciples." They did not understand such great
   transports of joy; it seemed to them a very unsuitable and indecent
   noise and clamour that they made, a confused uproar, many crying out
   together, as though they were out of their wits; they wondered that
   Christ would tolerate it. But what says Christ? "I tell you, that if
   these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out."
   The words seem to intimate, that there was cause enough to constrain
   those whose hearts were not harder than the very stones, to cry out,
   and make a noise; which is something like that other expression, of
   "causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak."

   When many, under great religious affections, are earnestly speaking
   together of divine wonders, in various parts of a company, to those who
   are next them; some attending to one, and others to another; there is
   something very beautiful in it, provided they do not speak so as to
   drown each others' voices, that none can hear what any say. There is a
   greater and more affecting appearance of conversation. When a multitude
   meets on any occasion of temporal rejoicing, freely and cheerfully to
   converse together, they are not wont to observe the ceremony of but one
   speaking at a time, while all the rest in a formal manner set
   themselves to attend to what he says. That would spoil all
   conversation, and turn it into the formality of set speeches. It is
   better for lay persons, speaking one to another of the things of God,
   when they meet together, to speak after the manner of Christian
   conversation, than to observe the formality of but one speaking at a
   time, the whole multitude silently and solemnly attending to what he
   says; which would carry in it too much of the air of the authority and
   solemnity or preaching. The apostle says, 1 Cor. xiv. 29, 30, 31. "Let
   the prophets speak, two or three, and let the others judge: If any
   thing be revealed to another that sitteth by let the first hold his
   peace: For ye may all prophesy, one by one, that all may learn, and all
   may be comforted;" but this does not reach the present case, because
   what the apostle is speaking in the church by immediate inspiration,
   and in the use of the gift of prophecy, or some gift of inspiration, in
   the exercises of which they acted as extraordinary ministers of Christ.

   VII. Another thing that some have found fault with, is abounding so
   much in singing in religious meetings. Objecting against such a thing
   as this, seems to arise from a suspicion already established of this
   work. They doubt of the pretended extraordinary love and joys that
   attend this work, and so find fault with the manifestations of them. If
   they thought persons were truly the subjects of an extraordinary degree
   of divine love, and heavenly rejoicing in God, I suppose they would not
   wonder at their having a disposition to be much in praise. They object
   not against the saints and angels in heaven singing praises and
   hallelujahs to God, without ceasing day or night; and therefore
   doubtless will allow that the more the saints on earth are like them in
   their dispositions, the more they will be disposed to do like them.
   They will readily own that the generality of Christians have great
   reason to be ashamed that they have so little thankfulness, and are no
   more in praising God, and manifesting a delight in that heavenly
   exercise? To complain of this, is to be too much like the Pharisees,
   who were disgusted when the multitude of the disciples began to
   rejoice, and with loud voices to praise God, and cry, hosanna, when
   Christ was entering into Jerusalem.

   There are many things in Scripture, that seem to intimate that praising
   God, both in speeches and songs, will be what the church of God will
   very much abound in, in the approaching glorious day. So on the seventh
   day of compassing the walls of Jericho, when the priests blew with the
   trumpets in an extraordinary manner, the people shouted with a great
   shout, and the wall of the city fell down flat. So the ark was brought
   back from its banishment, with extraordinary shouting and singing of
   the whole congregation of Israel. And the places in the prophecies of
   Scripture, signifying that the church of God, in the glorious Jubilee
   that is foretold, shall greatly abound in singing and shouting forth
   the praises of God, are too many to be mentioned. And there will be
   cause enough for it: I believe it will be a time wherein both heaven
   and earth will be much more full of joy and praise than ever they were
   before.

   But what is more especially found fault with, in the singing that is
   now practised, is making use of hymns of human composure. I am far from
   thinking that the book of Psalms should be thrown by in our public
   worship, but that it should always be used in the Christian church to
   the end of the world: but I know of no obligation we are under to
   confine ourselves to it. I can find no command or rule of God's word
   that does any more confine us to the words of the Scripture in our
   singing, than it does in our praying; we speak to God in both. And I
   can see no reason why we should limit ourselves to such particular
   forms of words, that we find in the Bible, in speaking to him by way of
   praise, in metre, and with music, than when we speak to him in prose,
   by way of prayer and supplication. And it is really needful that we
   should have some other songs besides the Psalms of David. It is
   unreasonable to suppose that the Christian church should for ever, and
   even in times of her greatest light, in her praises of God and the
   Lamb, be confined only to the words of the Old Testament, wherein all
   the greatest and most glorious things of the gospel, that are
   infinitely the greatest subjects of her praise, are spoken of under a
   veil, and not so much as the name of our glorious Redeemer ever
   mentioned, but in some dark figure, or as hid under the name of some
   type. And as to our making use of the words of others, and not those
   that are conceived by ourselves, it is no more than we do in all our
   public prayers; the whole worshipping assembly, excepting one only,
   makes use of the words that are conceived by him who speaks for the
   rest.

   VIII. Another thing that many have disliked, is the religious meetings
   of children to read and pray together, and perform religious exercises
   by themselves. What is objected is children's want of that knowledge
   and discretion which is requisite in order to a decent and profitable
   management of religious exercises. But it appears to me the objection
   is not sufficient. Children, as they have the nature of men, are
   inclined to society; and those of them who are capable of society one
   with another, are capable of the influence of the Spirit of God in its
   active fruits. And if they are inclined by a religious disposition,
   which they have from the Spirit of God, in order to improve their
   society one with another, in a religious manner, and to religious
   purposes, who should forbid them? If they have not discretion to
   observe method in their religious performances, or to speak sense in
   all that they say in prayer, they may notwithstanding have a good
   meaning, and God understands them, and it does not spoil or interrupt
   their devotion one with another. We who are adults have defects in our
   prayers that are a thousand times worse in the sight of God, and are a
   greater confusion, and more absurd nonsense in his eyes, than their
   childish indiscretions. There is not so much difference before God,
   between children and grown persons, as we are ready to imagine; we are
   all poor, ignorant, foolish babes, in his sight. Our adult age does
   bring us so much nearer to God, as we are apt to think. God in this
   work has shown a remarkable regard to little children; never was there
   such a glorious work amongst persons in their childhood, as has been of
   late, in New England. He has been pleased in a wonderful manner to
   perfect praise out of the mouths of babes and suckling; and many of
   them have more of that knowledge and wisdom that pleases him, and
   renders their religious worship acceptable, than many of the great and
   learned men of the world: it is they, in the sight of God, who are the
   ignorant and foolish children; these are grown men, and an hundred
   years old, in comparison with them. It is to be hoped that the days are
   coming, prophesied of, Isa. lxv. 20. When "the child shall die an
   hundred years old."

   I have seen many happy effects of children's religious meetings; and
   God has seemed often remarkably to own them in their meetings, and
   really descended from heaven to be amongst them: I have known several
   probable instances of children's being converted at such meetings. I
   should therefore think, that if children appear to be really moved to
   it by a religious disposition, and not merely from a childish affection
   of imitating grown persons, they ought by no means to be discouraged or
   discountenanced. But yet it is fit that care should be taken of them by
   their parents and pastors, to instruct and direct them, and to correct
   imprudent conduct and irregularities if they are perceived, or any
   thing by which the devil may pervert and destroy the design of their
   meetings.--All should take heed that they do not find fault with and
   despise the religion of children, from an evil principle, lest they
   should be like the chief priests and scribes, who were sore displeased
   at the religious worship and praises of little children, and the honour
   they gave Christ in the temple. We have an account of it, and of what
   Christ said upon it, in Matt. xxi. 15, 16. "And when the chief priests
   and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children
   crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, they
   were sore displeased, and said unto him, Hearest thou what those say?
   And Jesus saith unto them, Yea, have ye never read, Out of the mouths
   of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?"
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART IV.

   SHOWING WHAT THINGS ARE TO BE CORRECTED OR AVOIDED, IN PROMOTING THIS
   WORK, OR IN OUR BEHAVIOUR UNDER IT.

   Having thus observed, in some instances, wherein the conduct of those
   that have appeared to be the subjects of this work, or have been
   zealous to promote it, has been objected against or complained of
   without or beyond just cause; I proceed now to show what things ought
   to be corrected or avoided.

   Many, who are zealous for this glorious work of God, are heartily sick
   of the great noise there is in the country about imprudences and
   disorders; they have heard it so often from the mouths of opposers,
   that they are prejudiced against the sound. And they look upon it, that
   what is called being prudent and regular, so much insisted on, is no
   other than being asleep, or cold and dead, in religion; and that the
   great imprudence, so much blamed, is only being alive and engaged in
   the things of God. They are therefore rather confirmed in any practice,
   than brought off from it, by the clamour they hear against it, as
   imprudent and irregular. And, to tell the truth, the cry of
   irregularity and imprudence has been much more in the mouths of those
   who have been enemies to the main of the work than others; for they
   have watched for the halting of the zealous, and eagerly catched at any
   thing that has been wrong, and have greatly insisted on it, made the
   most of it, and magnified it; especially have they watched for errors
   in zealous preachers, who are much in reproving and condemning the
   wickedness of the times. They would therefore do well to consider that
   scripture, "The scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity
   are cut off, that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare
   for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing
   of naught." They have not only too much insisted on the magnified real
   errors, but have very injuriously charged them as guilty in things
   wherein they have been innocent, and have done their duty. This has so
   prejudiced the minds of some, that they have been ready to think that
   all that which has been said about errors and imprudences was injurious
   and from an ill spirit. It has confirmed them, that there is no such
   thing as any prevailing imprudences; and it has made them less cautious
   and suspicious of themselves, lest they should err.--Herein the devil
   has had an advantage put into his hands, and has taken it; and,
   doubtless, has been too subtle for some of the true friends of
   religion. That would be strange indeed, if in so great a commotion and
   revolution, and such a new state of things, wherein so many have been
   engaged, none have been guilty of any imprudence. It would be such a
   revival of religion as never was, if among so many men, not guided by
   infallible inspiration, there had not been many notable errors in
   judgement and conduct; our young preachers, and young converts, must in
   general vastly exceed Luther, the head of the reformation, who was
   guilty of a great many excesses in that great affair in which God made
   him the chief instrument.

   If we look back into the history of the church of God in past ages, we
   may observe that it has been a common device of the devil, to overset a
   revival of religion; when he finds he can keep men quiet and secure no
   longer, then he drives them to excesses and extravagances. He holds
   them back as long as he can; but when he can do it no longer, then he
   will push them on, and, if possible, run them upon their heads. And it
   has been by this means chiefly that he has been successful, in several
   instances, to overthrow most hopeful and promising beginnings. Yea, the
   principal means by which the devil was successful, by degrees, to
   overset the grand religious revival of the world, in the primitive ages
   of Christianity, and in a manner to overthrow the Christian church
   through the earth, and to make way for the great Anti-Christian
   apostacy, that master-piece of all the devil's works, was to improve
   the indiscreet zeal of Christians, to drive them into those three
   extremes of enthusiasm, superstition, and severity towards opposers;
   which should be enough for an everlasting warning to the Christian
   church.

   Though the devil will do his diligence to stir up the open enemies of
   religion, yet he knows what is for his interest so well, that, in a
   time of revival of religion, his main strength shall be tried with the
   friends of it; and he will chiefly exert himself in his attempts to
   mislead them. One truly zealous person, in the time of such an event,
   that seems to have a great hand in the affair, and draws the eyes of
   many upon him, may do more (through Satan's being too subtle for him)
   to hinder the work, than a hundred great, and strong, and open
   opposers. In the time of the great work of Christ, his hands, with
   which he works, are often wounded in the house of his friends, and his
   work hindered chiefly by them: so that if any one inquires, as in "What
   are those wounds in thine hands?" He may answer, "Those with which I
   was wounded in the house of my friends."

   The errors of the friends of the work of God, and especially of the
   great promoters of it, give vast advantage to the enemies of such a
   work. Indeed there are many things which are no errors, but are only
   duties faithfully and thoroughly done, that wound the minds of such
   persons more than real errors: but yet one real error gives opposers as
   much advantage, and hinders and clogs the work as much, as ten that are
   only supposed ones. Real errors do not fret and gall the enemies of
   religion so much as those things that are strictly right; but they
   encourage them more, they give them liberty, and open a gap for them;
   so that some who before kept their enmity burning in their own breasts,
   and durst not show themselves, will on such an occasion take courage,
   and give themselves vent, and their rage will be like that of an enemy
   let loose. Those who lay still before, having nothing to say but what
   they would be ashamed of, (agreeable to Tit. ii. 8.) when they have
   such a weapon put into their hands, will fight with all violence. And
   indeed the enemies of religion would not know what to do for weapons to
   fight with, were it not for the errors of its friends; and so must soon
   fall before them. Besides, in real errors, things that are truly
   disagreeable to the rule of God's word, we cannot expect the divine
   protection, and that God will appear on our side, as if our errors were
   only supposed ones.

   Since therefore the errors of the friends and promoters of such a
   glorious work of God are of such dreadful consequence; and seeing the
   devil, being sensible of this, is so assiduous, watchful, and subtle in
   his attempts with them, and has thereby been so successful to overthrow
   religion heretofore; certainly such persons ought to be exceeding
   circumspect and vigilant, diffident and jealous of themselves, and
   humbly dependent on the guidance of the good Shepherd. 1 Pet. iv. 7.
   "Be sober, and watch unto prayer." And 1 Pet. v. 8. " Be sober, be
   vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
   about." For persons to go on resolutely, in a kind of heat and
   vehemence, despising admonition and correction, being confident that
   they must be in the right because they are full of the Spirit, is
   directly contrary to the import of these words, be sober, be vigilant.

   It is a mistake I have observed in some, by which they have been
   greatly exposed to their wounding, that they think they are in no
   danger of going astray, or being misled by the devil, because they are
   near to God; and so have no jealous eye upon themselves, and neglect
   vigilance and circumspection, as needless in their case. They say, they
   do not think that God will leave them to dishonour him, and wound
   religion as long as they keep near to him. And I believe so too, as
   long as they keep near to God, so as to maintain a universal and
   diligent watch, and care to do their duty, avoid sin and snares with
   diffidence in themselves, and humble dependence and prayerfulness. But
   not merely because they are receiving blessed communications from God,
   in refreshing views of him; if at the same time they let down their
   watch, and are not jealous over their own hearts, by reason of its
   remaining blindness and corruption, and a subtle adversary.--It is a
   grand error for persons to think they are out of danger from the devil,
   and a corrupt, deceitful heart, even in their highest flights, and most
   raised frames of spiritual joy. For persons, in such a confidence, to
   cease to be jealous of themselves, and to neglect watchfulness and
   care, is a presumption by which I have known many woefully ensnared.
   However highly we may be favoured with divine discoveries and comforts,
   yet, as long as we are in the world, we are in the enemies country; and
   therefore that direction of Christ to his disciples is never out of
   date in this world, Luke xxi. 36. "Watch and pray always, that you may
   be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before the
   Son of man." It was not out of date with the disciples to whom it was
   given, after they came to be full of the Holy Ghost, and out of their
   bellies flowed rivers of living water, by that great effusion upon them
   that began on the day of Pentecost. And though god stands ready to
   protect his people, especially those that are near to him; yet he
   expects of all great care and labour, and that we should put on the
   whole armour of God, that we may stand in the evil day. To whatever
   spiritual privileges we are raised, we have no warrant to expect
   protection in any other way; for God has appointed this whole life, to
   be all as a race or a battle; the state of rest, wherein we shall be so
   out of danger as to have no need of watching and fighting, is reserved
   for another world. I have known it in abundance of instances, that the
   devil has come in very remarkably, even in the midst of the most
   excellent frames. It may seem a great mystery that it should be so; but
   it is no greater mystery, than that Christ should be taken captive by
   the devil, and carried into the wilderness, immediately after the
   heavens had been opened to him, and the Holy Ghost descended like a
   dove upon him, and when he heard that comfortable, joyful voice form
   the Father, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased." In like manner Christ in the heart of a Christian, is
   oftentimes as it were taken, and carried captive into a wilderness,
   presently after heaven has been as it were opened to the soul, and the
   Holy Ghost has descended upon it like a dove, and when God has been
   sweetly owning the believer, and testifying his favour to him as his
   beloved child.

   It is therefore a great error and sin in some persons, at this day,
   that they are fixed in some things which others account errors, and
   will not hearken to admonition and counsel, but are confident that they
   are in the right, because God is much with them. There were some such
   in the apostles' days. The apostle Paul, writing to the Corinthians,
   was sensible that some of them would not be easily convinced that they
   had been in error, because they looked upon themselves as spiritual, or
   full of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. xiv. 37, 38. "If any man think
   himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
   things that I write unto you are the commandment of the Lord; but if
   any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant."

   And although those who are spiritual amongst us have no infallible
   apostle to admonish them, yet let me entreat them, by the love of
   Christ, calmly and impartially to weigh what may be said to them by one
   who is their hearty and fervent friend, (though an inferior worm,) in
   giving his humble opinion concerning the errors that have been
   committed, by the zealous friends or promoters of this great work of
   God. In speaking of past errors, and those we are in danger of, I would
   in the

   First place, take notice of the causes whence the errors that attend a
   great revival of religion usually arise; and, as I go along, take
   notice of some particular errors that arise from each of those causes.

   Secondly, Observe some errors that have been owing to the influence of
   several of those causes conjunctly.

   The errors that attend a great revival of religion usually arise from
   these three things: 1. Undiscerned spiritual pride; 2. Wrong
   principles; and 3. Ignorance of Satan's advantages and devices.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   One cause of errors attending a great revival of religion, is
   undiscerned spiritual pride.

   The first and the worst cause of errors that prevail in such a state of
   things is spiritual pride. This is the main door by which the devil
   comes into the hearts of those who are zealous for the advancement of
   religion. It is the chief inlet of smoke from the bottomless pit, to
   darken the mind and mislead the judgment. This is the main handle by
   which the devil has hold of religious persons, and the chief source of
   all the mischief that he introduces, to clog and hinder a work of God.
   --This cause of error is the main spring, or at least the main support,
   of all the rest. Till this disease is cured, medicines are in vain
   applied to heal other diseases. It is by this that the mind defends
   itself in other errors and guards itself against light, by which it
   might be corrected and reclaimed. The spiritually proud man is full of
   light already; he does not need instruction, and is ready to despise
   the offer of it. But, if this disease be healed, other things are
   easily rectified. The humble person is like a little child, he easily
   receives instruction; he is jealous over himself, sensible how liable
   he is to go astray, and therefore, if it be suggested to him that he
   does so, he is ready most narrowly and impartially to inquire. Nothing
   sets a person so much out of the devil's reach as humility, and so
   prepares the mind for true divine light without darkness, and so clears
   the eye to look on things as they truly are; Ps. xxv. 9. "The meek will
   he guide in judgment. And the meek will he teach his way." Therefore we
   should fight, neither with small not with great, but with the king of
   Israel. Our first care should be to rectify the heart, and pull the
   beam out of our eye, and then we shall see clearly.

   I know that a great many things at this day are very injuriously laid
   to the pride of those that are zealous in the cause of God. When any
   person appears, in any respect, remarkably distinguished in religion
   from others; if he professes those spiritual comforts and joys that are
   greater than ordinary, or appears distinguishingly zealous in religion;
   if he exerts himself more than others in the cause of religion, or
   seems to be distinguished with success; ten to one but it will
   immediately awaken the jealousy of those about him. They will suspect
   (whether they have cause or no) that he is very proud of his goodness,
   and affects to have it thought that nobody is so good as he; and all
   his talk is heard, and all his behaviour beheld, with this prejudice.
   Those who are themselves cold and dead, and especially such as never
   had any experience of the power of godliness on their own hearts, are
   ready to entertain such thoughts of the best Christians; which arises
   from a secret enmity against vital and fervent piety. But zealous
   Christians should take heed lest this prove a snare to them, and the
   devil take advantage from it, to blind their eyes from beholding what
   there is indeed of this nature in their hearts, and make them think,
   because they are charged with pride wrongfully and from an ill spirit,
   in many things, that therefore it is so in every thing. Alas, how much
   pride have the best of us in our hearts! It is the worst part of the
   body of sin and death; the first sin that ever entered into the
   universe, and the last that is rooted out; it is God's most stubborn
   enemy!

   The corruption of nature may all be resolved into two things, pride and
   worldly-mindedness, the devil and the beast, or self and the world.
   These are the two pillars of Dagon's temple, on which the whole house
   leans. But the former of these is every way the worst part of the
   corruption of nature; it is the first-born son of the devil, and his
   image in the heart of man chiefly consists in it. It is the last thing
   in as sinner that is overborne by conviction, in order to conversion;
   and here is the saint's hardest conflict; the last thing over which he
   directly militates against god, and is most contrary to the Spirit of
   the Lamb of God. It is most like the devil its father, in a serpentine
   deceitfulness and secrecy; it lies deepest, is most active, and is most
   ready secretly to mix itself with every thing.

   And, of all kinds of pride, spiritual pride is upon many accounts the
   most hateful, it is most like the devil; most like the sin he committed
   in a heaven of light and glory, where he was exalted high in divine
   knowledge, honour, beauty, and happiness. Pride is much more difficult
   to be discerned than any other corruption, because its nature very much
   consists in a person's having too high a thought of himself. No wonder
   that he who has too high a thought of himself, does not know it; for he
   necessarily thinks that the opinion of himself was without just
   grounds, he would therein cease to have it. Those that are spiritually
   proud, have a high conceit of these two things, viz. Their light, and
   their humility, both which are a strong prejudice against a discovery
   of their pride. Being proud of their light, that makes them not jealous
   of themselves; he who thinks a clear light shines around him, is not
   suspicious of an enemy lurking near him unseen; and then, being proud
   of their humility, that makes them least of all jealous of themselves
   in that particular, viz., as being under the prevalence of pride. There
   are many sins of the heart that are very secret in their nature, and
   difficultly discerned. The psalmist says, Psal. xix. 12. "Who can
   understand his errors,? Cleanse thou me from secret faults." But
   spiritual pride is the most secret of all sins. The heart is deceitful
   and unsearchable in nothing so much as in this matter; and there is no
   sin in the world, that men are so confident in. The very nature of it
   is to work self-confidence, and drive away jealousy of any evil of that
   kind. There is no sin so much like the devil as this for secrecy and
   subtlety, and appearing in a great many shapes undiscerned and
   unsuspected. It appears as an angel of light; takes occasion to arise
   from every thing; it perverts and abuses every thing, and even the
   exercises of real grace, and real humility, as an occasion to exert
   itself: it is a sin that has, as it were, many lives; if you kill it,
   it will live still; if you mortify and suppress it in one shape, it
   rises in another; if you think it is all gone, yet it is there still.
   There are a great many kinds of it, that lie in different forms and
   shapes, one under another, and encompass the heart like the coats of an
   onion; if you pull off one, there is another underneath. We had need
   therefore to have the greatest watch imaginable over our hearts with
   respect to this matter, and to cry most earnestly to the great searcher
   of hearts for his help. He that trusts his own heart is a fool.

   God's own people should be the more jealous of themselves with respect
   to this particular at this day, because the temptations that many have
   to this sin are exceeding great. The great and distinguishing
   privileges to which God admits many of his saints, and the high honours
   he puts on some ministers, are great trials of persons in this respect.
   It is true, that great degrees of the spiritual presence of God tends
   greatly to mortify pride and corruption; but yet, though in the
   experience of such favours there be much to restrain pride one way,
   there is much to tempt and provoke it another; and we shall be in great
   danger thereby, without great watchfulness and prayerfulness. The
   angels that fell, while in heaven had great honours and high
   privileges, in beholding the face of God, and viewing his infinite
   glory, to cause in them exercises of humility, and to keep them from
   pride; yet, through want of watchfulness in them, their great honour
   and heavenly privilege proved to be to them an undoing temptation to
   pride, though they had no principle of pride in their hearts to expose
   them. Let no saint therefore, however eminent, and however near to God,
   think himself out of danger. He that thinks himself most out of danger,
   is indeed most in danger. The apostle Paul, who doubtless was an
   eminent a saint as any now, was not out of danger, even just after he
   was admitted to see God in the third heavens, 2 Cor. xii. And yet
   doubtless, what he saw in heaven of the ineffable glory of the Divine
   Being, had a direct tendency to make him appear exceeding little and
   vile in his own eyes.

   Spiritual pride in its own nature is so secret, that it is not so well
   discerned by immediate intuition on the thing itself, as by the effects
   and fruits of it; some of which I would mention, together with the
   contrary fruits of pure Christian humility. Spiritual pride disposes to
   speak of other persons' sins, their enmity against God and his people,
   the miserable delusion of hypocrites, and their enmity against vital
   piety, and the deadness of some saints, with bitterness, or with
   laughter and levity, and an air of contempt; whereas pure Christian
   humility rather disposes, either to be silent about them, or to speak
   of them with grief and pity. Spiritual pride is very apt to suspect
   others; whereas an humble saint is most jealous of himself; he is so
   suspicious of nothing in the world as he is of his own heart. The
   spiritually proud person is apt to find fault with other saints, that
   they are low in grace; and to be much in observing how cold and dead
   they are; and being quick to discern and take notice of their
   deficiencies. But the eminently humble Christian has so much to do at
   home, and sees so much evil in his own heart, and is so concerned about
   it, that he is not apt to be very busy with other hearts; he complains
   most of himself, and complains of his own coldness and lowness in
   grace. He is apt to esteem others better than himself, and is ready to
   hope that there is nobody but what has more love and thankfulness to
   God than he, and cannot bear to think that others should bring forth no
   more fruit to God's honour than he. Some who have spiritual pride mixed
   with high discoveries and great transports of joy, disposing them in an
   earnest manner to talk to others, are apt, in such frames, to be
   calling upon other Christians about them, and sharply reproving them
   for their being so cold and lifeless. There are others, who in their
   raptures are overwhelmed with a sense of their own vileness; and, when
   they have extraordinary discoveries of God's glory, are all taken up
   about their own sinfulness; and though they also are disposed to speak
   much and very earnestly, yet it is very much in blaming themselves, and
   exhorting fellow-Christians, but in a charitable and humble manner.
   Pure Christian humility disposes a person to take notice of every thing
   that is good in others, and to make the best of it, and to diminish
   their failings; but to gave his eye chiefly on those things that are
   bad in himself, and to take much notice of every thing that aggravates
   them.

   In a contrariety to this, it has been the manner in some places, or at
   least the manner of some persons to speak of almost every thing that
   they see amiss in others, in the most harsh, severe, and terrible
   language. It is frequent with them to say of others' opinions, or
   conduct, or advice--or of their coldness, their silence, their caution,
   their moderation, their prudence, &c.--that they are from the devil, of
   from hell; that such a thing is devilish, or hellish, or cursed, and
   that such persons are serving the devil, or the devil is in them, that
   they are soul-murderers, and the like; so that the words devil and hell
   are almost continually in their mouths. And such kind of language they
   will commonly use, not only towards wicked men, but towards them whom
   they themselves allow to be the true children of God, and also towards
   ministers of the gospel and others who are very much their superiors.
   And they look upon it as a virtue and high attainment thus to behave
   themselves. Oh, say they, we must be plain hearted and bold for Christ,
   we must declare war against sin wherever we see it, we must not mince
   the matter in the cause of God and when speaking for Christ. And to
   make any distinction in persons, or to speak the more tenderly, because
   that which is amiss is seen in a superior, they look upon as very mean
   for a follower of Christ when speaking in the cause of his Master. What
   a strange device of the devil is here, to overthrow all Christian
   meekness and gentleness, and even all show and appearance of it, and to
   defile the mouths of the children of God, and to introduce the language
   of common sailors among the followers of Christ, under a cloak of high
   sanctity and zeal, and boldness for Christ! And it is a remarkable
   instance of the weakness of the human mind, and how much too cunning
   the devil is for us!

   The grand defence of this way of talking is, That they say no more than
   what is true; they only speak the truth without mincing the matter; and
   that true Christians who have a great sight of the evil of sin, and
   acquaintance with their own hearts, know it to be true, and therefore
   will not be offended to hear such harsh expressions concerning them and
   their sins. It is only (say they) hypocrites, or cold and dead
   Christians, that are provoked and feel their enmity rise on such an
   occasion. But it is a grand mistake to think that we may commonly use
   all such language as represents the worst of each other, according to
   strict truth. It is really true, that every kind of sin, and every
   degree of it, is devilish and from hell, and is cursed, hellish, and
   condemned or damned. And if persons had a full sight of their hearts,
   they would think no terms too bad for them; they would look like
   beasts, like serpents, and like devils to themselves; they would be at
   a loss for language to express what they see in themselves. But shall a
   child therefore, from time to time, use such language concerning an
   excellent and eminently holy father or mother, as, That the devil is in
   them; that they have such and such devilish, cursed dispositions; that
   they commit every day hundreds of hellish, damned acts; and that they
   are cursed dogs, hell-hounds, and devils? And shall the meanest of the
   people be justified, in commonly using such language concerning the
   most excellent magistrates, or the most eminent ministers? I hope
   nobody has gone to this height. But the same pretences of boldness,
   plain-heartedness, and declared war against sin, will as well justify
   these things as the others. If we proceed in such a manner, on such
   principles as these, what a face will be introduced upon the church of
   Christ, the little beloved flock of that gentle Shepherd the Lamb of
   God! What a sound shall we bring into the house of God, into the family
   of his dear little children! How far off shall we soon banish that
   lovely appearance of humility, sweetness, gentleness, mutual honour,
   benevolence, complacence, and an esteem of others above themselves,
   which ought to clothe the children of God all over! Not but that
   Christians should watch over one another, and in any wise reprove one
   another, and do it plainly and faithfully; but it does not thence
   follow that dear brethren in the family of God, in rebuking one
   another, should use worse language than Michael the archangel durst use
   when rebuking the devil himself.

   Christians, who are but fellow-worms, ought at least to treat one
   another with as much humility and gentleness as Christ, who is
   infinitely above them treats them. But how did Christ treat his
   disciples when they were so cold towards him, and so regardless of him,
   at the time when his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death--and
   he in a dismal agony was crying and sweating blood for them--and they
   would not watch with him and allow him the comfort of their company one
   hour in his great distress, though he once and again desired it of
   them? One would think that then was a proper time, if ever, to have
   reproved them for a devilish, hellish, cursed, and damned slothfulness
   and deadness. But after what manner does Christ reprove them? Behold
   his astonishing gentleness! Says he, What, could ye not watch with me
   one hour? The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. And how
   did he treat Peter when he was ashamed of his Master, while he was made
   a mocking stock and a spitting stock for him? Why, he looked upon him
   with a look of love, and melted his heart. And though we read that
   Christ once turned, and said unto Peter, on a certain occasion, Get
   thee behind me, Satan; and this may seem like an instance of harshness
   and severity in reproving Peter; yet I humbly conceive that this is by
   many taken wrong, and that this is indeed no instance of Christ's
   severity in his treatment of Peter, but on the contrary, of his
   wonderful gentleness and grace, distinguishing between Peter and the
   devil in him, not laying the blame of what Peter had then said, or
   imputing it to him, but to the devil that influenced him. Christ saw
   the devil then present, secretly influencing Peter to do the part of a
   tempter to his Master; and therefore Christ turned him about to Peter,
   in whom the devil then was, and spake to the devil, and rebuked him.
   Thus the grace of Christ does not behold iniquity in his people,
   imputes not what is amiss in them to them, but to sin that dwells in
   them, and to Satan that influences them.

   Spiritual pride often disposes persons to singularity in external
   appearance, to affect a singular way of speaking, to use a different
   sort of dialect from others, or to be singular in voice, countenance,
   or behaviour. But he that is an eminently humble Christian, though he
   will be firm to his duty, however singular--going in the way that leads
   to heaven alone, though all the world forsake him--yet he delights not
   in singularity for singularity's sake. He does not affect to set up
   himself to be viewed and observed as one distinguished, as desiring to
   be accounted better than others--despising their company, or conformity
   to them-- but on the contrary is disposed to become all things to all
   men, to yield to others, and conform to them and please them, in every
   thing but sin. Spiritual pride commonly occasions a certain stiffness
   and inflexibility in persons, in their own judgment and their own ways;
   whereas the eminently humble person, though he be inflexible in his
   duty, and in these things wherein God's honour is concerned; and with
   regard to temptation to those things he apprehends to be sinful, though
   in never so small a degree, he is not at all of a yielding spirit, but
   is like a brazen wall; yet in other things he is of a pliable
   disposition, not disposed to set up his own opinion, or his own will;
   he is ready to pay deference to others' opinions, loves to comply with
   their inclinations, and has a heart that is tender and flexible, like a
   little child. Spiritual pride disposes persons to affect separation, to
   stand at a distance from others, as being better than they; and loves
   the show and appearance of the distinction. But, on the contrary, the
   eminently humble Christian is ready to look upon himself as not worthy
   that others should be united to him--to think himself more brutish than
   any man, and worthy of the society of God's children.--And though he
   will not be a companion with one that is visibly Christ's enemy--but
   delights most in the company of lively Christians, choosing such for
   his companions, and will be most intimate with them, not delighting to
   spend much time in the company of those who seem to relish no
   conversation but about worldly things--yet he does not love the
   appearance of an open separation from visible Christians, as being a
   kind of distinct company from them who are on visible company of those
   who seem to relish no conversation but about worldly things--yet he
   does not love the appearance of an open separation from visible
   Christians, as being a kind of distinct company from them who are one
   visible company with him by Christ's appointment; and will as much as
   possible shun all appearances of a superiority, or distinguishing
   himself as better than others. His universal benevolence delights in
   the appearance of union with his fellow-creatures, and will maintain it
   as much as he possibly can without giving open countenance to iniquity,
   or wounding his own soul. And herein he follows the example of his meek
   and lowly Redeemer, who did not keep up such a separation and distance
   as the Pharisees, but freely ate with publicans and sinners, that he
   might win them.

   The eminently humble Christian is as it were clothed with lowliness,
   mildness, meekness, gentleness of spirit and behaviour, and with a
   soft, sweet, condescending, winning air and deportment; these things
   are just like garments to him, he is clothed all over with them. 1 Pet.
   v. 5. "And be clothed with humility." Col. iii. 12. "Put on therefore,
   as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness,
   humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering." Pure Christian humility
   has no such thing as roughness, or contempt, or fierceness, or
   bitterness in its nature; it makes a person like a little child,
   harmless and innocent, that none need to be afraid of, or like a lamb,
   destitute of all bitterness, wrath, anger, and clamour; agreeable to
   Eph. iv. 31. With such a spirit as this ought especially zealous
   ministers of the gospel to be clothed, and those that God is pleased to
   employ as instruments in his hands of promoting his work. They ought
   indeed to be thorough in preaching the word of God, without mincing the
   matter at all; in handling the sword of the Spirit, as the ministers of
   the Lord of hosts, they ought not to be mild and gentle; they are not
   to be gentle and moderate in searching and awakening the conscience,
   but should be sons of thunder. The word of God, which is in itself
   sharper than any two-edged sword, ought not to be sheathed by its
   ministers, but so used that its sharp edges may have their full effect,
   even to the dividing asunder soul and spirit, joints and marrow. Yet
   they should do it without judging particular persons, leaving it to
   conscience and the Spirit of God to make the particular application.
   But all their conversation should savour of nothing but lowliness and
   good-will, love and pity to all mankind; so that such a spirit should
   be like a sweet odour diffused around them wherever they go. They
   should be like lions to guilty consciences, but like lambs to men's
   persons. This would have no tendency to prevent the awakening of men's
   consciences, but on the contrary would have a very great tendency to
   awaken them. It would make way for the sharp sword to enter; it would
   remove the obstacles, and make a naked breast for the arrow.--Yea, the
   amiable Christ-like conversation of such ministers in itself, would
   terrify the consciences of men, as well as their terrible preaching;
   both would co-operate to subdue the hard, and bring down the proud
   heart. If there had been constantly and universally observable such a
   behaviour as this in itinerant preachers, it would have terrified the
   consciences of sinners ten times as much as all the invectives and the
   censorious talk there has been concerning particular persons, for their
   opposition, hypocrisy, delusion, pharisaism, &c. These things in
   general have rather stupefied sinners' consciences; they take them up,
   and make use of them as a shield, wherewith to defend themselves from
   the sharp arrows of the word that are shot by these preachers. The
   enemies of the present work have been glad of these things with all
   their hearts.--Many of the most bitter of them are probably such as in
   the beginning of this work had their consciences something galled and
   terrified with it; but these errors of awakening preachers are the
   things they chiefly make use of as plasters to heal the sore that was
   made in their consciences.

   Spiritual pride takes great notice of opposition and injuries that are
   received, and is apt to be often speaking of them, and to be much in
   taking notice of their aggravations, either with an air of bitterness
   or contempt. Whereas pure and unmixed Christian humility, disposes a
   person rather to be like his blessed Lord, when reviled, dumb, not
   opening his mouth, but committing himself in silence to him that
   judgeth righteously. The eminently humble Christian, the more clamorous
   and furious the world is against him, the more silent and still will he
   be; unless it be in his closet, and there he will not be still.--Our
   blessed Lord Jesus seems never to have been so silent as when the world
   compassed him round, reproaching, buffeting, and spitting on him, with
   loud and virulent outcries, and horrid cruelties. There has been a
   great deal too much talk of late, among many of the true and zealous
   friends of religion, about opposition and persecution. It becomes the
   followers of the Lamb of God, when the world is in an uproar about the,
   and full of clamour against them, not to raise another noise to answer
   it, but to be still and quiet. It is not beautiful, at such time, to
   have pulpits and conversation ring with the sound of persecution,
   persecution, or with abundant talk about Pharisees, carnal persecutors,
   and the seed of the serpent.--Meekness and quietness among God's
   people, when opposed and reviled, would be the surest way to have God
   remarkably to appear for their defence. It is particularly observed of
   Moses, on occasion of Aaron and Miriam envying him, and rising up in
   opposition against him, that he "was very meek, above all men upon the
   face of the earth," Num. xii. 3. Doubtless because he remarkably showed
   his meekness on that occasion, being wholly silent under the abuse. And
   how remarkable is the account the follows of God's being as it were
   suddenly roused to appear for his vindication! What high honour did he
   put upon Moses! And how severe were his rebukes of his opposers! The
   story is very remarkable, and worthy every one's observation. Nothing
   is so effectual to bring God down from heaven in the defence of his
   people, as their patience and meekness under sufferings. When Christ
   "girds his sword upon his thigh, with his glory and majesty, and in his
   majesty rides prosperously, his right hand teaching him terrible
   things, it is because of truth, and MEEKNESS, and righteousness," Psal.
   xlv. 3,4. "God will cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth
   shall fear and be still, and God will arise to judgment, to save all
   the meek of the earth," Psal. lxxvi. 8,9. "He will lift up the meek,
   and cast the wicked down to the ground," Psal. cxlvii. 6. "He will
   reprove with equity for the meek of the earth, and will smite the earth
   with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips will he slay
   the wicked," Isa. xi. 4. The great commendation that Christ gives the
   church of Philadelphia is, "Thou hast kept the word of my patience,"
   Rev. iii. 10. And we may see what reward he promises her, in the
   preceding verse, "Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan,
   which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make
   them to come and worship at thy feet, and to know that I have loved
   thee." And thus it is that we might expect to have Christ appear for
   us, if under all the reproaches we are loaded with, we behaved
   ourselves with a lamb-like meekness and gentleness. But if our spirits
   are raised, and we are vehement and noisy with our complaints under
   colour of Christian zeal, this will be to take upon us our own defence,
   and God will leave it with us, to vindicate our cause as well as we
   can; yea, if we go on in a way of bitterness, and high censuring, it
   will be the way to have him rebuke us, and put us to shame before our
   enemies.

   Here some may be ready to say, "It is not in our own cause that we are
   thus vehement, but it is in the cause of God, and the apostle directed
   the primitive Christians to contend earnestly for the faith once
   delivered to the saints." But how was it that the primitive Christians
   contended earnestly for the faith? They defended the truth with
   arguments and a holy conversation, but yet gave their reasons with
   meekness and fear. They contended earnestly for the faith, by fighting
   violently against their own unbelief, and the corruptions of their
   hearts: yea, they resisted unto blood striving against sin; but the
   blood that was shed in this earnest strife, was their own blood, and
   not the blood of their enemies. It was in the cause of God that Peter
   was so fierce, and drew his sword, and began to smite with it; but
   Christ bids him put up his sword again, telling him that they that take
   the sword shall perish by the sword; and, while Peter wounds, Christ
   heals. They contend the most violently, and are the greatest conquerors
   in a time of persecution, who bear it with the greatest meekness and
   patience. Great humility improves even the reflections and reproaches
   of enemies, to put upon serious self-examination, whether or no there
   be not some just cause; whether or no there be not some just cause;
   whether they have not in some respect given occasion to the enemy to
   speak reproachfully. Whereas spiritual pride improves such reflections
   to make them the more bold and confident, and to go the greater lengths
   in that for which they are found fault with. I desire it may be
   considered, whether there has been nothing amiss of late among the true
   friends of vital piety in this respect; and whether the words of David,
   when reviled by Michal, have not been misinterpreted and misapplied to
   justify them in it, when he said, "I will be yet more vile, and will be
   base in mine own sight." The import of his words is, that he would
   humble himself yet more before God, being sensible that he was far from
   being sufficiently abased; and he signifies this to Michal, that he
   longed to be yet lower, and had designed already to abase himself more
   in his behaviour.--Not that he would got the greater length, to show
   his regardlessness of her revilings; that would be to exalt himself,
   and not to abase himself as more vile in his own sight.

   Another effect of spiritual pride is a certain unsuitable and
   self-confident boldness before God and men. Thus some, in their great
   rejoicings before God, have not paid a sufficient regard to that rule
   in Psal. ii. 11. They have not rejoiced with a reverential trembling,
   in a proper sense of the awful majesty of God, and the awful distance
   between him and them. And there has also been an improper boldness
   before men that has been encouraged and defended by a misapplication of
   that scripture. Prov. xxix. 25. "The fear of man bringeth a snare." As
   though it became all persons, high and low, men, women, and children,
   in all religious conversation, wholly to divest themselves of all
   manner of shamefacedness, modesty, or reverence towards man; which is a
   great error, and quite contrary to Scripture. There is a fear of
   reverence that is due to some men, Rom. xiii. 7. "Fear to whom fear,
   honour to whom honour." And there is a fear of modesty and
   shamefacedness in inferiors towards superiors, which is amiable, and
   required by Christian rules, 1 Pet. iii. 2. "While they behold your
   chaste conversation coupled with fear;" and 1 Tim. ii. 9. "In like
   manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
   shamefacedness and sobriety." The apostle means that this virtue shall
   have place, not only in civil communication, but also in spiritual
   communication, and in our religious concerns and behaviour, as is
   evident by what follows, 1 Tim. ii. 11, 12. "Let the women learn in
   silence, with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
   usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence." Not that I would
   hence infer that women's mouths should be shut up from Christian
   conversation; but all that I mean from it at this time is, that
   modesty, or shamefacedness, and reverence towards men, ought to have
   some place, even in our religious communication one with another. The
   same is also evident by 1 Pet. iii. 15. "Be ready always to give an
   answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in
   you, with meekness and fear." It is well if that very fear and
   shamefacedness, which the apostle recommends, have not sometimes been
   condemned, under the name of a cursed fear of man.

   It is beautiful for persons, when they are at prayer as the mouth of
   others, to make God only their fear and their dread, and to be wholly
   forgetful of men present, who, let them be great or small, are nothing
   in the presence of the great God. And it is beautiful for a minister,
   when he speaks in the name of the Lord of hosts, to be bold, and to put
   off all fear of men. And it is beautiful in private Christians, though
   they are women and even children, to be bold in professing the faith of
   Christ, in the practice of all religion, and in owning God's in the
   work of his power and grace, without any fear of men; though they
   should be reproached as fools and madmen, frowned upon by great men,
   and cast off by parents and all the world. But for private Christians,
   women and others, to instruct, rebuke, and exhort, with a like sort of
   boldness as becomes a minister when preaching, is not beautiful. Some
   have been bold in things that have really been errors; and have gloried
   in their boldness in practising them, though odd and irregular. And
   those who have gone the greatest lengths in these things, have been by
   some most highly esteemed, as appearing bold for the Lord Jesus Christ,
   and fully on his side; while others who have professed to be godly, and
   who have condemned such things, have been spoken of as enemies of the
   cross of Christ, or at least very cold and dead; and thus many, that of
   themselves were not inclined to such practices, have by this means been
   driven on, being ashamed to be behind, and accounted poor soldiers for
   Christ.

   Another effect of spiritual pride is to make the subject of it
   assuming. It oftentimes makes it natural to persons so to act and
   speak, as though in a special manner it belonged to them to be taken
   notice of and much regarded. It is very natural to a person that is
   much under the influence of spiritual pride, to take all the respect
   that is paid him. If others show a disposition to submit to him, and
   yield him the deference of a preceptor, he is open to it, and freely
   admits it; yea, it is natural for him to expect such treatment, and to
   take much notice if he fails of it, and to have an ill opinion of
   others that do not pay him that which he looks upon as his
   prerogative.--He is apt to think that it belongs to him to speak, and
   to clothe himself with a judicial and dogmatical air in conversation,
   and to take it upon him, as what belongs to him, to give forth his
   sentence, and to determine and decide. Whereas pure Christian humility
   vaunteth not itself, doth not behave itself unseemly, and is apt to
   prefer others in honour. One under the influence of spiritual pride is
   more apt to instruct others, than to inquire for himself, and naturally
   puts on the airs of a master. Whereas one that is full of pure
   humility, naturally has on the air of a disciple; his voice is, "What
   shall I do? What shall I do that I may live more to God's honour? What
   shall I do with this wicked heart?" He is ready to receive instruction
   from any body, agreeable to Jam. 1. 19. "Wherefore, my beloved
   brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak." The eminently
   humble Christian thinks he wants help from every body, whereas he that
   is spiritually proud thinks that every body wants his help. Christian
   humility, under a sense of others' misery, entreats and beseeches; but
   spiritual pride affects to command and warn with authority. There ought
   to be the utmost watchfulness against all such appearances of spiritual
   pride, in all that profess to have been the subjects of this work, and
   especially in the promoters of it, but above all in itinerant
   preachers. The most eminent gifts, and highest tokens of God's favour
   and blessing, will not excuse them.--Alas! What is man at his best
   estate! What is the most highly-favoured Christian, or the most eminent
   and successful minister, that he should now think he is sufficient for
   something, and somebody to be regarded; and that he should go forth,
   and act among his fellow-creatures as if he were wise, and strong, and
   good!

   Ministers who have been the principal instruments of carrying on this
   glorious revival of religion, and whom God has made use of to bring up
   his people as it were out of Egypt, should take heed, that they do not
   provoke God, as Moses did, by assuming too much to themselves, and by
   their intemperate zeal to shut them out from seeing the good things
   that God is going to do for this church in this world. The fruits of
   Moses' unbelief, which provoked God to shut him out of Canaan, and not
   to suffer him to partake of those great things God was about to do for
   Israel, were chiefly these two things:--First, His mingling bitterness
   with his zeal. He had a great zeal for God, and he could not bear to
   see the intolerable stiffneckedness of the people, that they did not
   acknowledge the work of God, and were not convinced by all his wonders
   that they had seen. But human passion was mingled with his zeal, Psal.
   cvi. 32, 33. "They angered him also at the waters of strife; so that it
   went ill with Moses for their sakes: because they provoked his spirit,
   so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips." Hear now, ye rebels, says
   he, with bitterness of language.--Secondly, He behaved himself, and
   spake with an assuming air. He assumed too much to himself; hear now,
   ye rebels, must we fetch water out of this rock? Spiritual pride
   wrought in Moses at that time. His temptations to it were very great;
   for he had had great discoveries of God, and had been privileged with
   intimate and sweet communion with him, and God had made him the
   instrument of great good to his church. But though he was so humble a
   person, and, by God's own testimony, meek above all men upon the face
   of the whole earth, yet his temptations were too strong for him. Which
   surely should make our young ministers that have of late been highly
   favoured, and have had great success, exceeding careful, and
   distrustful of themselves. Alas! How far are we from having the
   strength of holy, meek, aged Moses! The temptation at this day is
   exceeding great to both those errors that Moses was guilty of. There is
   great temptation to bitterness and corrupt passion with zeal; for there
   is so much unreasonable opposition made against this glorious work of
   God, and so much stiffneckedness manifested in multitudes of this
   generation, notwithstanding all the great and wonderful works in which
   God has passed before them, that it greatly tends to provoke the
   spirits of such as have the interest of this work at heart, so as to
   move them to speak unadvisedly with their lips. And there is also great
   temptation to an assuming behaviour in some persons. When a minister is
   greatly succeeded from time to time, and so draws the eyes of the
   multitude upon him, when he sees himself followed, resorted to as an
   oracle--and people ready to adore him, and as it were to offer
   sacrifice to him, and as it were to offer sacrifice to him, as it was
   with Paul and Barnabas at Lystra--it is almost impossible for a man to
   avoid taking upon him the airs of a master, or some extraordinary
   person; a man had need to have a great stock of humility, and much
   divine assistance, to resist the temptation. But the greater our
   dangers are, the more ought to be our watchfulness, prayerfulness, and
   diffidence, lest we bring ourselves into mischief. Fishermen who have
   been very successful, having caught a great many fish, had need to be
   careful that they do not at length begin to burn incense to their net.
   And we should take warning by Gideon, who after God had highly favoured
   and exalted him, and made him the instrument of working a wonderful
   deliverance for his people, at length made a god of the spoils of his
   enemies, which became a snare to him and to his house, so as to prove
   the ruin of his family.

   All young ministers, in this day of bringing up the ark of God, should
   take warning by the example of a young Levite in Israel, Uzzah the son
   of Abinadab. He seemed to have a real concern for the ark of God, and
   to be zealous and engaged in his mind on that joyful occasion of
   bringing it up. God made him an instrument to bring the ark out of its
   long-continued obscurity in Kiriath-jearim, and he was succeeded to
   bring it a considerable way towards mount Zion; but for his want of
   humility, reverence, and circumspection, and assuming or taking too
   much upon him, God broke forth upon him, and smote him for his error,
   so that he never lived to see and partake of the great joy of his
   church on occasion of the carrying up the ark into mount Zion, and the
   great blessings of heaven upon Israel consequent upon it. Ministers
   employed to carry on this work, have been chiefly of the younger sort,
   who have doubtless (as Uzzah had) a real concern for the ark; and it is
   evident that they are much animated and engaged in their minds (as he
   was) in this joyful day of bringing up the ark.--They are afraid what
   will become of the ark under the conduct of its ministers: they see it
   shakes, and they are afraid these blundering oxen will throw it. Some
   of them, it is to be feared, have been over-officious on this occasion,
   have assumed too much to themselves, and have been bold to put forth
   their hand to take hold of the ark, as though they were the only fit
   and worthy persons to defend it. If young ministers had great humility,
   without a corrupt mixture, it would dispose them especially to treat
   aged ministers with respect and reverence, as their fathers,
   notwithstanding that a sovereign God may have given themselves greater
   assistance and success, 1 Pet. v. 5. "Likewise, ye younger, submit
   yourselves unto the elder; yea, all of you be subject one to another;
   and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth
   grace to the humble." Lev. xix. 32. "Thou shalt rise up before the
   hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear they God; I am
   the Lord."

   As spiritual pride disposes persons to assume much to themselves, so it
   also disposes them to treat others with neglect. On the contrary, pure
   Christian humility disposes persons to honour all men, agreeable to
   that rule, 1 Pet. ii. 17. There has been in some, who I believe are
   true friends of religion, too great appearance of this fruit of
   spiritual pride, in their treatment of those whom they looked upon to
   be carnal men; and particularly in refusing to enter into any discourse
   or reasoning with them. Indeed to spend a great deal of time in
   jangling and warm debates about religion, is not the way to propagate,
   but to hinder it; and some are so dreadfully set against this work,
   that it is a dismal task to dispute with them; all that one can say is
   utterly in vain. I have found it so by experience. To enter into
   disputes about religion, at some times, is quite unseasonable,
   particularly in meetings for religious conference, or exercises of
   worship. But yet we ought to be very careful that we do not refuse to
   discourse with men, with any appearance of a supercilious neglect, as
   though we counted them not worthy to be regarded; on the contrary, we
   should condescend to carnal men, as Christ has condescended to us, to
   bear with our unteachableness and stupidity.--He still follows us with
   instructions, line upon line, and precept upon precept, saying, Come,
   let us reason together; setting light before us, and using all manner
   of arguments with us, and waiting upon such dull scholars, as it were
   hoping that we should receive light. We should be ready with meekness
   and calmness, without hot disputing, to give our reasons, why we think
   this work is the work of God, to carnal men when they ask us, and not
   turn them by as not worthy to be talked with; as the apostle directed
   the primitive Christians to be ready to give a reason of the Christian
   faith and hope to the enemies of Christianity, 1 Pet. iii. 15. "Be
   ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of
   the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear." And we ought not to
   condemn all reasoning about things of religion under the name of carnal
   reason. For my part, I desire no better than that those who oppose this
   work should fairly submit to have the cause betwixt us tried by strict
   reasoning.

   One qualification that the Scripture speaks of once and again, as
   requisite in a minister, is, that he should be (NOT ENGLISH) apt to
   teach, 1Tim. iii. 2. And the apostle seems to explain what he means by
   it, in 2 Tim. ii. 24, 25. Or at least there expresses one thing that he
   intends by it, viz. That a minister should be ready, meekly to
   condescend to and instruct opposers; "And the servant apt to teach,
   patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
   peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the
   truth."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Another cause of errors in conduct attending a religious revival, is
   the adoption of wrong principles.

   One erroneous principle, that which scare any has proved more
   mischievous to the present glorious work of God, is a notion that it is
   God's manner in these days, to guide his saints, at least some that are
   more eminent, by inspiration, or immediate revelation. They suppose he
   makes known to them what shall come to pass hereafter, or what it is
   his will that they should do, by impressions made upon their minds,
   either with or without texts of Scripture; whereby something is made
   know to them, that is not taught in the Scripture. By such a notion the
   devil has a great door opened for him; and if once this opinion should
   come to be fully yielded to, and established in the church of God,
   Satan would have opportunity thereby to set up himself as the guide and
   oracle of God's people, and to have his word regarded as their
   infallible rule, and so to lead them where he would, and to introduce
   what he pleased, and soon to bring the Bible into neglect and
   contempt.--Late experience, in some instances, has shown that the
   tendency of this notion is to cause persons to esteem the Bible as in a
   great measure useless.

   This error will defend and support errors. As long as a person has a
   notion that he is guided by immediate direction from heaven, it makes
   him incorrigible and impregnable in all his misconduct. For what
   signifies it, for poor blind worms of the dust, to go to argue with a
   man, and endeavour to convince him and correct him, that is guided by
   the immediate counsels and commands of the great JEHOVAH? This great
   work of God has been exceedingly hindered by this error; and, till we
   have quite taken this handle out of the devil's hands, the work of God
   will never go on without great clogs and hindrances.--Satan will always
   have a vast advantage in his hands against it, and as he has improved
   it hitherto, so he will do still. And it is evident, that the devil
   knows the vast advantage he has by it; that makes him exceeding loath
   to let go his hold.

   It is strange what a disposition there is in many well-disposed and
   religious persons to fall in with and hold fast this notion. It is
   enough to astonish one, that such multiplied, plain instances of the
   failing of such supposed revelations in the event, do not open every
   one's eyes. I have seen so many instances of the failing of such
   impressions that would almost furnish a history. I have been acquainted
   with them when made under all kinds of circumstances, and have seen
   them fail in the event, when made with such circumstances as have been
   fairest and brightest, and most promising. They have been made upon the
   minds of apparently eminent saints, and with an excellent heavenly
   frame of spirit yet continued, and made with texts of Scripture that
   seemed exceeding opposite, wonderfully brought to the mind, and the
   impressions repeated over and over; and yet all has most manifestly
   come to nothing, to the full conviction of the persons themselves. God
   has in so many instances of late, in his providence, covered such
   things with darkness, that one would think it should be enough quite to
   blank the expectations of those who have been ready to think highly of
   such things. It seems to be a testimony of God, that he has no design
   of reviving revelations in his church, and a rebuke from him to the
   groundless expectations of it.

   It seems to me that Zech. xiii. 5. Is a prophecy concerning ministers
   of the gospel in the latter and glorious day of the Christian church
   (which is evidently spoken of in this and the foregoing chapters). The
   words, I apprehend, are to be interpreted in a spiritual sense. I am an
   husbandman: The work of ministers is very often, in the New Testament,
   compared to the business of the husbandmen, that take care of God's
   husbandry, to whom he lets out his vineyard, and sends them forth to
   labour in his field, where one plants and another waters, one sows and
   another reaps; so ministers are called labourers in God's harvest. And
   as it is added, Men taught me to keep cattle from my youth; so the work
   of a minister is very often in Scripture represented by the business of
   a shepherd or pastor. And whereas it is said, I am no prophet; but man
   taught me from my youth: it is as much as to say, I do not pretend to
   have any thing added to them by impulses from above? Why should we not
   rest in that standing rule that God has given to his church, which, the
   apostle teaches us, is surer than a voice form heaven? And why should
   we desire to make the Scripture speak more to us than it does? Or why
   should any desire a higher kind of intercourse with heaven, than by
   having the Holy Spirit given in his sanctifying influences, infusing
   and exciting grace and holiness, love and joy, which is the highest
   kind of intercourse that the saints and angels in heaven have with God,
   and the chief excellency of the glorified man Christ Jesus?

   Some that follow impulses and impressions indulge a notion, that they
   do no other than follow the guidance of God's word, because the
   impression is made with a text of Scripture that comes to their mind.
   But they take that text as it is impressed on their mind. But they take
   that text as it is impressed on their minds, and improve it as a new
   revelation to all intents and purposes; while the text, as it is in the
   Bible, implies no such thing, and they themselves do not suppose that
   any such revelation was contained in it before. Suppose, for instance,
   that text should come into a person's mind with strong impression, Acts
   ix. 6. "Arise, and go into the city; and it shall be told thee what
   thou must do;" and he should interpret it as an immediate signification
   of the will of God, that he should now forthwith go to such a
   neighbouring town, and there he should meet with a further discovery of
   his duty. If such things as these are revealed by the impression of
   these words, it is to all intents a new revelation, not the less
   because certain words of Scripture are made use of in the case. Here
   are propositions or truths entirely new, that those words do not
   contain. These propositions, That it is God's mind and will that such a
   person by name should arise at such a time, and go to such a place, and
   that there he should meet with discoveries, are entirely new
   propositions, wholly different from those contained in that text of
   Scripture. They are no more implied in the words themselves, without a
   new revelation, than it is implied that he should arise and go to any
   other place, or that any other person should arise and go to that
   place. The propositions, supposed to be now revealed, are as really
   different from those contained in that scripture, as they are from the
   propositions contained in that text, Gen. v. 6. "And Seth lived an
   hundred and five years, and begat Enos." This is quite a different
   thing from the Spirit's enlightening the mind to understand the words
   of God, and know what is contained and revealed in them, and what
   consequences may justly be drawn from them, and to see how they are
   applicable to our case and circumstances; which is done without any new
   revelation, only by enabling the mind to understand and apply a
   revelation already made.

   Those texts of Scripture, that speak of the children of God as led by
   the Spirit, have been by some brought to defend such impulses;
   particularly Rom. viii. 14. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of
   God, they are the sons of God:" And Gal. v. 18. "But if ye are led by
   the Spirit, ye are not under the law." But these texts themselves
   confute them that bring them; for it is evident that the leading of the
   Spirit which the apostle speaks of is peculiar to the children of God,
   and that natural men cannot have; for he speaks of it as a sure
   evidence of their being the sons of God, and not under the law. But a
   leading or directing of a person by immediately revealing to him where
   he should go, or what shall hereafter come to pass, or what shall be
   the future consequence of his doing thus or thus, if there be any such
   thing in these days, is not of the nature of the gracious leading of
   the Spirit of God, peculiar to God's children. It is no more than a
   common gift; there is nothing in it but what natural men are capable
   of, and many of them have had in the days of inspiration. A man may
   have ten thousand such revelations and directions form the Spirit of
   God, and yet not have a jot of grace in his heart. It is no more than
   the gift of prophecy, which immediately reveals what will be, or should
   be hereafter; but this is only a common gift, as the apostle expressly
   shows, 1 Cor. xiii. 2, 8. If a person has any thing revealed to him
   from God, or is directed to any thing by a voice from heaven, or a
   whisper, or words immediately suggested to his mind, there is nothing
   of the nature of grace merely in this: it is of the nature of a common
   influence of the Spirit, and is but dross in comparison of the
   excellency of that gracious leading of the Spirit that the saints have.
   Such a way of being directed where one shall go, and what he shall do,
   is no more than what Balaam had from God, who from time to time
   revealed to him what he should do; so that he was in this sense led by
   the Spirit for a considerable time. There is a more excellent way in
   which the Spirit leads the sons of God, that natural men cannot have;
   and that is, by inclining them to do the will of God, and go in the
   shining path of truth and Christian holiness, from a holy, heavenly
   disposition, which the Spirit of God gives them, and which inclines and
   leads them to those things that are excellent and agreeable to God's
   mind, whereby they "are transformed by the renewing of their minds, and
   prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God," Rom.
   xii. 2. And so the Spirit of God does in a gracious manner teach the
   saints their duty; and he teaches them in a higher manner than ever
   Balaam, or Saul, or Judas, were taught. The Spirit of God enlightens
   them with respect to their duty, by making their eye single and pure,
   whereby the whole body is full of light. The sanctifying influence of
   the Spirit of God rectifies the taste of the soul, whereby it savours
   those things that are of God, and naturally relishes and delights in
   those things that are holy and agreeable to God's mind; and, like one
   of a distinguishing taste, it chooses those things that are good and
   wholesome, and rejects those that are evil. The sanctified ear tries
   words, and the sanctified heart tries actions, as the mouth tastes
   meat. And thus the Spirit of God leads and guides the meek in his way,
   agreeable to his promises; he enables them to understand the commands
   and counsels of his word, and rightly to apply them. Christ blames the
   Pharisees that they had not his holy distinguishing taste, to discern
   and distinguish what was right and wrong, Luke xii. 57. "Yea, and why
   even of your own selves judge ye not what is right?"

   The leading of the Spirit which God gives his children, and which is
   peculiar to them, is that teaching them his statutes, and causing them
   to understand the way of his precepts, which the psalmist so very often
   prays for, especially in the 119th Psalm: and not in giving them new
   statutes and new precepts. He graciously gives them eyes to see, and
   ears to hear, and hearts to understand; he causes them to understand
   the fear of the Lord, and so "brings the blind by a way they knew not,
   and leads them in paths that they had not known, and darkness light
   before them, and crooked things straight." So the assistance of the
   Spirit in praying and preaching seems by some to have been greatly
   misunderstood, and they have sought after a miraculous assistance of
   inspiration, by the immediate suggesting of words to them, by such
   gifts and influences of the Spirit, in praying and teaching, as the
   apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. xiv. 14, 26. (which many natural men had in
   those days,) instead of a gracious holy assistance of the Spirit of
   God, which is the far more excellent way; (as 1 Cor. xii. 31. and xiii.
   1.) the gracious and most excellent assistance of the Spirit of God in
   praying and preaching, is not by immediately suggesting words to the
   apprehension, which may be with a cold, dead heart; but by warming the
   heart, and filing it with a great sense of things to be spoken, and
   with holy affections, that these may suggest words. Thus indeed the
   Spirit of God may be said, indirectly and mediately, to suggest words
   to us, to indite our petitions for us, and to teach the preacher what
   to say; he fills the heart, and that fills the mouth. We know that when
   men are greatly affected in any matter, and their hearts are very full,
   it fills them with matter for speech, and makes them eloquent upon that
   subject; and much more have spiritual affections this tendency, for
   many reasons that might be given. When a person is in a holy and lively
   frame in secret prayer, or in christian conversation, it will
   wonderfully supply him with matter, and with expressions, as every true
   Christian knows; and it has the like tendency to enable a person in
   public prayer and preaching. And, if he has these holy influences of
   the Spirit on his heart in a high degree, nothing in the world will
   have so great a tendency to make both the matter and manner of his
   public performances excellent and profitable. But, since there is no
   immediate suggesting of words from the Spirit of God to be expected or
   desired, they who neglect and despise study and premeditation, in order
   to a preparation for the pulpit, in such an expectation, are guilty of
   presumption: though doubtless it may be lawful for some persons, in
   some cases, (and they may be called to it,) to preach with very little
   study; and the Spirit of God, by the heavenly frame of heart that he
   gives them, may enable them to do it to excellent purpose. Besides this
   most excellent way of the Spirit of God assisting ministers in public
   performances, which (considered as the preacher's privilege) far excels
   inspiration, there is a common assistance which natural men may have in
   these days, and which the godly may have intermingled with a gracious
   assistance, which is also very different from inspiration, and that is,
   his assisting natural principles; as the natural apprehension, reason,
   memory, conscience, and natural affection.

   But, to return to the head of impressions and immediate revelations;
   many lay themselves open to a delusion by expecting direction from
   heaven in this way, and waiting for it. In such a case it is easy for
   persons to imagine that they have it. They are perhaps at a loss
   concerning something, undetermined what they shall do, or what course
   they shall take in some affair; and they pray to God to direct them,
   and make known to them his mind and will: and then, instead of
   expecting to be directed, by being assisted in considering the rules of
   God's word, his providence, and their circumstances, to look on things
   in a true light, and justly to weigh them, they are waiting for some
   secret immediate influence, unaccountably swaying their minds, and
   turning their thoughts or inclinations that way in which God would have
   them to go. Hereby they are exposed to two things; first, they lay
   themselves open to the devil, and give him a fair opportunity to lead
   them where he pleases; for they stand ready to follow the first
   extraordinary impulse that they shall have, groundlessly concluding it
   is from God. And, secondly, they are greatly exposed to be deceived by
   their own imaginations: for such an expectation awakens and quickens
   the imagination; and that oftentimes is called an uncommon impression,
   that is no such thing; and they ascribe that to the agency of some
   invisible being, which is owing only to themselves.

   Again, another way that many have been deceived, is by drawing false
   conclusions from true premises. Many true and eminent saints have been
   led into mistakes and snares, by arguing that they have prayed in
   faith. They have indeed been greatly assisted in prayer for such a
   particular mercy, and have had the true spirit of prayer in exercise in
   their asking it of God: but they have concluded more from these
   premises than is a just consequence from them. That they have thus
   prayed is a sure sign that their prayer is accepted and heard, and that
   God will give a gracious answer according to his own wisdom, and that
   the particular thing asked shall be given, or that which is equivalent;
   this is a just consequence from it.--But it is not inferred by any new
   revelation now made, but by the promises made to the prayer of faith in
   the Holy Scriptures. But that God will answer them in that individual
   thing they ask, if it be not a thing promised in God's word, or they do
   not certainly know that it is what will be most for the good of God's
   church, and the advancement of Christ's kingdom and glory, nor whether
   it will be best for them, is more than can be justly concluded from it.
   If God remarkably meets with one of his children while he is praying
   for a particular mercy of great importance, for himself or some other
   person, or any society of men, and does by the influences of his Spirit
   greatly humble him, and empty him of himself in his prayer, and
   manifest himself remarkably in his excellency, sovereignty, and
   all-sufficient power and grace in Jesus Christ--and in a remarkable
   manner enables the person to come to him for that mercy, poor in
   spirit, and with humble resignation to God, and with a great degree of
   faith in the divine sufficiency, and the sufficiency of Christ's
   mediation--that person has indeed a great deal the more reason to hope
   that God will grant that mercy, than otherwise he would have. The
   greater probability is justly inferred, agreeable to the promises of
   the Holy Scripture, in that such prayer is accepted and heard; and it
   is much more probable that a prayer that is heard will be returned with
   a particular mercy that is asked, than one that is not so. And there is
   no reason at all to doubt, but that God sometimes especially enable to
   the exercises of faith, when the minds of his saints are engaged in
   thoughts of, and prayer for, some particular blessing they greatly
   desire; i.e. God is pleased especially to give them a believing frame,
   a sense of his fulness, and a spirit of humble dependence on him, at
   such times. When they are thinking of and praying for such mercy, he
   gives them a particular sense of his ability, and of the sufficiency of
   his power to overcome obstacles, and the sufficiency of his mercy and
   of the blood of Christ for the removal of the guilt that is in the way
   of the bestowment of such a mercy, in particular. When this is the
   case, it makes the probability still much greater, that God intends to
   bestow the particular mercy sought, in his own time, and his own way.
   But here is nothing of the nature of a revelation in the case, but only
   a drawing rational conclusions from the particular manner and
   circumstances of the ordinary gracious influences of God's Spirit. And
   as God is pleased sometimes to give his saints particular exercises of
   faith in his sufficiency, with regard to particular mercies; so he is
   sometimes pleased to make use of his word in order to it, and helps the
   actings of faith with respect to such a mercy. The strengthening of
   their faith in God's sufficiency, in this case, if therefore a just
   improvement of such scriptures; it is no more than what those
   scriptures, as they stand in the Bible, hold forth. But to take them as
   new whispers or revelations from heaven, is not making a just
   improvement of them. If persons have thus a spirit of prayer remarkably
   given to them, concerning particular mercy, from time to time, so as
   evidently to be assisted to act faith in God, in that particular, in a
   very distinguishing manner; the argument in some cases may be very
   strong, that God does design to grant that mercy, not from any
   revelation now made of it, but from such a kind and manner of the
   ordinary influence of his Spirit with respect to that thing.

   But here a great deal of caution and circumspection must be used in
   drawing inferences of this nature. There are many ways by which persons
   may be misled and deluded. The ground on which some expect that they
   shall receive the thing they have asked for, is rather a strong
   imagination, than any true humble faith in the divine sufficiency. They
   have a strong persuasion that the thing asked shall be granted, (which
   they can give no reason for,) without any remarkable discovery of that
   glory and fulness of God and Christ, that is the ground of faith. And
   sometimes the confidence that their prayers shall be answered, is only
   a self-righteous confidence, and no true faith. They have a high
   conceit of themselves as eminent saints, and special favourites of God,
   and have also a high conceit of the prayers they have made, because
   they were much enlarged and affected in them; and hence they are
   positive in it, that the thing will come to pass. And sometimes, when
   once they have conceived such a notion, they grow stronger and stronger
   in it; and this they think is from an immediate divine hand upon their
   minds to strengthen their confidence; whereas it is only by their
   dwelling in their minds on their own excellency, and high experiences,
   and great assistances, whereby they look brighter and brighter in their
   own eyes. Hence it is found by observation and experience, that nothing
   in the world exposes so much to enthusiasm as spiritual pride and
   self-righteousness.

   In order to drawing a just inference from the supposed assistance we
   have had in prayer for a particular mercy, and judging of the
   probability of the bestowment of that individual mercy, many things
   must be considered. We must consider the importance of the mercy
   sought, and the principle whence we so earnestly desire it; how far it
   is good, and agreeable to the mind and will of God; the degree of love
   to God that we exercised in our prayer; the degree of discovery that is
   made of the divine sufficiency, and the degree in which our assistance
   is manifestly distinguishing with respect to that mercy.--And there is
   nothing of greater importance in the argument than the degree of
   humility, poverty of spirit, self-emptiness, and resignation to the
   holy will of God, exercised in seeking that mercy. Praying for a
   particular mercy with much of these things, I have often seen blessed
   with a remarkable bestowment of the particular thing asked for. From
   what has been said, we may see which way God may, only by the ordinary
   gracious influences of his Spirit, sometimes give his saints special
   reason to hope for the bestowment of a particular mercy they prayed
   for, and which we may suppose he oftentimes gives eminent saints, who
   have great degrees of humility, and much communion with God. And here,
   I humbly conceive, some eminent servants of Jesus Christ that we read
   of in ecclesiastical story, have been led into a mistake; and, through
   want of distinguishing such things as these from immediate revelations,
   have thought that God has favoured them, in some instances, with the
   same kind of divine influences that the apostles and prophets had of
   old.

   Another erroneous principle that some have embraced, and which has been
   a source of many errors in their conduct, is, That persons ought always
   to do whatever the Spirit of God (though but indirectly) inclines them
   to. Indeed the Spirit of God is in itself infinitely perfect, and all
   his immediate actings, simply considered, are perfect, and there can be
   nothing wrong in them; and therefore all that the Spirit of God
   inclines us to directly and immediately, without the intervention of
   any other cause that shall pervert and misimprove what is from him,
   ought to be done. But there may be many things, disposition to do which
   may indirectly be from the Spirit of God, that we ought not to do. The
   disposition in general may be good, and from the Spirit of God; but the
   particular determination of that disposition, as to particular actions,
   objects, and circumstances, may be from the intervention or
   interposition of some infirmity, blindness, inadvertence, deceit, or
   corruption of ours. So that although the disposition in general ought
   to be allowed and promoted, and all those actings of it that are simply
   from God's Spirit, yet that particular ill direction or determination
   of that disposition, which is from some other cause, ought not to be
   followed.

   As for instance, the Spirit of God may cause a person to have a dear
   love to another, and so a great desire of and delight in his comfort,
   ease, and pleasure. This disposition in general is good, and ought to
   be followed; but yet through the intervention of indiscretion, or some
   other bad cause, it may be ill directed, and have a bad determination,
   as to particular acts; and the person indirectly, through that real
   love he has to his neighbour, may kill him with kindness; he may do
   that out of sincere goodwill to him, which may tend to ruin him.--A
   good disposition may, through some inadvertence or delusion, strongly
   incline a person to that which, if he saw all things as they are, would
   be most contrary to that disposition. The true loyalty of a general,
   and his zeal for the honour of his prince, may exceedingly animate him
   in war; but this good disposition, through indiscretion and mistake,
   may push him forward to those things that give the enemy great
   advantage, and may expose him and his army to ruin, and may tend to the
   ruin of his master's interest.

   The apostle does evidently suppose that the Spirit of God, in his
   extraordinary, immediate, and miraculous influences on men's minds, may
   in some respect excite inclinations, which, if gratified, would tend to
   confusion, and therefore must sometimes be restrained, and in their
   exercise must be under the government of discretion, 1 Cor. xiv. 31-33.
   "For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
   comforted. And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.
   For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the
   churches of the saints." Here by the spirits of the prophets, according
   to the known phraseology of the apostle, is meant the Spirit of God
   acting in the prophets, according to those special gifts with which
   each one was endued: and here it is plainly implied that the Spirit of
   God, thus operating in them, may be an occasion of their having
   sometimes an inclination to do that, in the exercise of those gifts,
   which it was not proper, decent, or profitable that they should; and
   that therefore the inclination, though indirectly from the Spirit of
   God, should be restrained; and that it ought to be subject to the
   discretion of the prophets, as to the particular time and circumstances
   of its exercise.

   I make no doubt but that it is possible for a minister to have by the
   Spirit of God such a sense of the importance of eternal things, and of
   the misery of mankind--so many of whom are exposed to eternal
   destruction--together with such a love to souls, that he might find in
   himself a disposition to spend all his time, day and night, in warning,
   exhorting, and calling upon men; and so that he must be obliged as it
   were to do violence to himself ever to refrain, so as to give himself
   any opportunity to eat, drink, or sleep. And so I believe there may be
   a disposition, in like manner, indirectly excited in laypersons,
   through the intervention of their infirmity, to do what only belongs to
   ministers; yea, to do those things that would not become either
   ministers or people. Through the influence of the Spirit of God,
   together with want of discretion, and some remaining corruption, women
   and children might feel themselves inclined to break forth aloud to
   great congregations, warning and exhorting the whole multitude; and to
   scream in the streets, or to leave their families, and go from house to
   house, earnestly exhorting others; but yet it would by no means follow
   that it was their duty to do these things, or that they would not have
   a tendency to do ten times as much hurt as good.

   Another wrong principle, from whence have arisen errors in conduct, is,
   that whatsoever is found to be of present and immediate benefit, may
   and ought to be practised, without looking forward to future
   consequences. Some persons seem to think that it sufficiently justifies
   any thing they say or do, that it is found to be for present
   edification; it assists and promotes their present affection, and
   therefore they think they should not concern themselves about future
   consequences, but leave them with God. Indeed in things that are in
   themselves our duty, being required by moral rules, or absolute
   positive commands of God, they must be done, and future consequences
   must be left with God; our discretion takes no place here: but in other
   things we are to be governed by discretion, and must only look at the
   present good, but our view must be extensive, and we must look at the
   consequences of things. It is the duty of ministers especially to
   exercise this discretion. In things wherein they are not determined by
   an absolute rule, and not enjoined them by a wisdom superior to their
   own, Christ has left them to their own discretion, with that general
   rule, that they should exercise the utmost wisdom they can obtain, in
   pursuing that which, upon the best view of the consequences of things,
   will tend most to the advancement of his kingdom. This is implied in
   those words of Christ to his disciples, when he sent them forth to
   preach the gospel, Matt. x. 16. "Be ye wise as serpents."

   The Scripture always represents the work of a gospel-minister by those
   employments that especially require a wise foresight of, and provision
   for, future events and consequences. So it is compared with the
   business of a steward, which in an eminent manner requires forecast;
   as, for instance, a wise laying in of provision for the supply of the
   needs of a family, according to its future necessities. So it is
   compared to the husbandman, that almost wholly consists in things done
   with a view to the future fruits and consequences of his labour. The
   husbandman's discretion and forecast is eloquently set forth in Isa.
   xxviii. 24, 25, 26. "Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? Doth he open
   and break the clods of his ground? When he hath made plain the face
   thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cumin,
   and cast in the principal wheat, and the appointed barley, and the rye
   in their place? For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth
   teach him." So the work of the ministry is compared to that of a wise
   builder or architect, who has a comprehensive view; and for whom it is
   necessary, that, when he begins a building, he should have at once a
   view of the whole frame, and all the future parts of the structure,
   even to the pinnacle, that all may be fitly framed together. So also it
   is compared to the business of a trader or merchant, who is to gain by
   trading; a business that exceedingly requires forecast, and without
   which is never like to be followed with success for any long time. So
   it is represented by the business of a fisherman, which depends on
   peculiar skill; and to that of a soldier, which perhaps, above any
   other secular business, requires great foresight, and a wise provision
   for future events and consequences.

   And particularly, ministers ought not to be careless how much they
   discompose the minds of natural men, or how great an uproar they raise
   in the carnal world, and so lay blocks in the way of the propagation of
   religion. This certainly is not to follow the example of the zealous
   apostle Paul, who though he would not depart from his duty to please
   carnal men, yet, where he might with a good conscience, exceedingly
   laid out himself to please them. He avoided raising in the multitude
   prejudices, oppositions, and tumults against the gospel; and looked
   upon it as of great consequence. 1 Cor. x. 32, 33. "Give none offence,
   neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, not to the church of God:
   even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit,
   but the profit of many, that they may be saved." Yea, he declares that
   he laid himself out so much for this, that he made himself a kind of a
   servant to all sorts of men, conforming to their customs and various
   humours in every thing wherein he might, even in the things that were
   very burdensome to him, that he might not fright men away from
   Christianity, and cause them to stand as it were braced and armed
   against it, but on the contrary, if possible, might with condescension
   and friendship win and draw them to it; 1 Cor. ix. 19-23. And agreeable
   hereto are the directions he gives to others, both ministers and
   people: So he directs the christian Romans, not to please themselves,
   but every one please his neighbour, for his good, to edification, Rom.
   xv. 1, 2, and to follow after the things that make for peace, chap.
   xiv. 19. And he expresses it in terms exceeding strong, Rom. xii. 18.
   "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all
   men." And he directs ministers to endeavour, if possible, to gain
   opposers by a meek, condescending treatment, avoiding all appearance of
   strife or fierceness, 2 Tim. ii. 24-26. To the like purpose, the same
   apostle directs Christians to walk in wisdom towards them that are
   without, Eph. iv. 5. and to avoid giving offence to others, if we can,
   "that our good may not be evil spoken of," Rom. xiv 16. So that it is
   evident, the most zealous and most successful propagator of vital
   religion that ever was, looked upon it to be of great consequence to
   endeavour, as much as possible, by all the methods of lawful meekness
   and gentleness, to avoid raising the prejudice and opposition of the
   world against religion.--When we have done our utmost, there will be
   opposition enough to vital religion, against which the carnal mind of
   man has such an enmity. We should not therefore needlessly increase and
   raise that enmity. The apostle, though he took so much pains to please
   men, had persecution almost every where raised against him. A fisherman
   is careful not needlessly to ruffle and disturb the water, lest he
   should drive the fish away from his net; but he will rather endeavour
   if possible to draw them into it. Such a fisherman was the apostle, 2
   Cor. xii. 15, 16. "And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you;
   though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. But be it
   so, I did not burden you, nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with
   guile."

   The necessity of suffering persecution, in order to being a true
   Christian, has undoubtedly by some been carried to an extreme, and the
   doctrine has been abused. It has been looked upon as necessary to
   uphold a man's credit amongst others as a Christian, that he should be
   persecuted. I have heard it made an objection against the sincerity of
   particular persons, that they were no more hated and reproached. And
   the manner of glorying in persecution, or the cross of Christ, has in
   some been very wrong, bearing too much the appearance of lifting up
   themselves in it, that they were very much hated and reviled, more than
   most, as an evidence of their excelling others, in being good soldiers
   of Jesus Christ. Such an improvement of the doctrine of the enmity
   between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, and of the
   necessity of persecution, becoming credible and customary, has a direct
   tendency to cause those that would be accounted true Christians, to
   behave themselves so towards those that are not well-affected to
   religion, as to provoke their hatred, or at least to be but little
   careful to avoid it, and not very studiously and earnestly to strive
   (after the apostle's example and precepts) to please them to their
   edification, and by meekness and gentleness to win them, and by all
   possible means to live peaceably with them.

   I believe that saying of our Saviour, Luke xii. 51. "I came not to send
   peace on earth, but division," has been abused; as though when we see
   great strife arise about religion, violent heats of spirit against the
   truly pious, and a loud clamour and uproar against the work of God, it
   was to be rejoiced in, because it is that which Christ came to send. It
   has almost been laid down as a maxim by some, That the more division
   and strife, the better sign; which naturally leads persons to seek and
   provoke it, or leads them to such a manner of behaviour, such a
   roughness and sharpness, or such an affected neglect, as has a natural
   tendency to raise prejudice and opposition; instead of striving as the
   apostle did to his utmost, by all meekness, gentleness, and benevolence
   of behaviour, to prevent or assuage it.--Christ came to send a sword on
   earth, and to cause division, no otherwise than he came to send
   damnation; for Christ, that is set for the glorious restoration of
   some, is set for the fall of others, and to be a stone of stumbling and
   rock of offence to them, and an occasion of their vastly more
   aggravated and terrible ruin. And this is always the consequence of a
   great revival of vital religion; it is the means of the salvation of
   some, and the more aggravated damnation of others. But certainly this
   is no just argument that men's exposedness to damnation is not to be
   lamented, or that we should not exert ourselves to our utmost, in all
   the methods that we can devise, that others might be saved, and to
   avoid all such behaviour towards them as tends to lead them down to
   hell.

   I know there is naturally a great enmity in the heart of man against
   vital religion; and I believe there would have been a great deal of
   opposition against this glorious work of God in New England, if the
   subjects and promoters of it had behaved themselves never so agreeably
   to Christian rules; and I believe if this work goes on and spreads much
   in the world, so as to begin to shake kingdoms and nations, it will
   dreadfully stir up the rage of earth and hell, and will put the world
   into the greatest uproar that ever it was in since it stood. I believe
   Satan's dying struggles will be the most violent; but yet a great deal
   might be done to restrain this opposition, by a good conformity to that
   of the apostle, Jam. iii. 13. "Who is a wise man, and endued with
   knowledge? let him show out of a good conversation his works with
   meekness of wisdom." And I also believe that if the rules of Christian
   charity, meekness, gentleness, and prudence had been duly observed by
   the generality of the zealous promoters of this work, it would have
   made three times the progress that it has; i.e. if it had pleased God
   in such a case to give a blessing to means in proportion as he has
   done.

   Under this head of carelessness about future consequences, it may be
   proper to say something of introducing things new and strange, and that
   have a tendency by their novelty to shock and surprise people. Nothing
   can be more evident from the New Testament, than that such things ought
   to be done with great caution and moderation, to avoid the offence that
   may be thereby given, and the prejudices that might be raised, to clog
   and hinder the progress of religion. Yea, it ought to be thus n things
   that are in themselves good and excellent, and of great weight,
   provided they are not things of absolute duty, which though they may
   appear to be innovations, yet cannot be neglected without immorality or
   disobedience to the commands of God. What great caution and moderation
   did the apostles use in introducing things that were new, and
   abolishing things that were old, in their day! How gradually were the
   ceremonial performances of the law of Moses removed and abolished among
   the Christian Jews! and how long did even the apostle Paul himself
   conform to those ceremonies which he calls weak and beggarly elements!
   yea, even the rite of circumcision, (Acts xvi. 3.) that he might not
   prejudice the Jews against Christianity! So it seems to have been very
   gradually that the Jewish sabbath was abolished, and the christian
   sabbath introduced, for the same reason. And the apostles avoided
   teaching Christians in those earlier days, at least for a great while,
   some high and excellent divine truths, because they could not bear them
   yet, 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2. Heb. v. 11, to the end. Thus strictly did the
   apostles observe the rule that their blessed Master gave them, of not
   putting new wine into old bottles, lest they should burst the bottles,
   and lose the wine. And how did Christ himself, while on earth, forbear
   so plainly to teach his disciples the great doctrines of Christianity,
   concerning his satisfaction, and the nature and manner of a sinner's
   justification and reconciliation with God, and the particular benefits
   of his death, resurrection, and ascension! because, in that infant
   state of the disciples, their minds were not prepared for such
   instructions; and therefore the more clear and full revelation of these
   things was reserved for the time when their minds should be further
   enlightened and strengthened by the outpouring of the Spirit after his
   ascension; John xvi. 12, 13. "I have yet many things to say unto you,
   but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is
   come, he will guide you into all truth." And Mark iv. 33. "And with
   many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to
   bear it."--These things might be enough to convince any one, that does
   not think himself wiser than Christ and his apostles, that great
   prudence and caution should be used in introducing things into the
   church of God, that are very uncommon, though in themselves excellent,
   lest by our rashness and imprudent haste we hinder religion much more
   than we help it.

   Persons influenced by indiscreet zeal are always in too much haste;
   they are impatient of delays, and therefore are for jumping to the
   uppermost step first, before they have taken the preceding steps;
   whereby they expose themselves to fall and break their bones. They are
   delighted to see the building rise, and all their endeavour and
   strength is employed in advancing its height, without taking care
   proportionably of the bottom; whereby the whole is in danger of coming
   to the ground. Or they are for putting on the cupola and pinnacle
   before the lower parts of the building are done; which tends at once to
   put a stop to the building, and hinder its ever being a complete
   structure. Many that are thus imprudent and hasty with their zeal, have
   a real eager appetite for that which is good; but like children, are
   impatient to wait for the fruit, and therefore snatch it before it is
   ripe. Oftentimes in their haste they overshoot their mark, and
   frustrate their own end; they put that which they would obtain further
   out of reach than it was before, and establish and confirm that which
   they would remove. Things must have time to ripen. The prudent
   husbandman waits till the harvest is ripe, before he reaps. We are now
   just beginning to recover out of a dreadful disease; but to feed a man
   recovering from a fever with strong meat at once, is the ready way to
   kill him. The reformation from popery was much hindered by this hasty
   zeal. Many were for immediately rectifying all disorders by force,
   which was condemned by Luther, and was a great trouble to him. See
   Sleiden's Hist. of the Reformation, p. 52, &c. and book v. throughout.
   It is a vain prejudice that some have lately imbibed against such rules
   of prudence and moderation; but they will be forced to come to them at
   last; they will find themselves unable to maintain their cause without
   them; and, if they will not hearken before, experience will convince
   them at last, when it will be too late for them to rectify their
   mistake.

   Another error, arising from an erroneous principle, is a wrong notion
   that they have an attestation of Divine Providence to persons, or
   things. We go too far, when we look upon the success that God gives to
   some persons, in making them the instruments of doing much good, as a
   testimony of God's approbation of those persons and all the courses
   they take. It has been a main argument to defend the conduct of some
   ministers, who have been blamed as imprudent and irregular, that God
   has blessed them, and given them great success; and that however men
   charge them as guilty of wrong things, yet that God is with them, and
   then who can be against them? And probably some of those ministers
   themselves, by this very means, have had their ears stopt against all
   that has been said to convince them of their misconduct. But there are
   innumerable ways by which persons may be misled, in forming a judgment
   of the mind and will of God, from the events of providence. If a
   person's success be a reward of something in him that God approves, yet
   it is no argument that he approves of every thing in him. Who can tell
   how far the divine grace may go in greatly rewarding some small good in
   a person, a good meaning, something good in his disposition; while he
   at the same time, in sovereign mercy, hides his eyes from a great deal
   that is bad, which it is his pleasure to forgive, and not to mark
   against the person, though in itself it be very ill? God has not told
   us after what manner he will proceed in this matter, and we go upon
   most uncertain grounds when we undertake to determine. It is an
   exceeding difficult thing to know how far love or hatred are exercised
   towards persons or actions by all that is before us. God was pleased in
   his sovereignty to give such success to Jacob in that which, from
   beginning to end, was a deceitful, lying contrivance and proceeding of
   his. In that way he obtained a blessing that was worth infinitely more
   than the fatness of the earth and the dew from heaven, given to Esau in
   his blessing; yea, worth more than all that the world can afford. God
   was for a while with Judas, so that by God's power accompanying him, he
   wrought miracles and cast out devils; but this could not justly be
   interpreted as God's approbation of his person, or the thievery in
   which he lived at the same time.

   The dispensations and events of providence, with their reasons, are too
   little understood by us, to be as our rule, instead of God's word; God
   has his way in the sea, and his path in the mighty waters, and his
   footsteps are not known, and he gives us no account of any of his
   matters. And therefore we cannot safely take the events of his
   providence as a revelation of his mind concerning a person's conduct
   and behaviour; we have no warrant so to do. God has never appointed
   those things to be our rule. We have but one rule to go by, and that is
   his holy word; and when we join any thing else with it, as having the
   force of a rule, we are guilty of that which is strictly forbidden,
   Deut. iv. 2. Prov. xxx. 6. and Rev. xxii. 18. They who make what they
   imagine is pointed forth to them in providence, the rule of behaviour,
   do err, as well as those that follow impulses and impressions. We
   should put nothing in the room of the word of God. It is to be feared
   that some have been greatly confirmed and imboldened, by the great
   success that God has given them, in some things that have really been
   contrary to the rules of God's holy word. If so, they have been guilty
   of presumption, and abusing God's kindness to them, and the great
   honour he has put upon them. They have seen that God was with them, and
   made them victorious in their preaching; and this, it is to be feared,
   has been abused by some to a degree of self-confidence. This has much
   taken off all jealousy of themselves; they have been bold therefore to
   go great lengths, in a presumption that God was with them, and would
   defend them, and finally baffle all that found fault with them.

   Indeed, there is a voice of God in his providence, that may be
   interpreted and well understood by the rule of his word; and providence
   may, to our dark minds and weak faith, confirm the word of God, as it
   fulfils it. But to improve divine providence thus, is quite a different
   thing from making a rule of providence. Good use may be made of the
   events of providence, of our own observation and experience, and human
   histories, and the opinion of eminent men; but finally all must be
   brought to one rule, viz. the word of God, and that must be regarded as
   our only rule.

   Nor do I think that they go upon sure ground, who conclude they have
   not been in an error in their conduct, because at the time of their
   doing a thing for which they have been blamed and reproached by others,
   they were favoured with special comforts of God's Spirit. God's
   bestowing special mercies on a person, is no sign that he approves of
   every thing he sees in him at that time. David had the presence of God
   while he lived in polygamy; and Solomon had some very high favours, and
   peculiar smiles of Heaven, and particularly at the dedication of the
   temple, while he greatly multiplied wives to himself, and horses, and
   silver, and gold; all contrary to the most express command of God to
   the king, in the law of Moses, Deut. xvii. 16, 17. We cannot tell how
   far God may hide his eyes from beholding iniquity in Jacob, and seeing
   perverseness in Israel. We cannot tell what are the reasons of God's
   actions any further than he interprets for himself. God sometimes gave
   some of the primitive Christians the extraordinary influence of his
   Spirit when they were out of the way of their duty, and even while they
   were abusing it; as is plainly implied, 1 Cor. xiv. 31, 33.--Suppose a
   person has done a thing for which he is reproached, and that reproach
   be an occasion of his feeling sweet exercises of grace in his soul, I
   do not think that a certain evidence that God approves of the thing he
   is blamed for: for undoubtedly a mistake may be the occasion of
   stirring up the exercise of grace. If a person, through mistake, thinks
   he has received some particular great mercy, that mistake may be the
   occasion of stirring up the sweet exercises of love, and true
   thankfulness to God. Suppose one that is full of love to God should
   hear what he deems credible tidings, concerning a remarkable
   deliverance of a child or a dear friend, or of some glorious thing done
   for the city of God, no wonder if, on such an occasion, the sweet
   actings of love to God, and delight in God, should be excited, though
   indeed afterwards it should prove a false report that he had heard. So,
   if one that loves God is much maligned and reproached for doing what he
   thinks God required and approves, no wonder that it is sweet to such an
   one to think that God is his friend, though men are his enemies; no
   wonder at all, that this is an occasion of his betaking himself to God
   as his sure friend, and find sweet complacence in him; though he be
   indeed in a mistake concerning that which he thought was agreeable to
   God's will. As I have before shown that the exercise of a truly good
   affection may be the occasion of error, and may indirectly incline a
   person to do that which is wrong; so, on the other hand, error, or a
   doing that which is wrong, may be an occasion of the exercise of a
   truly good affection. The reason of it is this, that however all
   exercises of grace be from the Spirit of God, yet he dwells and acts in
   the hearts of the saints, in some measure, after the manner of a vital,
   natural principle, a principle of new nature in them; whose exercises
   are excited by means, in some measure, as other natural principles are.
   Though grace is not in the saints as a mere natural principle, but as a
   sovereign agent, and so its exercises are not tied to means, by an
   immutable law of nature, as in mere natural principles; yet God has so
   constituted, that grace should dwell so in the hearts of the saints,
   that its exercises should have some degree of connection with means,
   after the manner of a principle of nature.

   Another erroneous principle that has been an occasion of some mischief
   and confusion, is, That external order in matters of religion, and use
   of the means of grace, is but little to be regarded. It has been spoken
   lightly of, under the names of ceremonies and dead forms, &c. and is
   probably the more despised by some, because their opposers insist so
   much upon it, and because they are so continually hearing from them the
   cry of disorder and confusion.--It is objected against the importance
   of external order, that God does not look at the outward form, he looks
   at the heart. But that is a weak argument against its importance, that
   true godliness does not consist in it; for it may be equally made use
   of against all the outward means of grace whatsoever. True godliness
   does not consist in ink and paper, but yet that would be a foolish
   objection against the importance of ink and paper in religion, when
   without it we could not have the word of God. If any external means at
   all are needful, any outward actions of a public nature, or wherein
   God's people are jointly concerned in public nature, or wherein God's
   people are jointly concerned in public society, without doubt external
   order is needful. The management of an external affair that is public,
   or wherein a multitude is concerned, without order, is in every thing
   found impossible.--Without order there can be no general direction of a
   multitude to any particular designed end, their purposes will cross and
   hinder one another. A multitude cannot act in union one with another
   without order; confusion separates and divides them, so that there can
   be no concert or agreement. If a multitude would help one another in
   any affair, they must unite themselves one to another in a regular
   subordination of members, in some measure as it is in the natural body;
   by this means they will be in some capacity to act with united
   strength. And thus Christ has appointed that it should be in the
   visible church, as 1 Cor. xii. 14, &c. and Rom. xii. 4-8. Zeal without
   order will do but little, or at least it will be effectual but a little
   while. Let a company, however zealous against the enemy, go forth to
   war without any order, every one rushing forward as his zeal shall
   drive him, all in confusion; if they gain something at first onset, by
   surprising the enemy, yet how soon do they come to nothing, and fall an
   easy helpless prey to their adversaries! Order is one of the most
   necessary of all external means of the spiritual good of God's church;
   and therefore it is requisite even in heaven itself, where there is the
   least need of any external means of grace. Order is maintained amongst
   the glorious angels there. And the necessity of it for carrying on any
   design, wherein a multitude are concerned, is so great that even the
   devils in hell are driven to something of it, that they may carry on
   the designs of their kingdom. And it is very observable, that those
   irrational creatures for whom it is needful that they should act in
   union, and join as a multitude together to carry on any work for their
   preservation--by a wonderful instinct that God has put into
   them--observe and maintain a most regular and exact order among
   themselves; such as bees and some others. And order in the visible
   church is not only necessary for carrying on the designs of Christ's
   glory and the church's prosperity, but it is absolutely necessary to
   its defence; without it, it is like a city without walls, and can be in
   no capacity to defend itself from any kind of mischief. And so, however
   it be an external thing, yet is not to be despised on that account; for
   though it be not the food of souls, yet it is in some respect their
   defence. The people of Holland would be very foolish to despise the
   dikes that keep out the sea from overwhelming them, under the names of
   dead stones and vile earth, because the matter of which they are built
   is not good to eat. It seems to be partly on this foundation that some
   have seemed to act on that principle, That the power of judging and
   openly censuring others should not be reserved in the hands of
   particular persons, or consistories appointed thereto, but ought to be
   left at large, for any body that pleases to take it upon them, or that
   think themselves fit for it. But more of this afterwards.

   On this foundation also, an orderly attending on the stated worship of
   God in families, has been made too light of; and it has been in some
   places too much a common and customary thing to be absent from
   family-worship, and to be abroad late in the night at religious
   meetings, or to attend religious conversation. Not but that this may be
   done on certain extraordinary occasions; I have seen the case to be
   such in many instances, that I have thought did afford sufficient
   warrant for persons to be absent from family-prayer, and to be from
   home till very late in the night. But we should take heed that it does
   not become a custom or common practice; if so, we shall soon find the
   consequences to be very ill. It seems to be on the same foundation--the
   supposed unprofitableness of external order--that it has been thought
   by some, there is no need of religious services and performances being
   limited to any certain office in the church; (of which more afterwards)
   and also, that those officers themselves, particularly that of the
   gospel-ministry, need not be limited, as it used to be, to persons of a
   liberal education; but some of late have been for having others, whom
   they have supposed to be persons of eminent experience, publicly
   licensed to preach, yea and ordained to the work of the ministry; and
   some ministers have seemed to favour such a thing. But how little do
   they seem to look forward, and consider the unavoidable consequences of
   opening such a door! If once it should become a custom, or a thing
   generally approved and allowed of, to admit uneducated persons to the
   work of the ministry, because of their remarkable experiences, and good
   understanding, how many lay-persons would soon appear as candidates for
   the work of the ministry; I doubt not but that I have been acquainted
   with scores that would have desired it. And how shall we know where to
   stop? If one is admitted because his experiences are remarkable,
   another will think his experiences also remarkable; and we perhaps
   shall not be able to deny but that they are nearly as great. If one is
   admitted because, besides experiences, he has good natural abilities,
   another by himself, and many of his neighbours, may be thought equal to
   him. It will be found of absolute necessity that there should be some
   certain, visible limits fixed, to avoid bringing odium upon ourselves,
   and breeding uneasiness and strife amongst others; and I know of none
   better, and indeed no other that can well be fixed, than what the
   prophet Zechariah fixes, viz. That those only should be appointed to be
   pastors or shepherds in God's church, that "have been taught to keep
   cattle from their youth," or that have had an education for that
   purpose. Those ministers who would break over these limits, and make a
   practice of it, would break down that fence which they themselves,
   after they have been wearied with the ill consequences, would be glad
   to have somebody else build up for them. Not but that there may
   probably be some persons in the land, who have had no education at
   college, that are in themselves better qualified for the work of the
   ministry, than some others who have taken their degrees, and are now
   ordained. But yet I believe the breaking over those bounds which have
   hitherto been set, in ordaining such persons, would in its consequences
   be a greater calamity than the missing such persons in the work of the
   ministry. Opening a door for the admission of unlearned men to the work
   of the ministry, though they should be persons of extraordinary
   experience, would on some accounts be especially prejudicial at such a
   day as this; because such persons, for want of extensive knowledge, are
   oftentimes froward to lead others into those things which a people are
   in danger of at such a time, above all others; viz. impulses, vain
   imaginations, superstition, indiscreet zeal, and such like extremes.

   Another erroneous principle that some have been, at least, in danger
   of, is, that ministers, because they speak as Christ's ambassadors, may
   assume the same style, and speak as with the same authority, that the
   prophets of old did, yea that Jesus Christ himself did in the 23d of
   Matthew, "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers," &c.; and that not only
   when they are speaking to the people, but also to their brethren in the
   ministry. The principle is absurd, because it makes no difference in
   the degrees and orders of messengers, though God has made a very great
   difference; for though they all come in some respect in the name of
   God, and with something of his authority, yet certainty there is a vast
   difference in the degree of authority with which God has invested them.
   Jesus Christ was sent into the world as God's messenger, and so was one
   of his apostles; and so also is an ordinary pastor of a church: but yet
   it does not follow, that because Jesus Christ and an ordinary minister
   are both messengers of God, that therefore an ordinary minister, in his
   office, is vested with an equal degree of authority that Christ was in
   his. As there is a great difference in their authority, and as Christ
   came as God's messenger in a vastly higher manner, so another style
   became him, more authoritative than is proper for us worms of the dust,
   though we also are messengers of inferior degree. It would be strange
   if God, when he has made so great a difference in the degree in which
   he has invested different messengers with his authority, should make no
   difference as to the outward appearance and show of authority. Though
   God has put great honour upon ministers, and they may speak as his
   ambassadors, yet he never intended that they should have the same
   outward appearance of authority and majesty, either in their behaviour
   or speech, as his Son shall have, when he comes to judgement at the
   last day; though both come in the name of the Lord. Alas! can it enter
   into the hearts of worms of the dust, that it is fit and suitable it
   should be so?
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   A third cause of errors in conduct, is, being ignorant or unobservant
   of some things, by which the devil has special advantage.

   And here I would particularly notice some things with respect to the
   inward experiences of Christians themselves. And something with regard
   to the external effects of experiences.

   I. Inward experiences. There are three things I would notice with
   regard to the experiences of Christians, by which the devil has many
   advantages against us.

   1. The first thing is the mixture there oftentimes is in the
   experiences of true Christians; whereby when they have truly gracious
   experiences, and divine and spiritual discoveries and exercises, they
   have something else mixed with them, besides what is spiritual. There
   is a mixture of that which is natural, and that which is corrupt, with
   that which is divine. The great imperfection of grace, the feebleness
   and infancy of the new nature, and the great remains of corruption,
   together with our circumstances in this world, where we are encompassed
   with what tends to pollute us, expose to this. And indeed it is not to
   be supposed that Christians ever have any experiences in this world
   that are wholly pure, entirely spiritual, without any mixture of what
   is natural and carnal. The beam of light, as it comes from the fountain
   of light upon our hearts, is pure; but, as it is reflected thence, it
   is mixt. The seed as sent from heaven, and planted in the heart, is
   pure; but, as it springs up out of the heart, is impure: yea, there is
   commonly a much greater mixture than persons for the most part seem to
   imagine. I have often thought that the experiences of true Christians
   are very frequently as it is with some sorts of fruits, which are
   enveloped in several coverings of thick shells or pods, that are thrown
   away by him that gathers the fruit, and but a very small part of the
   whole bulk is the pure kernel that is good to eat.

   The things, of all which there is frequently some mixture with gracious
   experiences, yea with very great and high experiences, are these three;
   human or natural affection and passions; impressions on the
   imagination; and a degree of self-righteousness or spiritual pride.
   There is very often with that which is spiritual a great mixture of
   that affection or passion which arises from natural principles; so that
   nature has a very great hand in those vehement motions and flights of
   the passions that appear. Hence the same degrees of divine
   communications from heaven shall have vastly different effects, in what
   outwardly appears, in persons of different natural tempers. The great
   mixture of that which is natural with that which is spiritual, is very
   manifest in the peculiar effects that divine influences have in some
   certain families, or persons of such a blood, in distinguishing the
   operations of the passions and affections, and the manner of their
   outward expressions. I know some remarkable instances of this. The same
   is also evident by the different effects of divine communications on
   the same person at different times, and in different circumstances. The
   novelty of things, or the sudden transition from an opposite extreme,
   and many other things that might be mentioned, greatly contribute to
   the raising of the passions. And sometimes there is not only a mixture
   of that which is common and natural with gracious experience, but even
   that which is animal, what is in a great measure from the body, and is
   properly the result of the animal frame. In what true Christians feel
   of affections towards God, all is not always purely holy and divine;
   every thing that is felt in the affections does not arise from
   spiritual principles, but common and natural principles have a very
   great hand; an improper self-love may have a great share in the effect:
   God is not loved for his own sake, or for the excellency and beauty of
   his own perfections, as he ought to be; nor have these things in any
   wise that proportion in the effect that they ought to have. So, in the
   love true Christians have one to another, very often there is a great
   mixture of what arises from common and natural principles, with grace.
   Self-love has a great hand; the children of God are not loved purely
   for Christ's sake, but there may be a great mixture of that natural
   love which many sects of heretics have boasted of, who have been
   greatly united one to another, because they were of their company, on
   their side, against the rest of the world; yea, there may be a mixture
   of natural love to the opposite sex, with christian and divine love. So
   there may be a great mixture in that sorrow for sin which the godly
   have, and also in their joys; natural principles may greatly contribute
   to what is felt, a great many ways, as might easily be shown. There is
   nothing that belongs to christian experience more liable to a corrupt
   mixture of zeal. Though it be an excellent virtue, a heavenly flame,
   when it is pure; yet as it is exercised in those who are so little
   sanctified, and so little humbled, as we are in the present state, it
   is very apt to be mixed with human passion, yea with corrupt, hateful
   affections, pride and uncharitable bitterness, and other things that
   are not from heaven, but from hell.

   Another thing often mixed with what is spiritual in the experiences of
   Christians, is an impression on the imagination; whereby godly persons,
   together with a spiritual understanding of divine things, and
   conviction of their reality and certainty, and a deep sense of their
   excellency or great importance upon their hearts, have strongly
   impressed on their minds external ideas or images of things. A degree
   of imagination in such a case, is unavoidable, and necessarily arises
   from human nature, as constituted in the present state; and often is of
   great benefit; but, when it is in too great a degree, it becomes an
   impure mixture that is prejudicial. This mixture very often arises from
   the constitution of the body. It commonly greatly contributes to the
   other kind of mixture mentioned before, viz. of natural affections and
   passions; it helps to raise them to a great height.

   Another thing that is often mixed with the experiences of true
   Christians, which is the worst mixture of all, is a degree of
   self-righteousness or spiritual pride. This is often mixed with the
   joys of Christians. Their joy is not purely the joy of faith, or a
   rejoicing in Christ Jesus, but is partly a rejoicing in themselves.
   There is oftentimes in their elevations a looking upon themselves, and
   a viewing their own high attainments; they rejoice partly because they
   are taken with their own experiences and great discoveries, which makes
   them in their own apprehensions so to excel; and this heightens all
   their passions, and especially those effects that are more external.
   There is a much greater mixture of these things in the experiences of
   some Christians than others; in some the mixture is so great, as very
   much to obscure and hide the beauty of grace in them, like a thick
   smoke that hinders all the shining of the fire.

   These things we ought to be well aware of, that we may not take all for
   gold that glisters, and that we may know what to countenance and
   encourage, and what to discourage; otherwise Satan will have a vast
   advantage against us, for he works in the corrupt mixture. Sometimes,
   for want of persons distinguishing the ore from the pure metal, those
   experiences are most admired by the persons themselves and by others
   that are not the most excellent. The great external effects, and
   vehemence of the passions, and violent agitations of the animal
   spirits, is sometimes much owing to the corrupt mixture, (as is very
   apparent in some instances,) though it be not always so. I have
   observed a great difference among those of high affections, who seem
   disposed to be earnestly talking to those about them. Some insist much
   more, in their talk, on what they behold in God and Christ, the glory
   of the divine perfections, Christ's beauty and excellency, and
   wonderful condescension and grace, and their own unworthiness, and the
   great and infinite obligations that they themselves and others are
   under to love and serve God; others insist almost wholly on their own
   high privileges, their assurance of God's love and favour, and the
   weakness and wickedness of opposers, and how much they are above their
   reach. The latter may have much of the presence of God, but their
   experiences do not appear to be so solid and unmixed as the former. And
   there is a great deal of difference in persons' earnestness in their
   talk and behaviour. In some it seems to come from the fulness of their
   hearts, and from the great sense they have of truth. They have a deep
   sense of the certainty and infinite greatness, excellency, and
   importance of divine and eternal things, attended with all appearances
   of great humility. In others their earnestness seems to arise from a
   great mixture of human passion, and an undue and intemperate agitation
   of the spirits, which appears by their earnestness and vehemence not
   being proportioned to the nature of the subject they insist on, but
   they are violent in every thing they say, as much when they are talking
   of things of smaller importance, as when speaking of things of greater
   weight. I have seen it thus in an instance or two, in which this
   vehemence at length issued in distraction. And there have been some few
   instances of a more extraordinary nature still, even of persons finding
   themselves disposed earnestly to talk and cry out, from an
   unaccountable kind of bodily pressure, without any extraordinary view
   of any thing in their minds, or sense of any thing upon their hearts;
   wherein probably there was the immediate hand of the devil.

   2 Another thing, by which the devil has great advantage, is the
   unheeded defects there sometimes are in the experiences of true
   Christians, connected with those high affections wherein there is much
   that is truly good. I do not mean that defect or imperfection of degree
   which is in every holy disposition and exercise in this life, in the
   best of the saints; but I aim at experiences being especially defective
   in some particular thing that ought to be in them; which, though it be
   not an essential defect, or such as is in the experiences of
   hypocrites, which renders them utterly vain, monstrous, and altogether
   abominable to God, is such as maims and deforms the experience. The
   essence of truly Christian experiences is not wanting, but that is
   wanting which is very needful in order to the proper beauty of the
   image of Christ in such a person's experiences. Things are very much
   out of a due proportion; there is indeed much of some things, but at
   the same time there is so little of some other things that should bear
   a proportion, that the defect very much deforms the Christian, and is
   truly odious in the sight of God. What I observed before was something
   too much, something mixed, not belonging to the Christian as such; what
   I speak of now is something not enough, something wanting that does
   belong to the Christian as such. The one deforms the Christian as a
   monstrous excrescence; by the other the new creature is maimed, some
   member in a great measure is wanting, or so small and withering as to
   be very much out of due proportion. This is another spiritual calamity
   that the saints are liable to through the great imperfection of grace
   in this life. Thus the chicken in the egg, in the beginning of its
   formation, has indeed the rudiments or lineaments of all the parts; yet
   some few parts only are plainly seen, when others are hid, so that
   without a microscope it appears very monstrous. When this deficiency
   and disproportion is great, as sometimes it is in real saints, it is
   not only a great deformity in itself, but has many ill consequences; it
   gives the devil great advantage, leaves a door open for corruption,
   exposes to very deformed and unlovely actions, and issues oftentimes in
   the great wounding of the soul.

   For the better understanding of this matter, we may observe, that God,
   in the revelation that he has made of himself to the world by Jesus
   Christ, has taken care to give a proportionable manifestation of two
   kinds of excellencies or perfections of his nature, viz. those that
   especially tend to possess us with awe and reverence, and to search and
   humble us; and those that tend to win, to draw, and encourage us. By
   the one, he appears as an infinitely great, pure, holy, and
   heart-searching judge; by the other, as a gentle and gracious father
   and a loving friend. By the one, he is a pure, searching, and burning
   flame; by the other, a sweet, refreshing light. These two kinds of
   attributes are as it were admirably tempered together in the revelation
   of the gospel. There is a proportionable manifestation of justice and
   mercy, holiness and grace, majesty and gentleness, authority and
   condescension. God hath thus ordered that his diverse excellencies, as
   he reveals himself in the face of Jesus Christ, should have a
   proportionable manifestation, herein providing for our necessities. He
   knew it to be of great consequence that our apprehensions of these
   diverse perfections of his nature should be duly proportioned one to
   another. A defect on the one hand, viz. having a discovery of his love
   and grace, without a proportionable discovery of his awful majesty, his
   holy and searching purity, would tend to spiritual pride, carnal
   confidence, and presumption; and a defect on the other hand, viz.
   having a discovery of his holy majesty, without a proportionable
   discovery of his grace, tends to unbelief, a sinful fearfulness and
   spirit of bondage. And therefore herein chiefly consists that
   deficiency of experiences that I am now speaking of. The revelation God
   has made of himself in his word, and the provision made for our
   spiritual welfare in the gospel, are perfect; but the actual light and
   communications we have, are many ways exceeding imperfect and maimed.
   And experience plainly shows, that Christians may have high
   manifestations in some respects, and yet their circumstances may be
   unhappy in this regard, that their discoveries are no more general.
   There is a great difference among Christians in this respect; some have
   much more general discoveries than others, who are upon many accounts
   the most amiable Christians. Christians may have experiences that are
   very high, and yet there may be very much of this deficiency and
   disproportion. Their high experiences are truly from the Spirit of God,
   but sin comes in by the defect, (as indeed all sin is originally from a
   defective, privative cause,) and in such a case high discoveries, at
   the same time that they are enjoyed, may be and sometimes are the
   occasion, or causa sine qua non, of sin. Sin may come in at the back
   door, the gap that is left open; as spiritual pride often does. And
   many times the Spirit of God is quenched by this means, and God
   punishes the pride and presumption that rises, by bringing such
   darkness, and suffering such awful consequences and horrid temptations,
   as are enough to make one's hair stand on end to hear them.--Christians
   therefore should diligently observe their own hearts as to this matter,
   and should pray to God that he would give them experiences in which one
   thing may bear a proportion to another, that God may be honoured and
   their souls edified thereby; and ministers should have an eye to this,
   in their private dealings with the souls of their people.

   It is chiefly from such a defect of experiences that some things have
   arisen which have been pretty common among true Christians of late,
   though supposed by many to have risen from a good cause; as
   particularly, talking of divine and heavenly things, and expressing
   divine joys, with laughter or light behaviour. I believe in many
   instances such things have arisen from a good cause, as their causa
   sine qua non. High discoveries and gracious joyful affections have been
   the occasion of them; but the proper cause has been sin, even that
   odious defect in their experience, whereby there has been wanting a
   sense of the awful and holy majesty of God as present with them, and
   their nothingness and vileness before him, proportionable to the sense
   they have had of God's grace and the love of Christ. And the same is
   true in many cases of unsuitable boldness; a disposition to speak with
   authority, intemperate zeal, and many other things that sometimes
   appear under great religious affections. And sometimes the vehemence of
   the motion of the animal spirits, under great affections, is owing in
   considerable measure to experiences being thus partial. I have known it
   in several instances, that persons have been greatly affected with the
   dying love of Christ, and the consideration of the happiness of the
   enjoyment of him in heaven, and other things of that nature, and their
   animal spirits at the same time have been in great emotion; but in the
   midst of it they have had such a deep sense of the awful, holy majesty
   of God, as at once composed them, and quieted animal nature, without
   diminishing their comfort, but only has made it of a better and more
   solid nature. When they have had a sense both of the majesty and grace
   of God, one thing has as it were balanced another, and caused a more
   happy sedateness and composure of body and mind.

   From these things we may learn how to judge of experiences, and to
   estimate their goodness. Those are not always the best which are
   attended with the most violent affections, and most vehement motions of
   the animal spirits, or have the greatest effects on the body. Nor are
   they always the best, that most dispose persons to abound in talk to
   others, and to speak in the most vehement manner, though these things
   often arise from the greatness of spiritual experiences. But those are
   the most excellent experiences that are qualified as follows: 1. That
   have the least mixture, or are the most purely spiritual. 2. That are
   the least deficient and partial, in which the diverse things that
   appertain to Christian experience are proportionable one to another.
   And, 3. That are raised to the highest degree. It is no matter how high
   they are raised if they are qualified as before mentioned, the higher
   the better. Experiences, thus qualified, will be attended with the most
   amiable behaviour, will bring forth the most solid and sweet fruits,
   will be the most durable, and will have the greatest effect on the
   abiding temper of the soul.

   If God is pleased to carry on this work, and it should prove to be the
   dawning of a general revival of the christian church, it may be
   expected that the time will come before long, when the experiences of
   Christians shall be much more generally thus qualified. We must expect
   green fruits before we have ripe ones. It is probable that hereafter
   the discoveries which the saints shall have of divine things, will be
   in a much higher degree than yet have been; but yet shall be so ordered
   of an infinitely wise and all sufficient God, that they shall not have
   so great an effect, in proportion, on the body, and will be less
   oppressive to nature. The outward manifestations will rather be like
   those that were in Stephen, when he was full of the Holy Ghost, when
   Acts vi. 15. "all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him,
   saw his face as it had been the face of an angel." Their inward fulness
   of the Spirit of God, in his divine, amiable, and sweet influences,
   shall as it were shine forth in a heavenly aspect, and the manner of
   speech and behaviour.--But,

   3. There is another thing concerning the experiences of Christians, of
   which it is of yet greater importance that we should be aware, than of
   the preceding, and that is the degenerating of experiences. What I mean
   is something diverse from the mere decay of experiences, or their
   gradually vanishing, by persons losing their sense of things; viz.
   experiences growing by degrees worse and worse in their kind, more and
   more partial and deficient; in which things are more out of due
   proportion, and also have more and more of a corrupt mixture; the
   spiritual part decreases, and the other useless and hurtful parts
   greatly increase. This I have seen in very many instances; and great
   are the mischiefs that have risen through want of being more aware of
   it.

   There is commonly, as I observed before, in high experiences, besides
   that which is spiritual, a mixture of three things, viz. natural or
   common affections, workings of the imagination, and a degree of
   self-righteousness or spiritual pride. Now it often comes to pass, that
   through persons not distinguishing the wheat from the chaff, and for
   want of watchfulness and humble jealousy of themselves--and by laying
   great weight on the natural and imaginary part, yielding to it, and
   indulging it, whereby that part grows and increases, and the spiritual
   part decreases--the devil sets in, and works in the corrupt part, and
   cherishes it to his utmost. At length the experiences of some persons,
   who began well, come to little else but violent motions of carnal
   affections, with great heats of the imagination, a great degree of
   enthusiasm and swelling of spiritual pride; very much like some fruits
   which bud, blossom, and kernel well, but afterwards are blasted with an
   excess of moisture; so that though the bulk is monstrously great, yet
   there is little else in it but what is useless and unwholesome. It
   appears to me very probable, that many of the heresies that have
   arisen, and sects that have appeared in the christian world, in one age
   and another, with wild enthusiastic notions and practices, began at
   first by this means, that it was such a degenerating of experiences
   which first gave rise to them, or at least led the way to
   them.--Nothing in the world so much exposes to this, as an unheeded
   spiritual pride and self-confidence, and persons being conceited of
   their own stock, without an humble, daily, and continual dependence on
   God. And this very thing seems to be typified of old, by the corrupting
   of the manna. Some of the children of Israel, because they had gathered
   a store of manna trusted in it; there being, as they apprehended,
   sufficient in the store they had gathered and laid up, without humbly
   looking to heaven, and stooping to the earth, for daily supplies; and
   the consequence was, that their manna bred worms and stank, Exod. xvi.
   20.. Pride above all things promotes this degeneracy of experiences,
   because it grieves and quenches the Spirit of the Lamb of God; and so
   it kills the spiritual part, cherishes the natural part, inflames the
   carnal affections, and heats the imagination.--The unhappy subject of
   such a degeneracy, for the most part, is not sensible of his own
   calamity; but because he finds himself still violently moved, has
   greater heats of zeal, and more vehement motions of his animal spirits,
   thinks himself fuller of the Spirit of God than ever. But indeed it is
   with him, as the apostle says of the Galatians, Gal. iii. 3. "Having
   begun in the Spirit, they are made perfect by the flesh."

   By the mixture there is of common affection with love to God, the love
   of true Christians is liable to degenerate, and to be more and more
   built on a supposition of being his high and peculiar favourites, and
   less and less on an apprehension of the excellency of God's nature as
   he is in himself. So the joy of Christians, by reason of the mixture
   there is with spiritual joy, is liable to degenerate, and to become
   little else but joy in self, joy in a person's own supposed eminency,
   and distinction from others in the favour of God. So zeal, that at
   first might be in great part spiritual, yet, in a long continuance of
   opposition and controversy, may degenerate more and more into human and
   proud passion, and may come to bitterness, and even a degree of hatred.
   And so love to the brethren may by degrees come to little else but
   fondness, and zeal for a party; yea, through a mixture of a natural
   love to the opposite sex, may degenerate more and more, till it issues
   in that which is criminal and gross. And I leave it with those who are
   better acquainted with ecclesiastical history, to inquire whether such
   a degeneracy of affections as this, might not be the first thing that
   led the way, and gave occasion to the rise, of the abominable notions
   of some sects that have arisen, concerning the community of women.
   However that is, yet certainly the mutual embraces and kisses of
   persons of different sexes, under the notion of christian love and holy
   kisses, are utterly to be disallowed and abominated, as having the most
   direct tendency quickly to turn christian love into unclean and brutish
   lust, which will not be the better, but ten times the worse, for being
   christened by the name of christian love. I should also think it
   advisable, that meetings of young people, of both sexes, in the
   evening, by themselves, without a minister, or any elder people amongst
   them, for religious exercises, should be avoided. For though for the
   present, while their minds are greatly solemn with lively impressions,
   and a deep sense of divine things, there may appear no ill consequence;
   yet we must look to the further end of things, and guard against future
   dangers, and advantages that Satan might gain against us. As a lively,
   solemn sense of divine things on the minds of young persons may
   gradually decay, so there will be danger that an ill improvement of
   these meetings may gradually prevail; if not in any unsuitable
   behaviour while together in the meeting, yet, when they break up to go
   home, they may naturally consort together in couples, for other than
   religious purposes; and it may at last so terminate, that young persons
   may go to such meetings chiefly for the sake of such an opportunity for
   company-keeping.

   The defect there sometimes is in the experiences of Christians exposes
   them to degenerate, as well as the mixture that they have. Deficient
   maimed experiences do sometimes become more and more so. The mind being
   wholly intent upon those things that are in view, and those that are
   most wanting being neglected, there is less and less of them, and so
   the gap for corruption to come in grows wider and wider. And commonly
   both these causes operate together.--We had need to be jealous over
   ourselves with a godly jealousy, as the apostle was over the christian
   Corinthians, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
   subtilty, so our minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is
   in Christ. God indeed will never suffer his true saints totally and
   finally to fall away, but yet may punish their pride and
   self-confidence, by suffering them to be long led into a dreadful
   wilderness, by the subtle serpent, to the great wounding of their own
   souls and the interest of religion.

   Before I dismiss this head of the degenerating of experiences, I would
   mention one thing more that tends to it; and that is, persons aiming in
   their experience to go beyond the rule of God's word, i.e. aiming at
   that which is indeed, in some respect, beyond the rule. Thus some
   persons have endeavoured utterly to root out and abolish all natural
   affection, or any special affection or respect to their near relations,
   under a notion that no other love ought to be allowed but spiritual
   love, and that all other love is to be abolished as carnal, and that it
   becomes Christians to love none upon the account of any thing else but
   the image of God; and that therefore love should go out to one and
   another only in that proportion in which the image of God is seen in
   them. They might as well argue that a man ought utterly to disallow of,
   and endeavour to abolish, all love or appetite to his daily food, under
   a notion that it is a carnal appetite, and that no other appetite
   should be tolerated but spiritual appetites. Why should the saints
   strive after that, as a high attainment in holiness, which the apostle
   in Rom. i. 31.. Mentions as one instance wherein the heathen had got to
   the most horrid pass in wickedness, viz. being without natural
   affection? Some have doubted whether they might pray for the conversion
   and salvation of the souls of their children, any more than for the
   souls of others; because the salvation of the souls of others would be
   as much to God's glory, as the salvation of their children; and they
   have supposed that to pray most for their own, would show a selfish
   disposition. So they have been afraid to tolerate a compassionate grief
   and concern for their nearest friends; for fear it would be an argument
   of want of resignation to God.--It is true, there is great danger of
   persons setting their hearts too much upon their earthly friends; our
   love to earthly friends ought to be under the government of the love of
   God, and should be attended with a spirit of submission and resignation
   to his will, and every thing should be subordinated to his glory. But
   that is no argument that these affections should be entirely abolished.
   The Creator of the world has put them in us, for the good of mankind,
   and because he saw they would be needful for them, as they must be
   united in society in the present state, and are of great use when kept
   in their proper place; and to endeavour totally to root them out, would
   be to reproach and oppose the wisdom of the Creator. Nor is the being
   of these natural inclinations, if well regulated, inconsistent with any
   part of our duty to God, or any argument of a sinful selfishness, any
   more than our natural abhorrence of pain, and the natural inclination
   to ease that was in the man Christ Jesus himself.

   It is the duty of parents to be more concerned and to pray more for the
   salvation of their children, than for the children of their neighbours;
   as it is the duty of a minister to be more concerned for the salvation
   of the souls of his flock, and to pray more for them, than those of
   other congregations, because they are committed to his care. So our
   near friends are more committed to our care than others, and our near
   neighbours, than those that live at a great distance; and the people of
   our land and nation are more, in some sense, committed to our care than
   the people of China, and we ought to pray more for them, and to be more
   concerned that the kingdom of Christ should flourish among them, than
   in another country, where it would be as much, and no more, for the
   glory of God. Compassion ought to be especially exercised towards
   friends, Job vi. 14. Christ did not frown upon a special affection and
   compassion for near friends; but rather countenanced and encouraged it,
   from time to time, in those who, in the exercise of such an affection
   and compassion, applied to him for relief for their friends; as in the
   instances of the woman of Canaan, Jairus, Mary and Martha, the
   centurion, the widow of Nain, and many others. The apostle Paul, though
   as much resigned and devoted to God, and under the power of his love,
   perhaps, as any mere man that ever lived, had a peculiar concern for
   his countrymen the Jews, the rather on that account, that they were his
   brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. He had a very high degree
   of compassionate grief for them, insomuch that he tells us he had great
   heaviness and continual sorrow of heart for them, and could wish
   himself accursed from Christ for them.--Many things are proper for the
   saints in heaven, which are not suitable to our state in this world;
   and for Christians, in these and other instances, to affect to go
   beyond the present state of mankind, and what God has appointed as fit
   for it, is an instance of that which the wise man calls being righteous
   overmuch, and has a tendency to open a door for Satan, and to cause
   religious affections to degenerate into something very unbecoming
   Christians.--Thus I have, as I proposed, taken notice of some things
   with regard to the inward experiences of Christians, by which Satan has
   an advantage. I now proceed.

   II. To take notice of something with regard to the external effects of
   experiences, which also gives Satan an advantage. What I refer to, is
   the secret and unaccountable influence that custom has upon persons,
   with respect to the external effects and manifestations of the inward
   affections of the mind. By custom I mean, both a person's being
   accustomed to a thing in himself, in his own common, allowed, and
   indulged practice; and also the countenance and approbation of others
   amongst whom he dwells, by their general voice and practice. It is well
   known, and appears sufficiently by what I have said already in this
   treatise and elsewhere, that I am far from ascribing all the late
   uncommon effects and outward manifestations of inward experiences to
   custom and fashion, as some do; I know it to be otherwise, if it be
   possible for me to know any thing of this nature by the most critical
   observation, under all manner of opportunities of observing. But yet
   this also is exceeding evident by experience, that custom has a strange
   influence in these things. I know it by the different manners and
   degrees of external effects and manifestations of great affections and
   high discoveries, in different towns, according to what persons are
   gradually led into, and to which they are insensibly habituated, by
   example and custom; and also in the same place, at different times,
   according to their conduct. If some person conducts them, that much
   countenances and encourages such kind of outward manifestations of
   great affections, they naturally and insensibly prevail, and grow by
   degrees unavoidable; but, when afterwards they come under another kind
   of conduct, the manner of external appearances will strangely alter.
   And yet it seems to be without any proper design or contrivance of
   those in whom there is this alteration; it is not properly affected by
   them, but the influence of example and custom is secret and insensible
   to the person themselves. These things have a vast influence in the
   manner of persons manifesting their joys, whether with smiles and an
   air of lightness, or whether with more solemnity and reverence; and so
   they have a great influence as to the dispositions persons have under
   high affections to abound in talk; and also as to the manner of their
   speaking, the loudness and vehemence of their speech. It would,
   however, be exceeding unjust, and against all the evidence of fact and
   experience, and the reason of things, to ascribe to custom all
   dispositions to be much in speaking to others, and to speak in a very
   earnest manner. It is manifest that example and custom has some way or
   other, a secret and unsearchable influence on those actions that are
   involuntary, in different places, and in the same places at different
   times.

   It would be very unreasonable, and prejudicial to the interest of
   religion, to frown upon all these extraordinary external effects and
   manifestations of great religious affections.--A measure of them is
   natural, necessary, and beautiful, and the effect in no wise
   disproportioned to the spiritual cause, and is of great benefit to
   promote religion. Yet I think they greatly err who suppose that these
   things should be wholly unlimited, and that all should be encouraged in
   going to the utmost length that they feel themselves inclined to. There
   ought to be a general restraint upon these things, and there should be
   a prudent care taken of persons in such extraordinary circumstances.
   They should be moderately advised at proper seasons, not to make more
   ado than there is need of, but rather to hold a restraint upon their
   inclinations; otherwise extraordinary outward effects will grow upon
   them, they will be more and more natural and unavoidable, and the
   extraordinary outward show will increase, without any increase of the
   internal cause. Persons will find themselves under a kind of necessity
   of making a great ado, with less and less affection of soul, till at
   length almost any slight emotion will set them going; and they will be
   more and more violent and boisterous, and will grow louder and louder,
   till their actions and behaviour become indeed very absurd. These
   things experience proves. Thus I have taken notice of the more general
   causes whence the errors that have attended this great revival of
   religion have risen, and under each head have observed some particular
   errors that have flowed from these fountains.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Some particular errors that have risen from several of the preceding
   causes--Censuring others.

   In some cases perhaps they have chiefly owing to one, and in others to
   another, and in others to the influence of several, or all conjunctly.
   And here the first thing I would take notice of is, censuring
   professing Christians of good standing in the visible church, as
   unconverted. I need not repeat what I have elsewhere said to show this
   to be against the plain, frequent, and strict prohibitions of the word
   of God. It is the worst disease that has attended this work, most
   contrary to the spirit and rules of Christianity, and of the worst
   consequences.--There is a most unhappy tincture that the minds of many,
   both ministers and people, have received that way. The manner of many
   has been, when they first enter into conversation with any person that
   seems to make any pretences to religion, to fix a judgment of him, from
   his manner of talking of religious things, whether he be converted, or
   experimentally acquainted with vital piety, or not; and then to treat
   him accordingly, and freely to express their thoughts of him to others,
   especially those of whom they have a good opinion, as true Christians,
   and accepted as brethren and companions in Christ. Or if they do not
   declare their minds expressly, yet by their manner of speaking of them,
   at least to their friends, they will show plainly what their thoughts
   are. So, when they have heard any minister pray or preach, their first
   work has been to observe him on a design of discerning him, whether he
   be a converted man or no; whether he prays like one that feels the
   saving power of God's Spirit in his heart, and whether he preaches like
   one that knows what he says. It has been so much the way in some
   places, that many new converts do not know but it is their duty to do
   so, they know no other way. And when once persons yield to such a
   notion, and give in to such a humour, they will quickly grow very
   discerning in their own apprehension, and think they can easily tell a
   hypocrite. And when once they have passed their censure, every thing
   seems to confirm it; they see more and more in the person they have
   censured, that seems to them to show plainly that he is an unconverted
   man. And then, if the person censured be a minister, every thing in his
   public performances seems dead and sapless, and to do them no good at
   all, but on the contrary to be of a deadening influence, and poisonous
   to the soul; yea, it seems worse and worse to them, his preaching grows
   more and more intolerable. Which is owing to a secret, strong
   prejudice, that steals in more and more upon the mind, as experience
   plainly and certainly shows. When the Spirit of God was wonderfully
   poured out in this place more than seven years ago, and near thirty
   souls in a week, take one with another, for five or six weeks together,
   were to appearance brought home to Christ, and all the town seemed to
   be alive and full of God, there was no such notion or humour prevailing
   here. When ministers preached here, as very many did at that time,
   young and old, our people did not go about to discern whether they were
   men of experience or not; they did not know that they must. Mr.
   Stoddard never brought them up in that way; it did not seem natural to
   them to go about any thing of that nature, nor did any such thing enter
   into their hearts; but, when any minister preached, the business of
   every one was to listen and attend to what he said, and apply it to his
   own heart, and make the utmost improvement of it. And it is remarkable,
   that never did there appear such a disposition in the people to relish,
   approve of, and admire ministers' preaching as at that time. Such
   expressions as these were frequent in the mouths of one and another, on
   occasion of the preaching of strangers here, viz. That they rejoiced
   there were so many such eminent ministers in the country; and they
   wondered they never heard the fame of them before. They were thankful
   that other towns had so good means; and the like. And scarcely ever did
   any minister preach here, but his preaching did some remarkable
   service; as I had good opportunity to know, because at that time I had
   particular acquaintance with most of the persons in the town, in their
   soul-concerns. That it has been so much otherwise of late in many
   places in the land is another instance of the secret and powerful
   influence of custom and example.

   There has been an unhappy disposition in some ministers toward their
   brethren in the ministry in this respect, which has encouraged and
   greatly promoted such a spirit among some of their people. A wrong
   improvement has been made of Christ's scourging the buyers and sellers
   out of the temple. It has been expected by some, that Christ was now
   about thus to purge his house of unconverted ministers; and this has
   made it more natural to them to think that they should do Christ
   service, and act as co-workers with him, to put to their hand, and
   endeavour by all means to cashier those ministers that they thought to
   be unconverted. Indeed it appears to me probable that the time is
   coming when awful judgments will be executed on unfaithful ministers,
   and that no sort of men in the world will be so much exposed to divine
   judgments. But then we should leave that work to Christ, who is the
   searcher of hearts, and to whom vengeance belongs; and not, without
   warrant, take the scourge out of his hand into our own. There has been
   too much of a disposition in some, as it were, to give ministers over
   as reprobates, being looked upon as wolves in sheeps' clothing; which
   has tended to promote and encourage a spirit of bitterness towards
   them, and to make it natural to treat them too much as if they knew God
   hated them. If God's children knew that others were reprobates it would
   not be required of them to love them; we may hate those that we know
   God hates; as it is lawful to hate the devil, and as the saints at the
   day of judgment will hate the wicked. [556] Some have been too apt to
   look for fire from heaven upon particular ministers; and this has
   naturally excited that disposition to call for it, which Christ rebuked
   in his disciples at Samaria. For my part, though I believe no sort of
   men on earth are so exposed to spiritual judgments as wicked ministers,
   yet I feel no disposition to treat any minister as if I supposed that
   he was finally rejected of God; for I cannot but hope that there is
   coming a day of such great grace, a time so appointed for magnifying
   the riches and sovereignty of divine mercy, beyond what ever was, that
   a great number of unconverted ministers will obtain mercy. There were
   no sort of persons in Christ's time that were so guilty, and so
   hardened, and towards whom Christ manifested such great indignation, as
   the priests and scribes; and there were no such persecutors of Christ
   and his disciples as they. And yet in that great outpouring of the
   Spirit that began on the day of Pentecost, though it began with the
   common people, yet in the progress of the work, after awhile, "a great
   company of priests in Jerusalem were obedient to the faith," Acts vi.
   7. And Saul, one of the most violent of all the persecuting Pharisees,
   became afterwards the greatest promoter of the work of God that ever
   was. I hope we shall yet see in many instances a fulfilment of that in
   Isa. xxix. 24. "They also that erred in spirit shall come to
   understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine."

   Nothing has been gained by this practice. The end that some have aimed
   at in it has not been obtained, nor is ever like to be. Possibly some
   have openly censured ministers, and encourage their people's uneasiness
   under them, in hopes that the uneasiness would be so general, and so
   great, that unconverted ministers in general would be cast off, and
   then things would go on happily. But there is no likelihood of it. The
   devil indeed has obtained his end; this practice has bred a great deal
   of unhappiness among ministers and people, has spoiled Christians'
   enjoyment of Sabbaths, and made them their most uneasy, uncomfortable,
   and unprofitable days, and has stirred up great contention, and set all
   in a flame. In one place and another, where there was a glorious work
   of God's Spirit begun, it has in a great measure knocked all on the
   head, and their ministers hold their places. Some have aimed at a
   better end in censuring ministers; they have supposed it to be a likely
   means to awaken them. Whereas indeed no one thing has had so great a
   tendency to prevent the awakening of disaffected ministers in general;
   and no one thing has actually had such influence to lock up the minds
   of ministers against any good effect of this great work of God in the
   land. I have known instances of some who seemed to be much moved by the
   first appearance of this work, but since have seemed to be greatly
   deadened by what has appeared of this nature. And, if there be one or
   two instances of ministers who have been awakened by it, there are ten
   to one on whom it has had a contrary influence. The worst enemies of
   this work have been inwardly caused by this practice; they have made a
   shield of it to defend their consciences, and have been glad that it
   has been carried to so great a length; at the same time that they have
   looked upon it, and improved it, as a door opened for them to be more
   bold in opposing the work in general.

   There is no such dreadful danger of natural men being undone by our
   forbearing thus to censure them, and carrying it towards them as
   visible Christians. It will be no bloody hell-peopling charity, as some
   seem to suppose, when we only allow them to be worthy of a public
   charity, on their profession and good external behaviour; any more than
   Judas was in danger of being deceived, by Christ's treating him a long
   time as a disciple, and sending him forth as an apostle. Christ did not
   then take it upon him to act as the judge and searcher of hearts, but
   only as the head of the visible church. Indeed such a charity as this
   may be abused by some, as every thing is, and will be, that is in its
   own nature proper, and of never so good tendency. I say nothing against
   dealing thoroughly with conscience, by the most convincing and
   searching dispensation of the word of God. I do not desire that sword
   should be sheathed, or gently handled by ministers; but let it used as
   a two-edged sword, to pierce, even to the dividing asunder soul and
   spirit, joints and marrow; let ministers handle it in flaming fire,
   without having any more mercy on it, than the furnace has on those
   metals that are tried in it. But we should let men's persons alone; let
   the word of God judge them, but let us not take it upon use till we
   have a warrant for it.

   Some have been ready to censure ministers because they seem, in
   comparison of some other ministers, to be very cold and lifeless in
   their ministerial performances. But then it should be considered, that,
   for ought we know, God may hereafter raise up ministers of so much more
   excellent and heavenly qualifications, and so much more spiritual and
   divine in their performances, that there may appear as great a
   difference between them, and those who now seem the most lively, as
   there is now between them, and others that are called dead and sapless.
   And those that are now called lively ministers may appear to their
   hearers, when they compare them with others who shall excel them, as
   wretchedly mean, and their performances poor, dead, dry things; and
   many may be ready to be prejudiced against them, as accounting them
   good for nothing, and, it may be, calling them soul-murderers. What a
   poor figure may we suppose the most lively of us, and those that are
   most admired by the people, make in the eyes of one of the saints of
   heaven, any otherwise than as their deadness, deformity, and rottenness
   is hid by the veil of Christ's righteousness!

   Another thing that has been supposed to be sufficient warrant for
   openly censuring ministers as unconverted, is their opposing this work
   of God that has lately been carried on in the land. And there can be no
   doubt with me but that opposition against this work may be such, as to
   render either ministers or people truly scandalous, and expose them to
   public ecclesiastical censure; and that ministers hereby may utterly
   defeat the design of their ministry, (as I observed before,) and so
   give their people just cause of uneasiness. I should not think that any
   person had power to oblige me constantly to attend the ministry of one
   who did from time to time plainly pray and preach against this work, or
   speak reproachfully of it frequently in his public performances, after
   all christian methods had been used for a remedy, and to no
   purpose.--But to determine how far opposing this work is consistent
   with a state of grace, is, as experience shows, a very difficult thing;
   who can tell how far, and for how long time, some persons of good
   experience in their own souls may proceed, through prejudices they have
   received from the errors that have been mixed with this work, or
   through some peculiar disadvantages they are under to behold things in
   a right view, by reason of the persons they converse with, or their own
   cold and dead frames? I have seen what abundantly convinces me, that
   the business is too high for me; I am glad that God has not committed
   such a difficult affair to me; I can joyfully leave it wholly in his
   hands, who is infinitely fit for it, without meddling at all with it
   myself. We may represent it as exceeding dangerous to oppose this work,
   for this we have good warrant in the word of God; but I know of no
   necessity we are under to determine whether it be possible for those
   that are guilty of it to be in a state of grace or no.

   God seems so strictly to have forbidden our judging our brethren in the
   visible church, no only because he knew that we were infinitely too
   weak, fallible, and blind, to be well capacitated for it, but also
   because he knew that it was not a work suited to our proud hearts; that
   it would be setting us vastly too high, and making us too much of lords
   over our fellow-creatures. Judging our brethren, and passing a
   condemnatory sentence upon them, seems to carry in it an act of
   authority, especially to sentence them with respect to that state of
   their hearts, on which depends their liableness to eternal damnation.
   This is evident by such interrogations as the following, to hear which
   from God's mouth, is enough to make us shrink into nothing with shame
   and confusion, under a sense of our own blindness and worthlessness,
   Rom. xiv. 4. "Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? To his
   own master he standeth or falleth." And James iv. 12. "There is one
   lawgiver that is able to save and to destroy; who art thou that judgest
   another?" Our wise and merciful Shepherd has graciously taken care not
   to lay in our way such a temptation to pride; he has cut up all such
   poison out of our pasture; and therefore we should not desire to have
   it restored. Blessed be his name, that he has not laid such a
   temptation in the way of my pride! I know that, in order to be fit for
   this business, I must not only be vastly more knowing, but more humble
   than I am.--Though I believe some of God's own children have of late
   been very guilty in this matter, yet, by what is said of it in the
   Scripture, it appears to me very likely, that God will awfully rebuke
   that practice. May it in sovereign and infinite mercy be prevented, by
   the deep and open humiliation of those that have openly practised it!

   As this practice ought to be avoided, so should all such open, visible
   marks of distinction and separation that imply it, (as particularly,
   distinguishing such as we have judged to be in a converted state with
   the compellations of brother or sister,) any further than there is a
   visible ecclesiastical distinction. In those places where it is the
   manner to receive such, and such only, to the communion of the visible
   church, as recommend themselves by giving a satisfying account of their
   inward experiences, there Christians may openly distinguish such
   persons, in their speech and ordinary behaviour, with a visible
   separation, without being inconsistent with themselves. I do not now
   pretend to meddle with that controversy, whether such an account of
   experience be requisite to church-fellowship. But certainly, to admit
   persons to communion with us as brethren in the visible church, and
   then visibly to reject them, and to make an open distinction between
   them and others, by different names or appellations, is to be
   inconsistent with ourselves. It is to make a visible church within a
   visible church, and visibly to divide between sheep and goats, setting
   one on the right hand, and the other on the left.--This bitter root of
   censoriousness must be totally rooted out, as we would prepare the way
   of the Lord. It has nourished and upheld many other things contrary to
   the humility, meekness, and love of the gospel. The minds of many have
   received an unhappy turn, with their religion; there is a certain point
   or sharpness, a disposition to a kind of warmth, that does not savour
   of that meek, lamb-like, sweet disposition that becomes Christians.
   Many have now been so long habituated to it, that they do not know how
   to get out of it; but we must get out of it; the point and sharpness
   must be blunted, and we must learn another way of manifesting our zeal
   for God.

   Some have a way of reflecting on others, and censuring them in open
   prayer; which, though it has a fair show of love, is indeed the boldest
   way of reproaching others imaginable; because there is implied in it an
   appeal to the most high God, concerning the truth of their censures and
   reflections.--And some have a way of joining a sort of imprecations
   with their petitions for others, though but conditional ones, that
   appear to me wholly needless and improper. They pray that others may
   either be converted or removed. I never heard nor read of any such
   thing practised in the church of God till now, unless it be with
   respect to some of the most visibly and notoriously abandoned enemies
   of the church of God. This is a sort of cursing men in our prayers,
   adding a curse with our blessing; whereas the rule is, Bless, and curse
   not. To pray that God would kill another, is to curse him as Elisha
   cursed the children who came out of Bethel. And the case must be very
   great and extraordinary indeed to warrant it, unless we were prophets,
   and did not speak our own words, but words indited by the immediate
   inspiration of the Spirit of God. It is pleaded, that if God has no
   design of converting others, it is best for them and others, that they
   should be immediately taken away and sent to hell before they have
   contracted more guilt. To which I would say, that so it was best for
   those children who met Elisha, seeing God had no design of converting
   them, to die immediately, as they did; but yet Elisha's imprecating
   that sudden death upon them, was cursing them; and therefore would not
   have been lawful for one who did not speak in the name of the Lord as a
   prophet.--And then, if we give way to such things as these, where shall
   we stop? A child that suspects he has an unconverted father and mother,
   may pray openly that his father and mother may either be converted, or
   taken away and sent to hell now quickly, before their guilt is greater.
   For unconverted parents are as likely to poison the souls of their
   family in their manner of training them up, as unconverted ministers
   are to poison their people. And so it might come to be a common thing
   all over the country, for children to pray after this manner concerning
   their parents, brethren and sisters concerning one another, husbands
   concerning their wives, and wives concerning their husbands; and so for
   persons to pray concerning all their unconverted friends and
   neighbours. And not only so, but we may also pray concerning all those
   saints who are not lively Christians, that they may either be enlivened
   or taken away; if that be true which is often said by some at this day,
   that these cold dead saints do more hurt than natural men, and lead
   more souls to hell, and that it would be well for mankind if they were
   all dead.

   How needless are such petitions or imprecations as these! What benefit
   is there of them? Is it not sufficient for us to pray that God would
   provide for his church and the good of souls, take care of his own
   flock, and give it needful means and advantages for its spiritual
   prosperity? Does God need to be directed by us in what way he shall do
   it? What need we ask of God to do it by killing such and such persons,
   if he do not convert them? unless we delight in the thoughts of God's
   answering us in such terrible ways, and with such awful manifestations
   of his wrath to our fellow-creatures.--And why do not ministers direct
   sinners to pray for themselves, that God would either convert them or
   kill them, and send them to hell now, before their guilt is greater? In
   this way we should lead persons in the next place to self-murder; for
   many probably would soon begin to think, that what they may pray for,
   they may seek by the use of means.

   Some, with whom I have discoursed about this way of praying, have said,
   That the Spirit of God, as it were, forces out such words from their
   mouths, when otherwise they should not dare to utter them. But such
   kind of impulse does not look like the influence of the Spirit of God.
   The Spirit of God indeed sometimes strongly inclines men to utter
   words; not by putting expressions into the mouth, and urging to utter
   them, but by filling the heart with a sense of divine things, and holy
   affections, whence the mouth speaks. That other way of being urged to
   use certain expressions, by an unaccountable force, is very probably
   from the influence of the devil.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [556] In these expressions our excellent author is not sufficiently
   guarded.--Our knowing or not knowing persons to be reprobates, in any
   sense of that term, is no sufficient standard of obligation to hate or
   to love them, in the way of benevolence. The obligation to love or to
   hate is founded on the nature of the object, as good or bad. But here
   we are liable to err, for want of discriminating between a person and
   his criminal qualities. Now every criminal object should be regarded by
   us a being possessed of physical powers; but this existence and these
   powers, being the product of divine bounty, deserve our benevolent
   approbation, not our hatred. On the other hand, every criminal object,
   or agent, is chargeable with criminal designs and hateful qualities
   exclusively his own; and these alone deserve our hatred. In no other
   sense but this latter can it be truly said that God hates the workers
   of iniquity, wicked men, or even the devil. But if so, in no other
   sense or degree ought we to hate them. Had our author been
   scientifically acquainted with that principle which accounts for the
   true origin of moral evil, he would have seen the impropriety of his
   statement.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Of errors connected with lay-exhorting.

   Another thing, in the management of which there has been much error and
   misconduct, is lay-exhorting; about which there has been abundance of
   disputing, jangling, and contention. In the midst of these disputes, I
   suppose that all are agreed as to these two things, viz. 1. That all
   exhorting one another by lay-men is not unlawful or improper; but, on
   the contrary, that such exhorting is a Christian duty. And, 2. I
   suppose also, all will allow that there is some kind or way of
   exhorting and teaching which belongs only to the office of teachers.
   All will allow that God has appointed such an office as that of
   teachers in the christian church, and therefore doubtless will allow
   that something or other is proper and peculiar to that office, or some
   business of teaching that does not belong as much to others as to them.
   If there be any way of teaching that is peculiar to that office, then
   for others to take that upon them, is to invade the office of a
   minister; which doubtless is very sinful, and is often so represented
   in Scripture. But the great difficulty is to settle the bounds, and to
   tell exactly how far lay-men may go, and when they exceed their limits;
   which is a matter of so much difficulty, that I do not wonder if many
   in their zeal have transgressed. The two ways of teaching and
   exhorting, the one of which ought ordinarily to be left to ministers,
   and the other of which may and ought to be practised by the people, may
   be expressed by those two name of preaching, and exhorting in way of
   christian conversation. But then a great deal of difficulty and
   controversy arises to determine what is preaching, and what is
   christian conversation. However, I will humbly offer my thoughts
   concerning this subject of lay-exhorting, as follows.

   I. The common people, in exhorting one another, ought not to clothe
   themselves with the like authority with that which is proper for
   ministers. There is a certain authority that ministers have and should
   exercise in teaching, as well as in governing the flock. Teaching is
   spoken of in Scripture as an act of authority, 1 Tim. ii. 12. In order
   to a man's preaching, special authority must be committed to him, "How
   shall they preach, except they be sent?" Ministers in this work of
   teaching and exhorting are clothed with authority, as Christ's
   messengers, Mal. ii. 7. as representing him, and so speaking in his
   name, and in his stead, 2 Cor. v. 18-20. And it seems to be the most
   honourable thing that belongs to the office of a minister of the
   gospel, that to him is committed the word of reconciliation, and that
   he has power to preach the gospel, as Christ's messenger, and speaking
   in his name. The apostle seems to speak of it as such, 1 Cor. i. 16,
   17. Ministers therefore, in the exercise of this power, may clothe
   themselves with authority in speaking, or may teach others in an
   authoritative manner, "These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with
   all authority; Let no man despise thee." But the common people, in
   exhorting one another, ought not thus to exhort in an authoritative
   manner. There is a great deal of difference between teaching as a
   father amongst a company of children, and counselling in a brotherly
   way, as the children may kindly counsel and admonish one another. Those
   that are mere brethren ought not to assume authority in exhorting,
   though one may be better, and have more experience, than another.
   Lay-men ought not to exhort as though they were the ambassadors or
   messengers of Christ, as ministers do; nor should they exhort, warn,
   and charge in his name, according to the ordinary import of such an
   expression, when applied to teaching.--Indeed in one sense, a Christian
   ought to do every thing he does in religion in the name of Christ, i.e.
   he ought to act in a dependence on him as his head and mediator, and do
   all for his glory. But the expression, as it is usually understood,
   when applied to teaching or exhorting, is speaking in Christ's stead,
   and as having a message from him.

   Persons may clothe themselves with authority in speaking, either by the
   authoritative words they make use of, or in the manner and
   authoritative air of their speaking. Though some may think that this
   latter is a matter of indifference, or at least of small importance,
   yet there is indeed a great deal in it; a person may go much out of his
   place, and be guilty of a great degree of assuming, in the manner of
   his speaking those words, which, as they might be spoken, might be
   proper for him.--The same words, spoken in a different manner, may
   express what is very diverse. Doubtless there may be as much hurt in
   the manner of a person's speaking, as there may in his looks; but the
   wise man tells us, that "an high look is an abomination to the Lord,"
   Prov. xxi. 4. Again, a man may clothe himself with authority, in the
   circumstances under which he speaks; as for instance, if he sets
   himself up as a public teacher. Here I would have it observed, that I
   do not suppose that a person is guilty of this, merely because he
   speaks in the hearing of many. Persons may speak only in a
   conversation, and yet speak in the hearing of a great number, as they
   often do in their common conversation about temporal things, at feasts
   and entertainments, where women as well as others converse freely
   together, in the hearing it may be of a great number, and yet without
   offence. And if their conversation on such occasions should turn on
   spiritual things, and they should speak as freely and openly, I do not
   see why it would not be as harmless. Nor do I think, that besides a
   great number being present, persons speaking with a very earnest and
   loud voice, is for them to set up themselves as public teachers, if
   they do it from no contrivance or premeditated design, or as purposely
   directing themselves to a congregation or multitude. But persons
   speaking in conversation, or when all freely converse one with
   another--directing themselves to none but those that are near them, and
   fall in their way--in that earnest and pathetic manner, to which the
   subject naturally leads, and as it were constrains them: I say, that
   for persons to do such, though many happen to hear them, does not
   appear to me to be setting themselves up as public teachers. Yea,
   suppose all this happens to hear them, does not appear to me to be
   setting themselves up as public teachers. Yea, suppose all this happens
   to be in a meeting-house; I do not think that this much alters the
   case, provided the solemnity of public service and divine ordinances be
   over; and provided also that they speak in no authoritative way, but in
   an humble manner, becoming their degree and station, though they speak
   very earnestly and pathetically.--Indeed modesty might in ordinary
   cases restrain some persons (as women and those that are young) from so
   much as speaking when a great number are present, at least, when some
   of those present are much their superiors, unless they are spoken to.
   And yet, the case may be so extraordinary as fully to warrant it. If
   something very extraordinary happens to persons, or if they are in
   extraordinary circumstances; as if a person be struck with lightening
   in the midst of a great company, or if he lies a-dying, it appears to
   none any violation of modesty for him to speak freely before those that
   are much his superiors. I have seen some women and children in such
   circumstances, on religious accounts, that it has appeared to me no
   more a transgressing the laws of humility and modesty for them to speak
   freely, let who will be present, than if they were in danger of dying.

   But then may a man be said to set up himself as a public teacher, when
   in a set speech, of design, he directs himself to a multitude, as
   looking that they should compose themselves to attend to what he has to
   say. And much more when this is a contrived and premeditated thing,
   without any thing like a constraint by an extraordinary sense or
   affection; and more still, when meetings are appointed on purpose to
   hear lay-persons exhort, and they take it as their business to be
   speakers, while they expect that others should come, and compose
   themselves and attend as hearers. When private Christians take it upon
   them in private meetings to act as the masters or presidents of the
   assembly, and accordingly from time to time to teach and exhort the
   rest, this has the appearance of authoritative teaching.

   When private Christians, who are no more then mere brethren, exhort and
   admonish one another, it ought to be in an humble manner, rather by way
   of entreaty, than with authority; and the more, according as the
   station of persons is lower. Thus it becomes women, and those that are
   young, ordinarily to be at a greater distance from any appearance or
   authority in speaking than others. Thus much at least is evident by 1
   Tim. ii. 9, 11, 12. That lay-persons ought not to exhort one another as
   clothed with authority, is a general rule; but it cannot justly be
   supposed to extend to heads of families in their own families. Every
   christian family is a little church, and the heads of it are its
   authoritative teachers and governors. Nor can it extend to
   schoolmasters among their scholars; and some other cases might perhaps
   be mentioned, that ordinary discretion will distinguish, where a man's
   circumstances do properly clothe him with authority, and render it fit
   and suitable for him to counsel and admonish others in an authoritative
   manner.

   II. No man but a minister duly appointed to that sacred calling, ought
   to follow teaching and exhorting as a calling, or so as to neglect that
   which is his proper calling. Having the office of a teacher in the
   church of God implies two things: 1. A being invested with the
   authority of a teacher; and 2. A being called to the business of a
   teacher, to make it the business of his life. Therefore that man who is
   not a minister, taking either of these upon him, invades the office of
   a minister. Concerning assuming the authority of a minister I have
   spoken already. But if a lay-man do not assume authority in his
   teaching, yet if he forsakes his proper calling, or doth so at least in
   a great measure, and spends his time in going about from house to house
   to counsel and exhort, he goes beyond his line, and violates christian
   rules. Those that have the office of teachers or exhorters, have it for
   their calling, and should make it their business, as a business proper
   to their office; and none should make it their business but such, Rom.
   xii. 3-8. "For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man
   that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
   think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man
   the proportion of faith. For as we have many members in one body, and
   all members have not the same office; so we being many, are one body in
   Christ.--He that teacheth let him wait on teaching, or he that
   exhorteth, on exhortation." 1 Cor. xii. 29. "Are all apostles? are all
   prophets? are all teachers?" 1 Cor. vii. 20. "Let every man abide in
   the same calling wherein he was called." 1 Thess. iv. 11. "And that ye
   study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your
   own hands, as we commanded you."

   It will be a very dangerous thing for lay-men, in either of these
   respects, to invade the office of minister. If this be common among us,
   we shall be in danger of having a stop put to the work of God, of the
   ark turning aside from us, before it comes to mount Zion, and of God
   making a breach upon us; as of old there was an unhappy stop put to the
   joy of the congregation of Israel, in bringing up the ark of God,
   because others carried it besides the Levites. And therefore David,
   when the error was found out, says, "None ought to carry the ark of
   God, but the Levites only; for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the
   ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever." And because one
   presumed to touch the ark who was not of the sons of Aaron, therefore
   the Lord made a breach upon them, and covered their day of rejoicing
   with a cloud in his anger."--Before I dismiss this head of
   lay-exhorting, I would take notice of three things relating to it, upon
   which there ought to be a restraint.

   1. Speaking in the time of the solemn worship of God; as public prayer,
   singing, or preaching, or administration of the sacrament of the holy
   supper, or any duty of social worship. This should not be allowed. I
   know it will be said, that in some cases, when persons are exceedingly
   affected, they cannot help it; and I believe so too; but then I also
   believe, and know by experience, that there are several things which
   contribute to that inability, besides merely and absolutely the sense
   of divine things upon their hearts. Custom and example, or the thing
   being allowed, have such an influence, that they actually help to make
   it impossible for persons under strong affections to avoid speaking. If
   it was disallowed, and persons at the time that they were thus disposed
   to break out, had this apprehension, that it would be very unbecoming
   for them so to do, it would contribute to their ability to avoid it
   Their inability arises from their strong and vehement disposition; and,
   so far as that disposition is from a good principle, it would be
   weakened by this thought, viz. "What I am going to do, will be for the
   dishonour of Christ and religion." And so the inward vehemence, that
   pushed them forward to speak, would fall, and they would be enabled to
   avoid it. This experience confirms.

   2. There ought to be a moderate restraint on the loudness of person's
   talking under high affections; for, if there be not, it will grow
   natural and unavoidable for persons to be louder and louder, without
   any increase of their inward sense; till it becomes natural to them, at
   last, to scream and halloo to almost every one they see in the streets,
   when they are much affected. But this is certainly very improper, and
   what has no tendency to promote religion. The man Christ Jesus, when he
   was upon earth, had doubtless as great a sense of the infinite
   greatness and importance of eternal things, and the worth of souls, as
   any have now; but there is not the least appearance in his history, of
   his taking any such course, or manner of exhorting others.

   3. There should also be some restraint on the abundance of talk, under
   strong affections; for, if persons give themselves an unbounded liberty
   to talk just so much as they feel an inclination to, they will increase
   and abound more and more in talk, beyond the proportion of their sense
   or affection; till at length it will become ineffectual on those that
   hear them, and, by the commonness of their abundant talk, they will
   defeat their own end.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Of errors connected with singing praises to God.

   One thing more of which I would take notice, before I conclude this
   part, is the mismanagement of singing praises to God. I believe it to
   have been one fruit of the extraordinary degrees of the sweet and
   joyful influence of the Spirit of God, that there has appeared such a
   disposition to abound in this divine exercise; not only in appointed
   solemn meetings, but when Christians occasionally meet together at each
   other's houses. But the mismanagement I have respect to is a way of
   performing it, without almost any appearance of that reverence and
   solemnity with which all visible, open acts of divine worship ought to
   be attended. It may be two or three are in a room singing hymns of
   praise to God, others talking at the same time, others about their
   work, with little more appearance of regard to what is doing, than if
   only singing a common song for their amusement and diversion. There is
   danger, if such things are continued, that a mere nothing be made of
   this duty, to the great violation of the third commandment. Let
   Christians abound as much as they will in this holy, heavenly exercise,
   in God's house and in their own houses; but, let it be performed as a
   holy act, wherein they have immediately and visibly to do with God.
   When any social open act of devotion or solemn worship of God is
   performed, God should be reverenced as present. As we would not have
   the ark of God depart from us, nor provoke God to make a breach upon
   us, we should take heed that we handle the ark with reverence.

   With respect to companies singing in the streets, going to or coming
   from the place of public worship, I would humbly offer my thoughts in
   the following particulars:

   1. The rule of Christ, concerning putting new wine into old bottles,
   does undoubtedly take place in things of this nature, supposing the
   thing in itself is good, but not essential, and not particularly
   enjoined or forbidden. For things so very new and uncommon, and of so
   open and public a nature, to be suddenly introduced and set up and
   practised in many parts of the country, without the matter being so
   much as first proposed to any public consideration, or giving any
   opportunity for the people of God to weigh the matter, or to consider
   any reasons that might be offered to support it, is putting new wine
   into old bottles with a witness; as if it were with no other design
   than to burst them directly. Nothing else can be expected to be the
   consequence of this than uproar and confusion, great offence, and
   unhappy mischievous disputes, even among the children of God
   themselves. Not that what is good in itself, and is new, ought to be
   forborne, till there is nobody that will like it; but it ought to be
   forborne, till there is nobody that will like it; but it ought to be
   forborne till the visible church of God is so prepared for it, at
   least, that there is a probability it will not do more hurt than good,
   or hinder the work of God more than promote it; as is more evident from
   Christ's rule, and the apostles' practice. If it be brought in when the
   country is so unprepared, that the shock and surprise, the contention
   and prejudice against religion it is like to occasion, will do more to
   hinder religion, then the practice is like to promote it, then the
   fruit is picked before it is ripe. And, indeed, such a hasty endeavour
   to introduce an innovation, supposing it to be good in itself, is the
   likeliest way to retard the effectual introduction of it; it will
   hinder its being extensively introduced, much more than it will promote
   it, and so will defeat its own end. But,

   As to the thing itself, if a considerable part of a congregation have
   occasion to go in company together to a place of public worship, and
   they should join together in singing praises to God, as they go, I
   confess, that after long consideration--and endeavouring to view the
   thing every way with the utmost diligence and impartiality I am capable
   of--I cannot find any valid objection against it. As to the common
   objection from Matt. vi. 5. "And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be
   as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the
   synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of
   men;" it is strong against a single person singing in the streets, or
   in the meeting-house by himself, as offering to God personal worship.
   But as it is brought against a considerable company, their thus
   publicly worshipping God, appears to me to have no weight at all; it is
   of no more force against a company's thus praising God in the streets,
   than against their praising him in the synagogues, or meeting-houses;
   for the streets and the synagogues are both put together in these words
   of our Saviour, as parallel in the case. It is evident that Christ
   speaks of personal, and not public worship. If to sing in the streets
   be ostentatious, then it must be because it is a public place, and it
   cannot be done there without being very open; but it is no more public
   than the synagogue or meeting-house is when full of people. Some
   worship is in its nature private, as that which is proper to particular
   persons, or families, or private societies, and has respect to their
   particular concerns; but that which I now speak of, is performed under
   no other notion than a part of God's public worship, without any
   relation to any private, separate society, and in which every visible
   Christian has equal liberty to join, if it be convenient for him, and
   he has a disposition, as in the worship that is performed in the
   meeting-house. When persons are going to the house of public worship,
   to serve God there with the assembly of his people, they are upon no
   other design than that of putting public honour upon God; that is the
   business they go from home upon; and, even in their walking the streets
   on this errand, they appear in a public act of respect to God; and
   therefore, if they go in company with public praise, it is not being
   public when they ought to be private. It is one part of the beauty of
   public worship, that it be very public; the more public it is, the more
   open honour it puts upon God; and especially is it beautiful in public
   praise; for the very notion of publicly praising God, is to declare
   abroad his glory, to publish his praise, to make it known, and proclaim
   it aloud, as is evident by innumerable expressions of Scripture. It is
   fit that God's honour should not be concealed, but made known in the
   great congregation, and proclaimed before the sun, and upon the
   house-tops, before kings and all nations, and that his praises should
   be heard to the utmost ends of the earth.

   I suppose none will condemn singing God's praises, merely because it is
   performed in the open air; and, if it may be performed by a company in
   the open air, doubtless they may do it moving, as well as standing
   still. So the children of Israel praised God, when they went to mount
   Zion with the ark of God; and the multitude praised Christ, when they
   entered with him into Jerusalem, a little before his passion. The
   children of Israel were wont, from year to year, to go up to Jerusalem
   in companies, from all parts of the land, three times in the year, when
   they often used to manifest the engagedness of their minds by
   travelling all night, and manifested their joy and gladness by singing
   praises with great decency and beauty, as they went towards God's holy
   mountain; as is evident by Isa. xxx. 29. "Ye shall have a song as in
   the night, when a holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart, as
   when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord, to
   the mighty One of Israel." And Ps. xlii. 4. "When I remember these
   things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude, I
   went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and praise,
   with a multitude that kept holy-day." Ps. c. 4. "Enter into his gates
   with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise." When God's people
   are going to his house, the occasion is so joyful to a Christian in a
   lively frame, that the duty of singing praises seems to be peculiarly
   beautiful on such an occasion. So that if the state of the country were
   ripe for it, and there should be frequent occasions for a considerable
   part of a congregation to go together to the places of public worship,
   and there was in other respects a proportionable appearance of fervency
   of devotion, it appears to me that it would be ravishingly beautiful,
   if such things were practised all over the land, and would have a great
   tendency to enliven, animate, and rejoice the souls of God's saints,
   and greatly to propogate vital religion. I believe the time is coming
   when the world will be full of such things.

   It seems to me to be requisite that there should be the consent of the
   governing part of the worshipping societies, to which persons have
   joined themselves, and of which they own themselves a part, in order to
   the introducing of things in public worship, so new and uncommon, and
   not essential, nor particularly commanded, into the places where those
   worshipping societies belong. The peace and union of such societies
   seems to require it. They have voluntarily united themselves to these
   worshipping societies, to the end that they might be one in the God's
   public worship, and have obliged themselves in covenant to act as
   brethren, mutual assistants, and members of one body in those affairs.
   All are hereby naturally and necessarily led to be concerned with one
   another, in matters of religion and God's worship; and this is a part
   of the public worship, that must be performed from time to time in the
   view of the whole, being performed at a time when they are meeting
   together for mutual assistance in worship, and therefore that which all
   must unavoidably be in some measure concerned in, at least so as to
   show their approbation and consent, or open dislike and separation from
   them in it. Hence charity, and a regard to the union and peace of such
   societies, seems to require a consent of the governing part, in order
   to the introducing any thing of this nature. Certainly if we are of the
   spirit of the apostle Paul, and have his discretion, we shall not set
   up any such practice without it. He, for the sake of peace, conformed
   in things wherein he was not particularly forbidden, to the Jews when
   among them; and so, when among those that were without the law, he
   conformed to them wherein he might.--To be sure, those go much beyond
   proper limits, who, coming from abroad, do immediately of their own
   heads, in a strange place, set up such a new and uncommon practice
   among a people.

   In introducing any thing of this nature among a people, their minister
   especially ought to be consulted, and his voice taken, as long as he is
   owned for their minister. Ministers are pastors of worshipping
   societies, and their heads and guides in the affairs of public worship.
   They are called in Scripture, "those that rule over them;" and their
   people are commanded Heb. xiii. 17. "to obey them, because they watch
   for their souls, as those that must give account." If it belongs to
   these shepherds and rulers to direct and guide the flock in any thing
   at all, it belongs to them so to do in the circumstantials of their
   public worship.--Thus I have taken particular notice of many of those
   things that have appeared to me to be amiss in the management of our
   religious concerns relating to the present revival of religion, and
   have taken liberty freely to express my thoughts upon them. Upon the
   whole it appears manifest to me, that things have as yet never been set
   a-going in their right channel; if they had, and means had been blessed
   in proportion as they have been now, this work would have so prevailed,
   as before this time to have carried all before it, and have triumphed
   over New England as its conquest.

   The devil, in driving things to these extremes, besides the present
   hindrance of the work of God, has, I believe, had in view a twofold
   mischief, in the issue of things; one, with respect to those that are
   cold in religion, to carry things to such an extreme in order that
   people in general, having their eyes opened by the great excess, might
   be tempted entirely to reject the whole work, as being all nothing but
   delusion and distraction. And another, with respect to those of God's
   children who have been very warm and zealous out of the way, to sink
   them down in unbelief and darkness. The time is coming, I doubt not,
   when the greater part of them will be convinced of their errors; and
   then probably the devil will take advantage to lead them into a
   dreadful wilderness, to puzzle and confound them about their own
   experiences, and the experiences of others; and to make them to doubt
   of many things that they ought not, and even to tempt them with
   atheistical thoughts. I believe, if all true Christians over the land
   should now at once have their eyes opened fully to see all their
   errors, it would seem for the present to damp religion. The dark
   thoughts that it would at first occasion, and the inward doubts,
   difficulties, and conflicts that would rise in their souls, would
   deaden their lively affections and joys, and would cause an appearance
   of a present decay of religion. But yet it would do God's saints great
   good in their latter end; it would fit them for more spiritual and
   excellent experiences, more humble and heavenly love, and unmixed joys,
   and would greatly tend to a more powerful, extensive, and durable
   prevalence of vital piety. I do not know but we shall be in danger,
   after our eyes are fully opened to see our errors, to go to contrary
   extremes. The devil has driven the pendulum far beyond its proper point
   of rest; and when he has carried it to the utmost length that he can,
   and it begins by its own weight to swing back, he probably will set in,
   and drive it with the utmost fury the other way; and so give us no
   rest; and if possible prevent our settling in a proper medium. What a
   poor, blind, weak, and miserable creature is man, at his best estate!
   We are like poor helpless sheep; the devil is too subtle for us. What
   is our strength! What is our wisdom! How ready are we to go astray! How
   easily are we drawn aside into innumerable snares, while in the mean
   time we are bold and confident, and doubt not but we are right and
   safe! We are foolish sheep in the midst of subtle serpents and cruel
   wolves, and do not know it. Oh how unfit are we to be left to
   ourselves! And how much do we stand in need of the wisdom, the power,
   the condescension, patience, forgiveness, and gentleness of our good
   Shepherd!
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART V.

   showing positively, what ought to be done to promote this work.

   In considering means and methods for promoting this glorious work of
   God, I have already observed, in some instances, wherein there has been
   needless objecting and complaining; and have also taken notice of many
   things amiss, that ought to be amended. I now proceed to show
   positively, what ought to be done, or what courses (according to my
   humble opinion) ought to be taken to promote this work. The obligations
   that all are under, with one consent, to do their utmost, and the great
   danger of neglecting it, were observed before.--I hope that some,
   neglecting it, were observed before.--I hope that some, upon reading
   what was said under that head, will be ready to say, What shall we do?
   To such readers I would now offer my thought, in answer to such an
   inquiry.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   We should endeavour to remove stumbling-blocks.

   That which I think we ought to set ourselves about, in the first place,
   is to remove stumbling-blocks. When God is revealed as about to come
   gloriously to set up his kingdom in the world, this is proclaimed,
   "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a high-way
   for our God,"Isa. xl. 3. And again, Isa. lvii. 14. "Cast ye up, cast ye
   up; prepare the way; take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my
   people." And, chap. lxii. 10. "Go through, go through the gates;
   prepare you the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather
   out the stones."

   And, in order to this, there must be a great deal done at confessing of
   faults, on both sides. For undoubtedly many and great are the faults
   that have been committed, in the jangling and confusions, and mixtures
   of light and darkness, that have been of late. There is hardly any duty
   more contrary to our corrupt dispositions, and mortifying to the pride
   of man; but it must be done. Repentance of faults is, in a peculiar
   manner, a proper duty, when the kingdom of heaven is at hand, or when
   we especially expect or desire that it should come; as appears by John
   the Baptist's preaching. And if God does now loudly call upon us to
   repent, then he also calls upon us to make proper manifestations of our
   repentance. I am persuaded that those who have openly opposed this
   work, or have from time to time spoken lightly of it, cannot be excused
   in the sight of God, without openly confessing their fault therein;
   especially ministers. If they have any way, either directly or
   indirectly, opposed the work, or have so behaved, in their public
   performances or private conversation, as to prejudice the minds of
   their people against the work; if hereafter they shall be convinced of
   the goodness and divinity of what they have opposed, they ought by no
   means to palliate the matter, or excuse themselves, and pretend that
   they always thought so, and that it was only such and such imprudences
   that they objected against. But they ought openly to declare their
   conviction, and condemn themselves for what they have done; for it is
   Christ that they have spoken against, in speaking lightly of and
   prejudicing others against this work; yea, it is the Holy Ghost. And
   though they have done it ignorantly and in unbelief, yet, when they
   find out who it is that they have opposed, undoubtedly God will hold
   them bound publicly to confess it.

   And on the other side, if those who have been zealous to promote the
   work have in any of the fore-mentioned instances openly gone much out
   of the way, and done that which is contrary to christian rules, whereby
   they have openly injured others, or greatly violated good order, and so
   done that which has wounded religion, they must publicly confess it,
   and humble themselves; as they would gather out the stones, and prepare
   the way of God's people. They who have laid great stumbling-blocks in
   others' way, by their open transgression, are bound to remove them by
   their open repentance.

   Some probably will be ready to object against this, that the opposers
   will take advantage by this to behave themselves insolently, and to
   insult both them and religion. And indeed, to the shame of some, they
   have taken advantage by such things; as of the good spirit that Mr.
   Whitfield showed in his retractions, and some others. But if there are
   some embittered enemies of religion, that stand ready to improve every
   thing to its disadvantage, yet that ought not to hinder doing an
   enjoined christian duty; though it be in the manifestation of humility
   and repentance, after a fault openly committed. To stand it out, in a
   visible impenitence of the real fault, to avoid such an inconvenience,
   is to do evil in order to prevent evil. Besides, the danger of evil
   consequence is much greater on the other side: to commit sin, and then
   stand in it, is what will give the enemy the greatest advantage. For
   Christians to act like Christians, in openly humbling themselves when
   they have openly offended, in the end brings the greatest honour to
   Christ and religion; and in this way are persons most likely to have
   God appear for them.

   Again, at such a day as this, God especially calls his people to the
   exercise of extraordinary meekness and mutual forbearance. Christ
   appears as it were coming in his kingdom, which calls for great
   moderation in our behaviour towards all men; Phil. iv. 5. "Let your
   moderation be known unto all men: The Lord is at hand." The awe of the
   Divine Majesty, that appears present or approaching, should dispose us
   to it, and deter us from the contrary. For us to be judging one
   another, and behaving with fierceness and bitterness one towards
   another, when he who is the searcher of all hearts, to whom we must all
   give an account, appears so remarkably present, is exceeding
   unsuitable. Our business at such a time should be at home, searching
   and condemning ourselves, and taking heed to our own behaviour. If
   there be glorious prosperity to the church of God approaching, those
   that are the most meek will have the largest share in it. For, when
   Christ ,"rides forth in his glory and his majesty" it is "because of
   truth, meekness, and righteousness," Psal. xlv. 3, 4. And, when God
   remarkably "arises to execute judgment," it is "to save all the meek of
   the earth,"Psal. lxxvi. 9. and it is "the meek" that "shall increase
   their joy in the Lord," Isa. xxix. 19. And, when the time comes that
   God will give this lower world into the hands of his saints, it is "the
   meek that shall inherit the earth."Psal. xxxvii 11. and Matt. v. 9.
   "But with the froward, God will show himself unsavoury."

   Those therefore that have been zealous for this work, and have greatly
   erred and been injurious with their zeal, ought not to be treated with
   bitterness. There is abundant reason to think, that most of them are
   the dear children of God, for whom Christ died; and therefore that they
   will see their error. As to those things, wherein we see them to be in
   an error, we have reason to say of them as the apostle, Phil. iii. 15.
   "If any are otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto them." Their
   errors should not be made use of to excite indignation towards them,
   but should influence all who hope we are the children of God, to humble
   ourselves, and become more entirely dependent on the Lord Jesus Christ,
   when we see those who are God's own people so ready to go astray. And
   those ministers who have been judged, and injuriously dealt with, will
   do the part of Christ's disciples, not to judge and revile again, but
   to receive such injuries with meekness and forbearance, and making a
   good improvement of them, more strictly examining their hearts and
   ways, and committing themselves to God. This will be the way to have
   God vindicate them in his providence, if they belong to him. We have
   not yet seen the end of things; nor do we know who will be most
   vindicated, and honoured of God, in the issue. Eccl. vii. 8. "Better is
   the end of a thing, than the beginning thereof; and the patient in
   spirit is better then the proud in spirit."--Contrary to this mutual
   meekness, is each party's stigmatizing one another with odious names,
   as is done in many parts of New England; which tends greatly to widen
   and perpetuate the breach. Such distinguishing names of reproach do as
   it were divide us into two armies, separated, and drawn up in
   battle-array; which greatly hinders the work of God.

   And as such an extraordinary time as this does especially require of us
   the exercise of great forbearance one towards another; so there is
   peculiarly requisite in God's people the exercise of great patience, in
   waiting on God, under any special difficulties and disadvantages they
   may be under as to the means of grace. The beginning of a revival of
   religion will naturally and necessarily be attended with a great many
   difficulties of this nature; many parts of the reviving church will,
   for a while, be under great disadvantages, by reason of what remains of
   the old disease, of a general corruption of the visible church. We
   cannot expect that, after a long time of degeneracy and depravity in
   the state of things in the church, all should come to rights at once,
   it must be a work of time. And for God's people to be over-hasty and
   violent, in such a case, being resolved to have every thing rectified
   at once, or else forcibly to deliver themselves by breaches and
   separations, is the way to hinder things coming to rights as they
   otherwise would. It is the way to keep them back, and to break all in
   pieces. Indeed the difficulty may be so intolerable as to allow of no
   delay, and God's people cannot continue in the state wherein they were,
   without violations of God's absolute commands: but otherwise, though
   the difficulty may be very great, another course should be taken. God's
   people should have recourse directly to the throne of grace, to
   represent their difficulties before the great Shepherd of the sheep,
   who has the care of all the affairs of his church; and, when they have
   done, they should wait patiently upon him. If they do so, they may
   expect that in his time he will appear for their deliverance; but if,
   instead of that, they are impatient, and take the work into their own
   hands, they will betray their want of faith, will dishonour God, and
   have reason to fear that he will leave them to manage their affairs for
   themselves as well as they can. If they had waited on Christ patiently,
   continuing still instant in prayer, they might have had him appearing
   for them, much more effectually to deliver them. He that believeth
   shall not make haste. And it is for those that are found patiently
   waiting on the Lord, under difficulties, that he will especially
   appear, when he comes to do great things for his church; as is evident
   by Isa. xxx. 18. at the latter end, and Isa. xlix. 23. and Psal.
   xxxvii. 9. and many other places.

   I have somewhere, not long since, met with an exposition of those words
   of the spouse, several times repeated in the book of Canticles, I
   charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
   love, till he please. It was the only satisfying exposition that ever I
   met with, and was to this purpose, viz. That when the church of God is
   under great difficulties, and in distress, and Christ does not appear
   for her help, but seems to neglect her, as though he were asleep, God's
   people, or the daughters of Jerusalem, in such a case, should not show
   a hasty spirit, and, not having patience to wait for Christ to awake
   for their help till his time comes, take indirect courses for their own
   deliverance, and use violent means for their escape, before Christ
   appears to open the door for them; and so, as it were, stir up, and
   awake Christ, before this time. When the church is in distress, and God
   seems not to appear for her in his providence, he is very often
   represented in Scripture as being asleep; as Christ was asleep in the
   ship, when the disciples were tossed by the storm, and the ship covered
   with waves. And God's appearing for his people's help, is represented
   as his awaking out of sleep, Psal. vii. 6. Psal. xxxv. 23. Psal. xliv.
   23. Psal. lix. 4. Psal.lxxiii. 20. Christ has an appointed time for his
   thus awaking out of sleep; and his people ought to wait upon him, and
   not, in an impatient fit, stir him up before his time. It is worthy to
   be observed, how strict this charge is given to the daughters of
   Jerusalem; it is repeated three times over in the book of Canticles,
   chap. ii. 7.-- iii. 5.-- viii. 4. In the 2d chapter and six first
   verses, are represented the support Christ gives his church, while she
   is in a suffering state, as the lily among thorns. In the 7th verse is
   represented her patience in waiting for Christ, to appear for her
   deliverance, when she charges the daughters of Jerusalem not to stir
   up, nor awake her love till he please, by the roes, and the hinds of
   the field; which are creatures of a gentle, harmless nature. They are
   not beasts of prey, do not devour one another, do not fight with their
   enemies, but flee from them; and are of a pleasant loving nature, Prov.
   v. 19. In the next verse, we see the church's success, in this way of
   waiting under sufferings, with meekness and patience; Christ soon
   awakes, speedily appears, and swiftly comes; Cant. ii. 8. "The voice of
   my beloved! Behold, he cometh, leaping upon the mountains, skipping
   upon the hills!"
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   What must be done more directly to advance this work.

   What has been mentioned hitherto, has relation to the behaviour we are
   obliged to, as we would prevent the hindrances of the work; but,
   besides these, there are things that must be done, more directly to
   advance it. And here it concerns every one, in the first place, to look
   into his own heart, and see to it that he be a partaker of the benefits
   of the work himself, and that it be promoted in his own soul. Now is a
   most glorious opportunity for the good of souls. It is manifestly with
   respect to a time of great revival of religion in the world, that we
   have that gracious, earnest, and moving invitation proclaimed in the
   55th of Isa. "Ho, every one that thirsteth," &c. as is evident by the
   foregoing chapter, and what follows in the close of this. In the 6th
   verse, it is said, "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon
   him while he is near." And is with special reference to such a time,
   that Christ proclaims as he does, Rev. xxi. 6. "I will give unto him
   that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely." And
   chap. xxii. 17. "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him
   that heareth say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever
   will, let him take the water of life freely." And it seems to be with
   reference to such a time, which is typified by the feast of
   tabernacles, that Jesus, at that feast, stood and cried, as we have an
   account, John vii. 37, 38. "In the last day, that great day of the
   feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come
   unto me and drink. He that believeth on me, out of his belly shall flow
   rivers of living water." And it is with special reference to God's
   freeness and readiness to bestow grace at such a time, that it is said
   in Isa. lx. 11. Of the spiritual Jerusalem, "Thy gates shall be open
   continually, they shall not be shut day or night."

   And though I judge not those who have opposed this work, and would not
   have others judge them, yet, if any such shall happen to read this
   treatise, I would take the liberty to entreat them to leave off
   troubling themselves so much about others, and to look into their own
   souls, and see to it that they are the subjects of a true, saying work
   of the Spirit of God.--If they have reason to think they never have
   been, or if it be but a very doubtful hope that they have, then how can
   they have any heart to be fiercely engaged about the mistakes and the
   supposed false hopes of others? And I would now beseech those who have
   hitherto been somewhat inclining to Arminian principles, seriously to
   weight the matter with respect to this work, and consider, whether, if
   the Scriptures are the word of God, the work that has been described in
   the first part of the treatise must not be, as to the substance of it,
   the work of God, and the flourishing of that religion which is taught
   by Christ and his apostles. Can any good medium be found, where a man
   can rest with any stability, between owning this work, and being a
   deist? If indeed this be the work of God, does it not entirely
   overthrow their scheme of religion; and does it not infinitely concern
   them, as they would be partakers of eternal salvation, to relinquish
   their scheme? Now is a good time for Arminians to change their
   principles. I would now, as one of the friends of this work, humbly
   invite them to come and join with us, and be on our side; and, if I had
   the authority of Moses, I would say to them as he did to Habab, Num. x.
   29. "We are journeying unto the place, of which the Lord said, I will
   give it you; come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the Lord
   hath spoken good concerning Israel."

   As the benefit and advantage of the good improvement of such a season
   is very great, so the danger of neglecting and misimproving it is
   proportionably great. It is abundantly evident by the Scripture, that
   as a time of great outpouring of the Spirit is a time of great favour
   to those who are partakers of the blessing, so it is always at time of
   remarkable vengeance to others. So in Isa. lxi. 2. what is called, the
   acceptable year of the Lord, is also called the day of vengeance of our
   God. So it was amongst the Jews, in the apostles days. The apostle in 2
   Cor. vi. 2. says of that time, that it was the accepted time, and day
   of salvation; and Christ says of the same time, Luke xxi. 22. "These
   are the days of vengeance." While the blessings of the kingdom of
   heaven were given to some, there was"an axe laid at the root of the
   trees, that those that did not bear fruit, might be hewn down, and cast
   into the fire," Matt. iii. 9-11. Then was glorified both the goodness
   and severity of God, in a remarkable manner, Rom. xi. 22. The harvest
   and the vintage go together; at the same time that the earth is reaped,
   and God's elect are gathered into his garner, "the angel that has power
   over fire, thrusts in his sickle, and gathers the cluster of the vine
   of the earth, and casts it into the great wine-press of the wrath of
   God," Rev. xiv. So it is foretold, in reference to the beginning of the
   glorious times of the christian church, that as "the hand of the Lord
   is known towards his servants, so shall his indignation be towards his
   enemies," Isa. lxvi. 14. So when that glorious morning shall appear,
   wherein "the Sun of righteousness shall arise to the elect with healing
   in his wings, the day shall burn as an oven to the wicked,"Mal. iv.
   1-3. There is no time like it for the increase of guilt, and treasuring
   up wrath, and desperate hardening of the heart, if men stand it out;
   which is the most awful judgment, and fruit of divine wrath, that can
   be inflicted on any mortal. So that a time of great grace, and the
   fruits of divine mercy, is evermore also a time of divine vengeance, on
   those that neglect and misimprove such a season.

   The state of the present revival of religion has an awful aspect upon
   those that are advanced in years. The work has been chiefly amongst the
   young; and comparatively but few others have been made partakers of it.
   And indeed it has commonly been so, when God has begun any great work
   for the revival of his church; he has taken the young people, and has
   cast off the old and stiff-necked generation. There was a remarkable
   outpouring of the Spirit of God on the children of Israel in the
   wilderness, but chiefly on the younger generation, their little ones,
   that they said should be a prey, the generation that entered into
   Canaan with Joshua. That generation seems to have been the most
   excellent that ever was in the church of Israel. There is no
   generation, of which there is so much good, and so little evil, spoken
   in Scripture, as might be shown. In that generation, such as were under
   twenty years when they went out of Egypt, was that kindness of youth,
   and love of espousals, spoken of, Jer. ii. 2, 3. But the old generation
   were passed by; they remained obstinate and stiff-necked, were always
   murmuring, and would not be convinced by all God's wondrous works that
   they beheld. God by his awful judgments executed in the wilderness, and
   the affliction which the people suffered there, convinced and humbled
   the younger generation, and fitted them for great mercy; as is evident
   by Deut. ii. 16. but he destroyed the old generation; "he swore in his
   wrath that they should not enter not his rest, and their carcasses fell
   in the wilderness." When it was a time of great mercy, and of God's
   Spirit on their children, it was remarkably a day of vengeance unto
   them; as appears by the 90th Psalm. Let the generation in this land
   take warning from hence, and take heed that they do not refuse to be
   convinced by all God's wonders that he works before their eyes, and
   that they do not continue for ever objecting, murmuring, and cavilling
   against the work of God, lest while he is bringing their children into
   a land flowing with milk and honey, he should swear in his wrath
   concerning them, that their carcasses shall fall in the wilderness.

   So when God had a design of great mercy to the Jews, in bringing them
   out of the Babylonish captivity, and returning them to their own land,
   there was a blessed outpouring of the Spirit upon them in Babylon, to
   bring them to deep conviction and repentance, and to cry earnestly to
   God for mercy; which is often spoken of by the prophets. But it was not
   upon the old generation, that were carried captive. The captivity
   continued just long enough for that perverse generation to waste away
   and die in their captivity, at least those of them that were adult
   persons when carried captive. The heads of families were exceeding
   obstinate, and would not hearken to the earnest repeated warnings of
   the prophet Jeremiah; but he had greater success among the young
   people; as appears by Jer. vi. 10, 11. "To whom shall I speak and give
   warning, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and
   they cannot hearken; behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a
   reproach; they have no delight in it. Therefore I am full of the fury
   of the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour it out upon the
   children abroad, and upon the assembly of the young men together; for
   even the husband with the wife (i.e. the heads of families, and parents
   of these children) shall be taken, the aged, with him that is full of
   days." Blessed be God! there are some of the elder people that have
   been made partakers of this work. And those that are most awakened by
   these warnings of God's word, and the awful frowns of his providence,
   will be most likely to be made partakers hereafter. It infinitely
   concerns them to take heed to themselves, that they may be partakers of
   it; for how dreadful will it be to go to hell, after having spent so
   many years in doing nothing but treasuring up wrath!

   But above all others does it concern us who are ministers, to see to it
   that we have experience of the saving operations of the same Spirit
   that is now poured out on the land. How sorrowful and melancholy is the
   case, when it is otherwise! For one to stand at the head of a
   congregation of God's people, as representing Christ and speaking in
   his stead; and to act the part of a shepherd and guide to a people in
   such a state of things, when many are under great awakenings, many are
   converted, and many of God's saints are filled with divine light, love,
   and joy; to undertake to instruct and lead them all under these various
   circumstances; to be put to it continually to play the hypocrite, and
   force the airs of a saint in preaching; and from time to time in
   private conversation, and particular dealing with souls, to undertake
   to judge of their circumstances; to try to talk with persons of
   experience, as if he knew how to converse with them, and had experience
   as well as they; to make others believe that he rejoices when others
   are converted; and to force a pleased and joyful countenance and manner
   of speech, when there is nothing in the heart; what sorrowful work is
   here! Oh how miserable must such a person feel! What a wretched bondage
   and slavery in this! What pains, and how much art, must such a minister
   user to conceal himself! And how weak are his hands! What infinite
   provocation of the most high God, and displeasure of his Lord and
   Master, he incurs, by continuing a secret enemy to him in his heart, in
   such circumstances! I think there is a great deal of reason from the
   Scripture to conclude, that no sort of men in the world will be so low
   in hell as ungodly ministers. Every thing spoken of in Scripture, as
   that which aggravates guilt, and heightens divine wrath, meets in them.
   And what great disadvantages are unconverted ministers under, to oppose
   any irregularities, imprudences, or intemperate zeal, which they may
   see in those who are the children of God, when they are conscious to
   themselves that they have no zeal at all! If enthusiasm and wildness
   comes in like a flood, what poor, weak instruments are such ministers
   to withstand it! With what courage can they open their mouths, when
   they look inward, and consider how it is with them!

   We who are ministers, not only have need of some true experience of the
   saving influence of the Spirit of God upon our heart, but we need a
   double portion at such a time as this. We need to be as full of light
   as a glass that is held out in the sun; and, with respect to love and
   zeal, we need to be like the angels, who are a flame of fire. The state
   of the times extremely requires a fulness of the divine spirit in
   ministers, and we ought to give ourselves no rest till we have obtained
   it. And, in order to this, I should think ministers, above all persons,
   ought to be much in prayer and fasting, both in secret and one with
   another. It seems to me, that it would become the circumstances of the
   present day, if ministers in a neighbourhood would often meet together,
   and spend days in fasting and fervent prayer among themselves,
   earnestly seeking extraordinary supplies of divine grace from heaven.
   And how desirable that, on their occasional visits one to another,
   instead of spending away their time in sitting and smoking, in
   diverting, or worldly, unprofitable conversation--telling news, and
   making their remarks on this and the other trifling subject--they would
   spend their time in praying together, singing praises, and religious
   conference. How much do many of the common people shame many of us who
   are in the work of the ministry, in these respects! Surely we do not
   behave ourselves so much like Christian ministers, and the disciples
   and ambassadors of Christ, as we ought to do. And, while we condemn
   zealous persons for censuring ministers at this day, it ought not to be
   without deep reflections upon, and great condemnation of, ourselves;
   for indeed we do very much to provoke censoriousness, and lay a great
   temptation before others to the sin of judging. And if we can prove
   that those who are guilty of it transgress the scripture-rule, our
   indignation should be chiefly against ourselves.

   Ministers, at this day in a special manner, should act as
   fellow-helpers in their great work. It should be seen that they are
   animated and engaged, that they exert themselves with one heart and
   soul, and with united strength, to promote the present glorious revival
   of religion; and to that end should often meet together, and act in
   concert. And if it were a common thing in the country, for ministers to
   join in public exercises, and second one another in their preaching, I
   believe it would be of great service. I mean that ministers having
   consulted one another as to their subjects before they go to the house
   of God, should there (two or three of them) in short discourses
   earnestly enforce each other's warnings and counsels. Such appearance
   of united zeal in ministers would have a great tendency to awaken
   attention, and to impress and animate the hearers; as has been found by
   experience in some parts of the country.--Ministers should carefully
   avoid weakening one another's hands; and therefore every thing should
   be avoided, by which their interest with their people might be
   diminished, or their union with them broken. Therefore, if ministers
   have not forfeited their acceptance in that character in the visible
   church, by their doctrine or behaviour, their brethren in the ministry
   ought studiously to endeavour to heighten the esteem and affection of
   their people towards them, that they may have no temptation to repent
   their admitting other ministers to preach in their pulpits.

   Two things exceeding needful in ministers, as they would do any great
   matters to advance the kingdom of Christ, are zeal and resolution.
   Their influence and power, to bring to pass great effects, is greater
   than can well be imagined. A man of but an ordinary capacity will do
   more with them, than one of ten times the parts and learning without
   them; more may be done with them in a few days, or at least weeks, than
   can be done without them in many years. Those who are possessed of
   these qualities commonly carry the day, in almost all affairs. Most of
   the great things that have been done in the world, the great
   revolutions that have been accomplished in the kingdoms and empires of
   the earth, have been chiefly owing to them. The very appearance of a
   thoroughly engaged spirit, together with a fearless courage and
   unyielding resolution, in any person that has undertaken the managing
   of any affair amongst mankind, goes a great way towards accomplishing
   the effect aimed at. It is evident that the appearance of these in
   Alexander did three times as much towards conquering the world, as all
   the blows that he struck. And how much were the great things that
   Oliver Cromwell did owing to these! And the great things that Mr.
   Whitfield has done, every where, as he has run through the British
   dominions, (so far as they are owing to means,) are very much owing to
   the appearance of these things which he is eminently possessed of. When
   the people see these in a person, to a great degree, it awes them, and
   has a commanding influence upon their minds. It seems to them that they
   must yield; they naturally fall before them, without standing to
   contest or dispute the matter; they are conquered as it were by
   surprise. But while we are cold and heartless, and only go on in a dull
   manner, in an old formal round, we shall never do any great matters.
   Our attempts, with the appearance of such coldness and irresolution,
   will not so much as make persons think of yielding. They will hardly be
   sufficient to put it into their minds; and if it be put into their
   minds, the appearance of such indifference and cowardice does as it
   were call for and provoke opposition.--Our misery is want of zeal and
   courage; for not only through want of them does all fail that we seem
   to attempt, but it prevents our attempting any thing very remarkable
   for the kingdom of Christ. Hence oftentimes, when any thing very
   considerable is proposed to be done for the advancement of religion or
   the public good, many difficulties are in the way, and a great many
   objections are started, and it may be it is put off from one to
   another; but nobody does any thing. And after this manner good designs
   or proposals have often failed, and have sunk as soon as proposed.
   Whereas, if we had but Mr. Whitfield's zeal and courage, what could not
   we do, with such a blessing as we might expect!

   Zeal and courage will do much in persons of but an ordinary capacity;
   but especially would they do great things, if joined with great
   abilities. If some great men who have appeared in our nation, had been
   as eminent in divinity as they were in philosophy, and had engaged in
   the christian cause with as much zeal and fervour as some others have
   done, and with a proportional blessing of heaven, they would have
   conquered all Christendom, and turned the world upside down. We have
   many ministers in the land that do not want abilities, they are persons
   of bright parts and learning; they should consider how much is expected
   and will be required of them by their Lord and Master, how much they
   might do for Christ, and what great honour and glorious a reward they
   might receive, if they had in their hearts a heavenly warmth, and
   divine heat proportionable to their light.

   With respect to candidates for the ministry, I will not undertake
   particularly to determine what kind of examination or trial they should
   pass under, in order to their admission to that sacred work. But I
   think this is evident from the Scripture, that another sort of trial
   with regard to their virtue and piety is requisite, than is required in
   order to persons being admitted into the visible church. The apostle
   directs, that hands be laid suddenly on no man; but that they should
   first be tried, before they are admitted to the work of the ministry;
   but it is evident that persons were suddenly admitted by baptism into
   the visible church, on profession of their faith in Christ, without
   such caution or strictness in their probation. And it seems to me,
   those would act very unadvisedly, that should enter on that great and
   sacred work, before they had comfortable satisfaction concerning
   themselves, that they have had a saving work of God on their souls.

   And though it may be thought that I go out of my proper sphere, to
   intermeddle in the affairs of the colleges; yet I will take the liberty
   of an Englishman that speaks his mind freely concerning public affairs,
   and the liberty of a minister of Christ, (who doubtless may speak his
   mind as freely about things that concern the kingdom of his Lord and
   Master,) to give my opinion, in some things, with respect to those
   societies; the original and main design of which is to train up
   persons, and fit them for the work of the ministry. And I would say in
   general, that it appears to me care should be taken, some way or other,
   that those societies should be so regulated, that they should, in fact,
   be nurseries of piety. Otherwise they are fundamentally ruined and
   undone as to their main design and most essential end. They ought to be
   so constituted, that vice and idleness should have no living there.
   They are intolerable in societies, whose main design is, to train up
   youth in christian knowledge and eminent piety, to fit them to be
   pastors of the flock of the blessed Jesus. I have heretofore had some
   acquaintance with the affairs of a college, and experience of what
   belonged to its tuition and government; and I cannot but think that it
   is practicable enough, so as to constitute such societies, that there
   should be no residing there, without being virtuous, serious, and
   diligent. It seems to me a reproach to the land, that ever it should be
   so with our colleges, that, instead of being places of the greatest
   advantages for true piety, one cannot send a child thither without
   great danger of his being infected as to his morals. It is perfectly
   intolerable, and any thing should be done, rather than it should be so.
   If we pretend to have any colleges at all, under any notion of training
   up youth for the ministry, there should be some way found out, that
   should certainly prevent its being thus. To have societies for bringing
   persons up to be ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and to lead souls to
   heaven, and to have them places of so much infection, is the greatest
   nonsense and absurdity imaginable.

   And as thorough and effectual care should be taken that vice and
   idleness be not tolerated in these societies, so certainly their design
   requires that extraordinary means should be used in them for training
   up the students in vital religion, and experimental and practical
   godliness; so that they should be holy societies, the very place should
   be as it were sacred. They should be, in the midst of the land,
   fountains of piety and holiness. There is a great deal of pains taken
   to teach the scholars human learning; there ought to be as much and
   more care thoroughly to educate them in religion, and lead them to true
   and eminent holiness. If the main design of these nurseries is to bring
   up persons to teach Christ, then it is of the greatest importance that
   there should be care and pains taken to bring those who are there
   educated to the knowledge of Christ. It has been common in our public
   prayers, to call these societies, the schools of the prophets; and, if
   they are schools to train up young men to be prophets, certainly there
   ought to be extraordinary care taken to train them up to be
   Christians.--And I cannot see why it is not on all accounts fit and
   convenient for the governors and instructors of the colleges
   particularly, singly, and frequently, to converse with the students
   about the state of their souls; as is the practice of the Rev. Dr.
   Doddridge, one of the most noted of the present dissenting ministers in
   England, who keeps an academy at Northampton, as he himself informs the
   Rev. Mr. Wadsworth of Hartford in Connecticut, in a letter dated at
   Northampton, March 6th, 1741. The original of which letter I have seen,
   and have by me an extract of it, sent me by Mr. Wadsworth; which is as
   follows:

   "Through the divine goodness, I have every year the pleasure to see
   some plants taken out of my nursery, and set in neighbouring
   congregations; where they generally settle with an unanimous consent,
   and that to a very remarkable degree, in some very large and once
   divided congregations. A circumstance in which I own and adore the hand
   of a wise and gracious God; and cannot but look upon it as a token for
   good. I have at present a greater proportion of pious and ingenious
   youth under my care, than I ever before had; so that I hope the church
   may reasonably expect some considerable relief from hence, if God spare
   their lives a few years, and continue to them those gracious
   assistances which he has hitherto mercifully imparted.--I will not,
   Sir, trouble you at present with a large account of my method of
   academical education; only would observe, that I think it of vast
   importance to instruct them carefully in the Scriptures; and not only
   endeavour to establish them in the great truths of Christianity, but to
   labour to promote their practical influence on their hearts. For which
   purpose, I frequently converse with each of them alone, and conclude
   the conversation with prayer. This does indeed take up a great deal of
   time; but I bless God, it is amply repaired in the pleasure I have in
   seeing my labour is not in vain in the Lord."

   There are some who are not ministers, nor are concerned immediately in
   those things that appertain to their office, or in the education of
   persons for it, who are under great advantages to promote such a
   glorious work as this. Some laymen, though it be not their business
   publicly to exhort and teach, are in some respects under greater
   advantage to encourage and forward this work than ministers; as
   particularly great men, or those who are high in honour and influence.
   How much might such do to encourage religion, and open the way for it
   to have free course, and bear down opposition, if they were but
   inclined! There is commonly a certain unhappy shyness in great men with
   respect to religion, as though they were ashamed of it, or at least
   ashamed to do much at it; whereby they dishonour and doubtless greatly
   provoke the King of kings, and very much wound religion among the
   common people. They are careful of their honour, and seem to be afraid
   of appearing openly forward and zealous in religion, as though it were
   what would debase their character, and expose them to contempt.--But,
   in this day of bringing up the ark, they ought to be like David, the
   great king of Israel, who made himself vile before the ark; and as he
   was the highest in honour and dignity among God's people, so he thought
   it became him to appear foremost in the zeal and activity manifested on
   that occasion; thereby animating and encouraging the whole congregation
   to praise the Lord, and rejoice before him with all their might. And
   though it diminished him in the eyes of scoffing Michal, yet it did not
   at all abate the honour and esteem of the congregation of Israel, but
   advanced it; as appears by 2 Sam. vi. 22.

   Rich men have a talent in their hands, in the disposal and improvement
   of which they might very much promote such a work as this, if they were
   so disposed. They are far beyond others in advantages to do good, and
   lay up for themselves treasures in heaven. What a thousand pities it is
   that, for want of a heart, they commonly have no share at all there,
   but heaven is peopled mostly with the poor of this world! One would
   think that our rich men who call themselves Christians, might devise
   some notable things to do with their money, to advance the kingdom of
   their professed Redeemer, and the prosperity of the souls of men, at
   this time of such extraordinary advantage for it. It seems to me, that
   in this age most of us have but very narrow penurious notions of
   Christianity, as it respects our use and disposal of our temporal
   goods. The primitive Christians had not such notions; they were trained
   up by the apostles in another way.--God has greatly distinguished some
   of the inhabitants of New England from others, in the abundance he has
   given them of the good things of this life. If they could now be
   persuaded to lay out some considerable part of that which God has given
   them for his honour, and lay it up in heaven, instead of spending it
   for their own honour, or laying it up for their posterity, they would
   not repent of it afterwards. How liberally did the heads of the tribes
   contribute to their wealth at the setting up the tabernacle, though it
   was in a barren wilderness! These are the days of erecting the
   tabernacle of God amongst us. We have a particular account how the
   goldsmiths and the merchants helped to rebuild the wall of Jerusalem,
   Neh. iii. 32. The days are coming, and I believe not very far off, when
   the sons of "Zion shall come from far, bringing their silver and their
   gold with them, unto the name of the Lord their God, and to the holy
   One of Israel;" Isa. lx. 9. when the merchants of the earth shall trade
   for Christ, more than for themselves, and "their merchandise and hire
   shall be holiness to the Lord, and shall not be treasured or laid up
   for posterity, but shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat
   sufficiently, and for durable clothing;" Isa. xxiii. 18. when "the
   ships of Tarshish shall bring the wealth of the distant parts of the
   earth to the place of God's sanctuary, and to make the place of his
   feet glorious; and the abundance of the sea shall be converted to the
   use of God's church, and she shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and
   suck the breasts of kings."Isa. lx. 5, 9, 13, 16. The days are coming,
   when the great and the rich men of the word "shall bring their honour
   and glory into the church," and shall, as it were, strip themselves in
   order to spread their garments under Christ's feet, as he enters
   triumphantly into Jerusalem; and when those that will not do so shall
   have no glory, and their silver and gold shall be cankered, and their
   garments moth-eaten. For the saints shall then inherit the earth, and
   they shall reign on it; and those that honour God he will honour, and
   those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed.--If some of our rich
   men would give one quarter of their estates to promote this work, they
   would act a little as if they were designed for the kingdom of heaven,
   and as rich men will act by and by who shall be partakers of the
   spiritual wealth and glories of that kingdom.

   Great things might be done for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ
   at this day by those who have ability, by establishing funds for the
   support and propagation of religion; by supporting some who are
   eminently qualified with gifts and grace in preaching the gospel in
   certain parts of the country, which are more destitute of the means of
   grace; by searching out children of promising abilities, and their
   hearts full of love to Christ, but of poor families, (as doubtless
   there are such now in the land,) and bringing them up for the ministry;
   and by distributing books, that are remarkably fitted to promote vital
   religion, and have a great tendency to advance this work.--Or if they
   would only bear the trouble and expense of sending such books into
   various parts of the land to be sold, it might be an occasion that ten
   times so many of those books should be bought, as otherwise would be-by
   establishing and supporting schools in poor towns and villages; what
   might be done on such a foundation, as not only to bring up children in
   common learning, but also might very much tend to their conviction and
   conversion, and being trained up in vital piety. Doubtless something
   might be done this way in old towns and more populous places, that
   might have a great tendency to the flourishing of religion in the
   rising generation.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Of some particulars that concern all in general.

   And here, the first thing I shall mention is fasting and prayer. It
   seems to me, that the circumstances of the present work loudly call
   upon God's people to abound in this; whether they consider their own
   experience, or the riches of God's grace. God has lately given them an
   experience of the worth of his presence, and of the blessed fruits of
   the effusions of his Spirit, to excite them to pray for the
   continuance, increase, and greater extent of such blessings; and they
   have great encouragement to pray for the out-pouring of his Spirit, and
   the carrying on of this work, by the great manifestations he has lately
   made of the work, by the great manifestations he has lately made of the
   freeness and riches of his grace. There is much in what we have seen of
   the glorious works of God's power and grace, to put us in mind of the
   yet greater things of this nature that he has spoken of in his word,
   and to excite our longings, and our hopes of their approach. Beside, we
   should consider the great opposition that Satan makes against this
   work, the many difficulties with which it is clogged, and the
   distressing circumstances that some parts of God's church in this land
   are under at this day, on one account and another.

   So is God's will, through his wonderful grace, that the prayers of his
   saints should be one great and principal means of carrying on the
   designs of Christ's kingdom in the world. When God has something very
   great to accomplish for his church, it is his will that there should
   precede it the extraordinary prayers of his people; as is manifest by
   Ezek. xxxvi. 37. "I will yet, for this, be inquired of by the house of
   Israel, to do it for them:" (see the context.) And it is revealed that,
   when God is about to accomplish great things for his church, he will
   begin by remarkably pouring out the spirit of grace and supplication,
   Zech. xii. 10. If we are not to expect that the devil should go out of
   a particular person, under a bodily possession, without extraordinary
   prayer, or prayer and fasting; how much less should we expect to have
   him cast out the land, and the world, without it!

   I am sensible that somewhat considerable has been done in duties of
   this nature in some places, but I do not think so much as God in the
   present dispensations of his providence calls for. I should think the
   people of God in this land, at such a time as this is, would be in the
   way of their duty while doing three times as much at fasting and prayer
   as they do; not only, not principally, for the pouring out of the
   Spirit on those places to which they belong; but that God would appear
   for his church, and, in mercy to miserable men, carry on his work in
   the land, and in the world, and fulfil the things he has spoken of in
   his word, that his church has been so long wishing, and hoping, and
   waiting for. "They that make mention of the Lord," at this day, ought
   not to "keep silence" and should "give God no rest, till he establish,
   and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth;" agreeable to Isa.
   lxii. 6, 7. Before the first great out-pouring of the Spirit of God on
   the christian church, which began at Jerusalem, the disciples gave
   themselves to incessant prayer, Acts i. 13, 14. There is a time spoken
   of, wherein God will remarkably and wonderfully appear for the
   deliverance of his church from all her enemies, and when he will avenge
   his own elect; and Christ reveals that this will be in answer to their
   incessant prayers, or "crying day and night," Luke xviii.7. In Israel,
   the day of atonement, which was their great day of fasting and prayer,
   preceded and made way for the glorious and joyful feast of tabernacles.
   When Christ is mystically born into the world, to rule over all
   nations, it is represented in the Rev. xii. 12th chapter of Rev. as
   being in consequence of the church's "crying, and travailing in birth,
   and being pained to be delivered." One thing here intended doubtless
   is, her crying and agonizing in prayer.

   God seems at this very time to be waiting for this from us. When he is
   about to bestow some great blessing on his church, it is often his
   manner, in the first place, so to order things in his providence, as to
   show his church their great need of it, and to bring them into distress
   for want of it, and so put them upon crying earnestly to him for it.
   Let us consider God's present dispensations towards his church in this
   land; a glorious work of his grace has been begun and carried on; and
   he has of late suffered innumerable difficulties to arise, that in a
   great measure clog and hinder it, and bring many of God's dear children
   into great distress. And yet he does not wholly forsake the work of his
   hand; there are remarkable tokens of his presence still to be seen,
   here and there; as though he was not forward to forsake us, and (if I
   may so say) as though he had a mind to carry on his work, but only was
   waiting for something that he expected in us, as requisite in order to
   it. And we have a great deal of reason to think, that one thing at
   least is, that we should further acknowledge the greatness and
   necessity of such a mercy, and our dependence on God for it, in earnest
   and importunate prayers to him. And by the many errors that have been
   run into, by the wounds we have thereby given ourselves and the cause
   that we would promote, and the mischief and confusion we have thereby
   made, God has hitherto been remarkably showing us our great and
   universal dependence on him, and exceeding need of his help and grace;
   which should engage our cries to him for it.

   There is no way that Christians in a private capacity can do so much to
   promote the work of God, and advance the kingdom of Christ, as by
   prayer. By this, even women, children, and servants may have a public
   influence. Let persons in other respects be never so weak, and never so
   mean, and under never so poor advantages to do much for Christ and the
   souls of men; yet, if they have much of the spirit of grace and
   supplication, in this way they may have power with him who is infinite
   in power, and has the government of the whole world. A poor man in his
   cottage may have a blessed influence all over the world. God is, if I
   may so say, at the command of the prayer of faith; and in this respect
   is, as it were, under the power of his people; as princes, they have
   power with God, and prevail. Though they may be private persons, their
   prayers are put up in the name of a Mediator who is a public person,
   being the Head of the whole church, and the Lord of the universe. If
   they have a great sense of the importance of eternal things, and a
   concern for the precious souls of men, they need not regret it that
   they are not preachers; they may go in their earnestness and agonies of
   soul, and pour out their souls before one who is able to do all things.
   Before him they may speak as freely as ministers; they have a great
   High Priest, through whom they may come boldly at all times, and may
   vent themselves before a prayer-hearing Father without restraint.

   If the people of God at this day, instead of spending time in fruitless
   disputing, in talking about opposers, judging them, and animadverting
   upon the unreasonableness of their talk and behaviour, and its
   inconsistence with true experience, would be more silent in this way,
   and open their mouths much more before God, and spend more time in
   fasting and prayer, they would be more in the way of a blessing. And if
   some Christians who have been complaining of their ministers, and
   struggling in vain to deliver themselves from the difficulties
   complained of under their ministry, had said and acted less before men,
   and had applied themselves with all their might to cry to God for their
   ministers, had as it were risen and stormed heaven with their humble,
   fervent, and incessant prayers for them, they would have been much more
   in the way of success.

   God in his providence appearing in the present state of things; does
   especially call on his people in New England to be very much in praying
   to him for the pouring out of the Spirit upon ministers in the land.
   For though it is not for us to determine concerning particular
   ministers, how much they have of the Spirit of God; yet in the general
   degrees of the presence of God with the ministry in New England, much
   greater degrees of it than have hitherto been granted; they need it for
   themselves, and the church of God stands in extreme need of it.

   On days of fasting and prayer, wherein the whole congregation is
   concerned, if the day, besides what is spent in our families, was not
   wholly spent in the meeting-house, but part of it in particular praying
   companies or societies, it would have a tendency to animate and engage
   devotion, more than if the whole day were spent in public, where the
   people are no way active themselves in the worship, and otherwise than
   as they join with the minister. The inhabitants of many of our towns
   are now divided into particular praying societies; most of the people,
   young and old, have voluntarily associated themselves in distinct
   companies, for mutual assistance in social worship, in private houses.
   What I intend therefore is, that days of prayer should be spent partly
   in these distinct praying companies. Such a method as this, has been
   several times proved, viz. In the forenoon, after the duties of the
   family and closet, as early as might be, all the people of the
   congregation have gathered in their particular religious societies;
   companies of men by themselves, and companies of women by themselves;
   young men by themselves, and young women by themselves; and companies
   of children in all parts of the town by themselves, as many as were
   capable of social religious exercises; the boys by themselves, and the
   girls by themselves; and about the middle of the day, at an appointed
   hour, all have met together in the house of God, to offer up public
   prayers, and to hear a sermon suitable to the occasion; and then, they
   have retired from the house of God again into their private societies,
   and spent the remaining part of the day in praying together there,
   excepting so much as was requisite for the duties of the family and
   closet in their own houses.--And it has been found to be of great
   benefit, to assist and engage the minds of the people in the duties of
   the day.

   I have often thought it would be very desirable, and very likely to be
   followed with a great blessing, if there could be some contrivance for
   an agreement of all God's people in America, who are well-affected to
   this work, to deep a day of fasting and prayer; wherein we should all
   unite on the same day, in humbling ourselves before God for our past
   long-continued lukewarmness and unprofitableness; not omitting
   humiliation for the errors that so many of God's people--though
   zealously affected towards this work--through their infirmity and
   remaining blindness and corruption have run into; and together with
   thanksgivings to God for so glorious and wonderful a display of his
   power and grace in the late out-pourings of his Spirit, to address the
   Father of mercies, with prayers and supplications, and earnest cries,
   that he would continue and still carry on this work, and more
   abundantly and extensively pour out his Spirit, and particularly upon
   ministers; and that he would bow the heavens and come down, and erect
   his glorious kingdom through the earth.--Some perhaps may think that
   its being all on the same day, is a circumstance of no great
   consequence; but I cannot be of that mind. Such a circumstance makes
   the union and agreement of God's people in his worship the more
   visible, and puts the greater honour upon God, and would have a great
   tendency to assist and enliven the devotions of Christians. It seems to
   me, it would mightily encourage and animate God's saints in humbly and
   earnestly seeking to God for such blessings which concern them all; and
   that it would be much for the rejoicing of all, to think, that at the
   same time such multitudes of God's dear children, far and near, were
   sending up their cries to the same common Father, for the same mercies.
   Christ speaks of agreement in asking, as wheat contributes to the
   prevalence of the prayers of his people, Matt. xviii. 19. "Again I say
   unto you, that if any two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any
   thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which
   is in heaven." If the agreement, or united purpose and appointment, of
   but two of God's children, would contribute much to the prevalence of
   their prayers; how much more the agreement of so many thousands! Christ
   delights greatly in the union of his people, as appears by his prayer
   in the 17th of John; and especially is the appearance of their union in
   worship lovely and attractive unto him.

   I doubt not but such a thing as I have now mentioned is practicable
   without a great deal of trouble. Some considerable number of ministers
   might meet together, and draw up the proposal, wherein a certain day
   should be fixed at a sufficient distance, endeavouring therein to avoid
   any other public day that might interfere with the design in any of the
   provinces, and the business of the day should be particularly
   mentioned. These proposals should be published, and sent abroad into
   all parts, with a desire, that as many ministers as are disposed to
   fall in with them, would propose the matter to their congregations,
   and, having taken their consent, would subscribe their names, together
   with the places of which they are ministers, and send back the
   proposals thus subscribed to the printer. The hands of many ministers
   might be to one paper. The printer having received the papers, thus
   subscribed, from all the provinces, might print the proposals again,
   with all the names; thus they might be sent abroad again with the
   names, that God's people might know who are united with them in the
   affair. One of the ministers of Boston might be desired to have the
   oversight of printing and dispersing the proposals. In such a way,
   perhaps, might be fulfilled, in some measure, such a general mourning
   and supplication of God's people as is spoken of Zech. xii. at the
   latter end, with which the church's glorious day is to be
   introduced.--And such a day might be something like the day of
   atonement in Israel, before the joyful feast of tabernacles.

   One thing more I would mention concerning fasting and prayer, wherein I
   think there has been a neglect in ministers; and that is, That although
   they recommend and much insist on the duty of secret prayer, in their
   preaching, so little is said about secret fasting. It is a duty
   recommended by our Saviour to his followers, just in like manner as
   secret prayer is; as may be seen by comparing Matt. vi. 5, 6, with ver.
   16-18. Though I do not suppose that secret fasting is to be practised
   in a stated manner, and steady course, like secret prayer; yet it seems
   to me a duty that all professing Christians should practise, and
   frequently practise. There are many occasions, of both a spiritual and
   temporal nature, that properly require it; and there are many
   particular mercies we desire for ourselves or friends, that it would be
   proper in this manner to seek of God.

   Another thing I would also mention, wherein it appears to me that there
   has been an omission, with respect to the external worship of God.
   There has been of late a great increase of preaching the word, of
   social prayer, and of singing praises. These external duties of
   religion are attended much more frequently than they used to be; yet I
   cannot understand that there is any increase of the administration of
   the Lord's supper, or that God's people do any more frequently
   commemorate the dying love of their Redeemer, in this sacred memorial
   of it, than they used to do. I do not see why an increase of love to
   Christ should not dispose Christians as much to increase in this as in
   those other duties; or why it is not as proper that Christ's disciples
   should abound in this duty, in this joyful season, which is spiritually
   supper-time, a feast-day with God's saints, wherein Christ is so
   abundantly manifesting his dying love to souls, and is dealing forth so
   liberally of the precious fruits of his death. It seems plain by the
   Scripture, that the primitive Christians were wont to celebrate this
   memorial of the sufferings of their dear Redeemer every Lord's day; and
   so I believe it will be again in the church of Christ, in days that are
   approaching. And whether we attend this holy and sweet ordinance so
   often now, or no; yet I cannot but think it would become us, at such a
   time as this, to attend it much oftener than is commonly done in the
   land.

   But another thing I would mention, which it is of much greater
   importance that we should attend to, and that is the duty incumbent
   upon God's people at this day, to take heed, that while they abound in
   external duties of devotion, such as praying, hearing, singing, and
   attending religious meetings, there be a proportionable care to abound
   in moral duties, such as acts of righteousness, truth, meekness,
   forgiveness, and love towards our neighbour; which are of much greater
   importance in the sight of God than all the externals of his worship.
   Our Saviour was particularly careful that men should be well aware of
   this, Matt. ix. 13. "But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have
   mercy, and not sacrifice." and chap.xii. 7. "But if ye had known what
   this meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have
   condemned the guiltless."

   The internal acts and principles of the worship of God, or the worship
   of the heart, in love and fear, trust in God, and resignation to him,
   &c. are the most essential and important of all duties of religion
   whatsoever; for therein consists the essence of all religion. But of
   this inward religion there are two sorts of external manifestations or
   expressions. To one sort belong outward acts of worship, such as
   meeting in religious assemblies, attending sacraments and other outward
   institutions, honouring God with gestures, such as bowing, or kneeling
   before him, or with words, in speaking honourably of him in prayer,
   praise, or religious conference. To the other sort belong expressions
   of our love to God, by obeying his moral commands, self-denial,
   righteousness, meekness, and christian love, in our behaviour among
   men. The latter are of vastly the greatest importance in the christian
   life; God makes little account of the former, in comparison of them;
   they are abundantly more insisted on, by the prophets of the Old
   Testament, and Christ and his apostles in the New. When these two kinds
   of duties are spoken of together, the latter are evermore greatly
   preferred; as in Isa. i. 12-18. and Amos v. 21, &c. and Mic. vi. 7, 8.
   and Isa. lviii. 5, 6, 7. and Zech. xii. ten first verses, and Jer. ii.
   seven first verses, and Matt. xv. 3, &c. Often, when the times were
   very corrupt in Israel, the people abounded in the former kind of
   duties, but were at such times always notoriously deficient in the
   latter; as the prophets complain, Isa. lviii. four first verses, Jer.
   vi. 13, compared with ver. 20. hypocrites and self-righteous persons do
   much more commonly abound in the former kind of duties than the latter;
   as Christ remarks of the Pharisees, Matt. xxiii. 14, 25-34. When the
   Scripture directs us to show our faith by our works, it is principally
   the latter sort are intended; as appears by Jam. ii from ver. 8, to the
   end, and 2d chap. ver. 3, 7-11. And we are to be judged, at the last
   day, especially by these latter sort of works; as is evident by the
   account we have of the day of judgment, in the 25th of Matt.. External
   acts of worship, in words and gestures, and outward forms, are of
   little use, but as signs of something else, or as they are a profession
   of inward worship. They are not so properly showing our religion by our
   deeds; for they are only showing our religion by words, or an outward
   profession. But he that shows religion in the other sort of duties,
   shows it in something more than a profession of words, he shows it in
   deeds. And though deeds may be hypocritical, as well as words; yet in
   themselves they are of greater importance, for they are much more
   profitable to ourselves and our neighbour. We cannot express our love
   to God by doing any thing that is profitable to him; God would
   therefore have us do it in those things that are profitable to our
   neighbours, whom he has constituted his receivers. Our goodness extends
   not to God, but to our fellow-Christians. The latter sort of duties put
   greater honour upon God, because there is greater self-denial in them.
   The external acts of worship, consisting in bodily gestures, words, and
   sounds, are the cheapest part of religion, and least contrary to our
   lusts. The difficulty of thorough, external religion, does not lie in
   them. Let wicked men enjoy their covetousness, their pride, their
   malice, envy, and revenge, their sensuality and voluptuousness, in
   their behaviour amongst men, and they will be willing to compound the
   matter with God, and submit to what forms of worship you please, and as
   many as you please. This was manifest in the Jews in the days of the
   prophets, the Pharisees in Christ's time, and the Papists and
   Mahometans at this day.

   At a time when there is an apparent approach of any glorious revival of
   God's church, he especially calls his professing people to the practice
   of moral duties, Isa. lvi. 1. "Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment,
   and do justice; for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness
   to be revealed." So when John preached that "the kingdom of heaven was
   at hand," and cried to the people, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
   make his paths straight," Luke iii. 4. The people asked him, Luke iii.
   10-14."What they should do?" He answers, "He that hath two coats, let
   him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do
   likewise." The publicans said, "What shall we do?" He answers, "Exact
   no more that that which is appointed you." And the soldiers asked him,
   "What shall we do?" He replies, "Do violence to no man, neither accuse
   any falsely; and be content with your wages," ver. 10-14.

   God's people at such time as this, ought especially to abound in deeds
   of charity, or alms-giving. We generally, in these days, seem to fall
   far below the true spirit and practice of Christianity with regard to
   this duty, and seem to have but little notion of it, so far as I can
   understand the New Testament.--At a time when God is so liberal of
   spiritual things, we ought not to be strait-handed towards him, and
   sparing of our temporal things. So far as I can judge by the Scripture,
   there is no external duty whatsoever, by which persons will be so much
   in the way, not only of receiving temporal benefits, but also spiritual
   blessings, the influences of God's Holy Spirit in the heart, in divine
   discoveries and spiritual consolations. I think it would be
   unreasonable to understand those promises, made to this duty, in the
   58th chap. of Isaiah, in a sense exclusive of spiritual discoveries and
   comforts; Isa. lviii. 7, &c.--"Is it not to deal thy bread to the
   hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house?
   when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
   thyself from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the
   morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily; and thy
   righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy
   reward. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt
   cry, and he shall say, Here I am; if thou take away from the midst of
   thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;
   and if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
   soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as
   the noon-day. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy
   thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; and thou shalt be like a
   watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not." So
   that giving to the poor is the way to receive spiritual blessings, is
   manifest by Psal. cxii. 4, &c. "Unto the upright there ariseth light in
   the darkness: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous. A
   good man showeth favour, and lendeth; he will guide his affairs with
   discretion. Surely he shall not be moved for ever; the righteous shall
   be in everlasting remembrance. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings;
   his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. His heart is established, he
   shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies. He hath
   dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his horn shall be exalted with
   honour." That this is one likely means to obtain assurance, is evident
   by 1 John iii. 18, 19. "My little children, let us not love in word,
   neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. And hereby we know that
   we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him."

   We have a remarkable instance in Abraham, of God rewarding deeds of
   charity with sweet discoveries of himself. He had been remarkably
   charitable to his brother Lot, and the people redeemed out of captivity
   with him, by exposing his life to rescue them. He had re-taken not only
   the persons, but all the spoil that had been taken by Chedorlaomer and
   the confederate kings. The king of Sodom offered him, that, if he would
   give him the persons, he might take the goods to himself; but Abraham
   refused to take any thing, even so much as a thread or shoe-latchet,
   but returned all.--He might have greatly enriched himself if he had
   taken the spoil to himself, for it was the spoil of five wealthy kings
   and their kingdoms, yet he did not covet it. The king and people of
   Sodom were now become objects of charity, having been stript of all by
   their enemies; therefore Abraham generously bestowed all upon them, as
   we have an account in Gen. xiv. and four last verses. He was soon
   rewarded for it, by a blessed discovery that God made of himself to
   him; as in the next words; Gen. xv. 1. "After these things the word of
   the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abraham; I am
   thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward." "I am thy shield to defend
   thee in battle, as I have now done; and though thou hast charitably
   refused to take any reward for exposing thy life to rescue this people,
   yet fear not, thou shalt not be a loser, thou shalt have a reward; I am
   thy exceeding great reward."

   When Christ was upon earth, he was poor, and an object of charity; and,
   during the time of his public ministry he was supported by the charity
   of some of his followers, and particularly certain women, of whom we
   read Luke viii. 2, 3. And these women were rewarded, by being
   peculiarly favoured with gracious manifestations which Christ made of
   himself to them. He discovered himself first to them after his
   resurrection, before the twelve disciples; they first saw a vision of
   glorious angels, who spake comfortably to them; and then Christ himself
   appeared to them, and spake peace to them, saying, "All hail, be not
   afraid; and they were admitted to come and hold him by the feet, and
   worship him," Matt. xxviii. And though we cannot be charitable in this
   way to Christ, who in his exalted state is infinitely above the need of
   our charity; yet we may be charitable to him even now, as well as they
   then. For though Christ is not here, yet he has left others in his
   room, to be his receivers; and they are the poor. Christ is yet poor in
   his members; and he that gives to them, lends to the Lord; and Christ
   tells us, that he shall look on what is done to them, as done to him.

   Rebekah, in her marriage with Isaac, was undoubtedly a remarkable type
   of the church, in her espousals to the Lord Jesus. She obtained her
   husband in doing deeds of charity; agreeable to the prayer of Abraham's
   servant, who desired that this might be the thing to distinguish the
   virgin who was to be Isaac's wife. So Cornelius was brought to the
   knowledge of Christ in this way. "He was a devout man, and one that
   feared God, with all his house; which gave much alms to the people, and
   prayed to God always. And an angel appeared to him, and said to him,
   Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God; and
   now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter,"
   &c. Acts x. at the beginning. And we have an account of the following
   parts of the chapter, how God, by Peter's preaching, revealed Christ to
   Cornelius and his family, and of the Holy Ghost descending upon them,
   and filling their hearts with joy and their mouths with praises.

   Some may possibly object, That for persons to do deeds of charity, in
   hope of obtaining spiritual blessings and comforts in this way, would
   seem to show a self-righteous spirit, as though they would offer
   something to God to purchase these favours. But, if this be a good
   objection, it may be made against every duty whatsoever. All external
   duties of the first table will be excluded by it, as well as those of
   the second. First-table duties have as direct a tendency to raise
   self-righteous persons' expectations of receiving something from God,
   on account of them, as second-table duties; and on some accounts more,
   for those duties are more immediately offered to God, and therefore
   persons are more ready to expect something from God for them. But no
   duty is to be neglected, for fear of making a righteousness of it. And
   I have always observed, that those professors who are most partial in
   their duty--exact and abundant in external duties of the first table,
   and slack as to those of the second--are the most self-righteous.

   If God's people in this land were once brought to abound in such deeds
   of love, as much as in praying, hearing, singing, and religious
   meetings and conference, it would be a most blessed omen. Nothing would
   have a greater tendency to bring the God of love down from heaven to
   earth; so amiable would be the sight in the eyes of our loving and
   exalted Redeemer, that it would soon as it were fetch him down from his
   throne in heaven, to set up his tabernacle with men on the earth, and
   dwell with them. I do not remember ever to have read of any remarkable
   outpouring of the Spirit, that continued any long time, but what was
   attended with an abounding in this duty. We know it was so with that
   great effusion of the Spirit which began at Jerusalem in the apostles'
   days. And so it was in the late remarkable revival of religion in
   Saxony, which began by the labours of the famous professor Franck, and
   has now been carried on for above thirty years, and has spread its
   happy influences into many parts of the world; it was begun, and has
   been carried on, by a wonderful practice in this duty. And the
   remarkable blessing that God has given Mr. Whitfield, and the great
   success with which he has crowned him, may well be thought to be very
   much owing to his laying out himself so abundantly in charitable
   designs. And it is foretold, that God's people shall abound in this
   duty at the time of the great outpouring of the Spirit that shall be in
   the latter days, Isa. xxxiii. 5, 8. "The vile person shall no more be
   called liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful--But the liberal
   deviseth liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand."

   To promote a reformation, with respect to all sorts of duties among a
   professing people, one proper means, and that which is recommended by
   frequent scripture examples, is their solemn, public renewing of their
   covenant with God.--And doubtless it would greatly tend to promote this
   work in the land, if the congregations of God's people could generally
   be brought to this. Suppose a draught of a covenant be made by their
   ministers, wherein there should be an express mention of those
   particular duties that the people of the respective congregations have
   been observed to be most prone to neglect, those particular sins into
   which they have heretofore especially fallen, or of which it may be
   apprehended they are especially in danger, whereby they may prevent or
   resist the motions of God's Spirit. Suppose the matter be fully
   proposed and explained to the people, and, after sufficient opportunity
   for consideration, they be led, all that are capable of understanding,
   particularly to subscribe the covenant. Suppose also all appear
   together on a day of prayer and fasting, publicly to own it before God
   in his house, as their vow to the Lord; hereby congregations of
   Christians would do what would be beautiful in itself, what would put
   honour upon God, and be very profitable to themselves. Such a thing was
   attended with a very wonderful blessing in Scotland, and followed with
   a great increase of the blessed tokens of the presence of God, and
   remarkable outpourings of his Spirit; as the author of the Fulfilling
   of the Scripture informs, p. 186. 5th edition.--A people must be taken
   when they are in a good mood, when considerable religious impressions
   prevail among them; otherwise innumerable will be their objections and
   cavils against it.

   One thing more I would mention, which, if God should still carry on
   this work, would tend much to promote it; and that is, That a history
   should be published once a month, or once a fortnight, of its progress,
   by one of the ministers of Boston, who are near the press, and are most
   conveniently situated to receive accounts from all parts. It has been
   found by experience, that the tidings of remarkable effects of the
   power and grace of God in any place, tend greatly to awaken and engage
   the minds of persons in other places. It is a great pity, therefore,
   but that some means should be used for the most speedy, most extensive,
   and certain information of such things; that the country be not left to
   the slow, partial, and doubtful information, and false representations,
   of common report.

   Thus I have (I hope, by the help of God) finished what I proposed. I
   have taken the more pains in it, because it appears to me that now God
   is giving us the most happy season to attempt an universal reformation
   that ever was given in New England. And it is a thousand pities, that
   we should fail of that which would be so glorious, for want of being
   sensible of our opportunity, of being aware of those things that tend
   to hinder it, of taking improper courses to obtain it, or of not being
   sensible in what way God expects we should seek it. If it should please
   God to bless any means for convincing the country of his hand in this
   work, for bringing them fully and freely to acknowledge his glorious
   power and grace in it; and for bringing them to engage with one heart
   and soul, and by due methods, to endeavour to promote it, it would be a
   dispensation of Divine Providence that would have a most glorious
   aspect, happily signifying the approach of great and glorious things to
   the church of God, and justly causing us to hope that Christ would
   speedily come to set up his kingdom of light, holiness, peace, and joy
   on earth, as is foretold in his word. Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus!
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

AN HUMBLE INQUIRY

        INTO THE

    RULES OF THE WORD OF GOD,

        CONCERNING

  THE QUALIFICATIONS

        REQUISITE

    TO A COMPLETE STANDING AND FULL COMMUNION

        IN THE VISIBLE

  CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

   Behold now I have opened my mouth:(My words shall be of the uprightness
   of my heart.--Job xxxiii. 2, 3.

   Confitebatur [Lutherus] dolorem suum, quod ab ipsis reflorescentis
   Evangelii Primordiis, quosvis abeque Discrimine ad Coenam Dominicam
   admisisset, quodque Disciplinam, Fractrum Disciplinae similem, apud suos
   non constituisset.--Quia objiciebatur, Fratres non habere Ecclesiam
   apertam:--Responsum fuit, Sancta dare non Sanctis prohibuisse
   Christum:--Errorem [in Papatu] corrigi non posse aliter quam ut certa
   Probatione, nec illa subitanea, Cordium Arcana reveluntur, Novitiique
   dui et caute tum informentur, tum explorentur.--Ratio Discipl. Fratr.
   Bohem.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

   My appearing in this public manner on that side of the question, which
   is defended in the following sheets, will probably be surprising to
   many; as it is well known, that Mr. Stoddard, so great and eminent a
   divine, and my venerable predecessor in the pastoral office over the
   church in Northampton, as well as my own grandfather, publicly and
   strenuously appeared in opposition to the doctrine here maintained.

   However, I hope it will be not taken amiss that I think as I do, merely
   because I herein differ from him, though so much my superior, and one
   whose name and memory I am under distinguishing obligations, on every
   account, to treat with great respect and honour. Especially may I
   justly expect, that it will not be charged on me as a crime, that I do
   not think in every thing just as he did, since none more than he
   himself asserted this scriptural and protestant maxim, that we ought to
   call no man on earth master, or make the authority of the greatest and
   holiest of mere men the ground of our belief of any doctrine in
   religion. Certainly we are not obliged to think any man infallible, who
   himself utterly disclaims infallibility. Very justly Mr. Stoddard
   observes in his Appeal to the Learned, p. 97. "All protestants agree,
   that there is no infallibility at Rome; and I know nobody else pretends
   to any, since the apostles' days." And he insists, in his preface to
   his sermon on the same subject, That it argues no want of a due respect
   in us to our forefathers, for us to examine their opinions. Some of his
   words in that preface contain a good apology for me, and are worthy to
   be repeated on this occasion. They are as follows:

   "It may possibly be a fault (says Mr. Stoddard) to depart from the ways
   of our fathers: but it may also be a virtue, and an eminent act of
   obedience, to depart from them in some things. Men are wont to make a
   great noise, that we are bringing in innovations, and depart from the
   old way: but it is beyond me, to find out wherein the iniquity does
   lie. We may see cause to alter some practices of our fathers, without
   despising them, without priding ourselves in out wisdom, without
   apostacy, without abusing the advantages God has given us, without a
   spirit of compliance with corrupt men, without inclination to
   superstition, without making disturbance in the church of God: and
   there is no reason, that it should be turned as a reproach upon us.
   Surely it is commendable for us to examine the practices of our
   fathers; we have no sufficient reason to take practices upon trust from
   them. Let them have as high a character as belongs to them; yet we may
   not look upon their principles as oracles. Nathan himself missed it in
   his conjecture about building the house of God. He that believes
   principles because they affirm them, makes idols of them. And it would
   be no humility, but baseness of spirit, for us to judge ourselves
   incapable to examine the principles that have been handed down to us.
   If we be by any means fit to open the mysteries of the gospel, we are
   capable to judge of these matters: and it would ill become us, so to
   indulge ourselves in case, as to neglect the examination of received
   principles. If the practices of our fathers in any particulars were
   mistaken, it is fit they should be rejected; if they be not, they will
   bear examination. If we be forbidden to examine their practice, that
   will cut off all hopes of reformation."

   Thus, in these very reasonable and apposite sayings, Mr. Stoddard,
   though dead, yet speaketh: and here (to apply them to my own case) he
   tells me, that I am not at all blamable, for not taking his principles
   on trust; that not withstanding the high character justly belonging to
   him, I ought not to look on his principles as oracles, as though he
   could not miss it, as well as Nathan himself in his conjecture about
   building the house of God; nay, surely, that I am even to be commended,
   for examining his practice, and judging for myself; that it would ill
   become me to do otherwise; that this would be no manifestation of
   humility, but rather show a baseness of spirit; that if I be not
   capable to judge for myself in these matters, I am by no means fit to
   open the mysteries of the gospel; that if I should believe his
   principles, because he advanced them, I should be guilty of making him
   an idol.--Also he tells his and my flock, with all others, that it ill
   becomes them, so to indulge their ease, as to neglect examining
   received principles and practices; and that it is fit, mistakes in any
   particulars be rejected: that if in some things I differ in my judgment
   from him, it would be very unreasonable, on this account, to make a
   great noise, as though I were bringing in innovations, and departing
   from the old way; that I may see cause to alter some practices of my
   grandfather and predecessor, without despising him, without priding
   myself in my wisdom, without apostacy, without despising the advantages
   God has given me, without inclination to superstition, and without
   making disturbance in the church of God; in short, that it is beyond
   him to find out wherein the iniquity of my so doing lies; and that
   there is no reason why it should be turned as a reproach upon me. Thus,
   I think, he sufficiently vindicates my conduct in the present case, and
   warns all with whom I am concerned, not to be at all displeased with
   me, or to find the least fault with me, merely because I examine for
   myself, have a judgment of my own, and am for practising in some
   particulars different from him, how positive soever he was that his
   judgment and practice were right. It is reasonably hoped and expected,
   that they who have a great regard to his judgment, will impartially
   regard his judgment, and hearken to his admonition in these things.

   I can seriously declare, that an affectation of making a show as if I
   were something wiser than that excellent person, is exceeding distant
   from me, and very far from having the least influence in my appearing
   to oppose, in this way of the press, an opinion which he so earnestly
   maintained and promoted. Sure I am, I have not affected to vary from
   his judgment, nor in the least been governed by a spirit of
   contradiction, neither indulged a cavilling humour, in remarking on any
   of his arguments or expressions.--I have formerly been of his opinion,
   which I imbibed from his books, even from my childhood, and have in my
   proceedings conformed to his practice; though never without some
   difficulties in my view, which I could not solve. Yet, however, a
   distrust of my own understanding, and deference to the authority of so
   venerable a man, the seeming strength of some of his arguments,
   together with the success he had in his ministry, and his great
   reputation and influence, prevailed for a long time to bear down my
   scruples.--But the difficulties and uneasiness on my mind increasing,
   as I became more studied in divinity, and as I improved in experience;
   this brought me to closer diligence and care to search the Scriptures,
   and more impartially to examine and weigh the arguments of my
   grandfather, and such other authors as I could get on his side of the
   question. By which means, after long searching, pondering, viewing, and
   reviewing, I gained satisfaction, became fully settled in the opinion I
   now maintain, as in the discourse here offered to public view; and
   dared to proceed no further in a practice and administration
   inconsistent therewith: which brought me into peculiar circumstances,
   laying me under an inevitable necessity publicly to declare and
   maintain the opinion I was thus established in; as also to do it from
   the press, and to do it at this time without delay.

   It is far from a pleasing circumstance of this publication, that it is
   against what my honoured grandfather strenuously maintained, both from
   the pulpit and press. I can truly say, on account of this and some
   other consideration, it is what I engage in with the greatest
   reluctance that ever I undertook any public service in my life. But the
   state of things with me is so ordered, by the sovereign disposal of the
   great Governor of the world, that my doing this appeared to me very
   necessary and altogether unavoidable. I am conscious, not only is the
   interest of religion concerned in this affair, but my own reputation,
   future usefulness, and my very subsistence, all seem to depend on my
   freely opening and defending myself, as to my principles, and agreeable
   conduct in my pastoral charge; and on my doing it from the press: in
   which way alone am I able to state and justify my opinion, to any
   purpose, before the country, (which is full of noise,
   misrepresentations, and many censures concerning this affair,) or even
   before my own people, as all would be fully sensible, if they knew the
   exact state of the case.--I have been brought to this necessity in
   divine providence, by such a situation of affairs and coincidence of
   circumstances and events, as I choose at present to be silent about;
   and which it is not needful, nor perhaps expedient, for me to publish
   to the world.

   One thing among others that caused me to go about this business with so
   much backwardness, was the fear of a bad improvement some ill-minded
   people might be ready, at this day, to make of the doctrine here
   defended; particularly that wild enthusiastical sort of people, who
   have of late gone into unjustifiable separations, even renouncing the
   ministers and churches of the land in general, under pretence of
   setting up a pure church. It is well known, that I have heretofore
   publicly remonstrated, both from the pulpit and press, against very
   many of the notions and practices of this kind of people: and shall be
   very sorry if what I now offer to the public, should be any occasion of
   their encouraging or strengthening themselves in those notions and
   practices. To prevent which, I would now take occasion to declare, I am
   still of the same mind concerning them that I have formerly manifested.
   I have the same opinion concerning the religion and inward experiences
   chiefly in vogue among them, as I had when I wrote my Treatise on
   Religious Affections, and when I wrote my Observations and Reflections
   of Mr. Brainerd's Life. I have no better opinion of their notion of a
   pure church by means of a spirit of discerning, their censorious
   outcries against the standing ministers and churches in general, their
   lay ordinations, their lay preachings, and public exhortings, and
   administering sacraments; their assuming, self-confident, contentious,
   uncharitable, separating spirit; their going about the country, as sent
   by the Lord, to make proselytes; with their many other extravagant and
   wicked ways. My holding the doctrine that is defended in this
   discourse, is no argument of any change of my opinion concerning them;
   for when I wrote those two books before mentioned, I was of the same
   mind concerning the qualifications of communicants at the Lord's table
   that I am of now.

   However, it is not unlikely, that some will still exclaim against my
   principles, as being of the same pernicious tendency with those of the
   Separatists. To such I can only by a solemn protestation aver the
   sincerity of my aims, and the great care I have exercised to avoid
   whatsoever is erroneous, or might be in any respect mischievous. But as
   to my success in these my upright aims and endeavours, I must leave it
   to every reader to judge for himself, after he has carefully perused
   and impartially considered the following discourse: which, considering
   the nature and importance of the subject, I hope all serious readers
   will accompany with their earnest prayers to the Father of lights, for
   his gracious direction and influence. And, to Him be glory in the
   churches by Christ Jesus.

   J. E.
     __________________________________________________________________

      A PREFACE

   by his american friends.

   Though the doctrine here maintained by our dear and reverend brother,
   was brought over hither by the pious and judicious fathers of this
   country from the Puritans in England, and held by them and their
   successors in our churches above threescore years without dissension;
   yet some good and learned men have since gone into another way of
   thinking in this matter. And as the word of god is our only rule of
   judging, and this only can bind the conscience in religion, it must
   needs concern every man to search the Scriptures, that he may come to
   as satisfying a knowledge as may be, whether he has a right to the
   Lord's supper, and whether it be his immediate duty to partake of it,
   or admit of others. And for all that we had hitherto read on this
   subject, it seemed to us, there wanted further searchings and
   discoveries.

   And though we have not all had opportunity to read the composure
   following; yet we apprehend the reverend Author singularly qualified to
   manage this important argument, from his great acquaintance with the
   Scriptures, and diligent application to the study of them, with a
   special aim to find the mind of Christ and settle his judgment in this
   particular; both to get more light himself, and communicate the same to
   others. And we have this peculiar motive to excite attention to what he
   writes, that he is so far from arguing from the prejudice or influence
   of education, that being brought up in the contrary way of thinking,
   and more inclined thereto from a special veneration of his reverend
   grandfather; yet on carefully searching the sacred volumes, he was
   obliged to yield to those convictions they produced in him, and change
   his judgment.

   The following Treatise contains the substance of those convictions, or
   the particular reasons of this alteration. And if those who are now in
   his former way of thinking, would with due seriousness, humility,
   calmness, diligence, and impartiality, search the Scriptures, and
   consider his arguments derived from them, looking up to god through
   christ, and subjecting their minds entirely to him, they may either see
   and yield to the convictions, and find cause to change their judgments
   also, or will at least continue their fraternal affection to the worthy
   Author, and others in the same sentiments with him.

   We heartily pray that the reverend Author and his flock may for a long
   time be happy together; that their cordial love and tenderness to each
   other may continue and operate in mutual and all lawful condescensions
   and forbearances under different sentiments in these particulars; that
   every one may be open to light, and guard against all prejudice,
   precipitance, and passion; that they may be very watchful against the
   devices of Satan to disunite or disaffect them; that they may study the
   things that make for peace and edification.--And the god of light,
   love, and peace, will continue with them.

   THOMAS PRINCE.

   JOHN WEBB.

   THOMAS FOXCROFT.

   Boston,.

   M. BYLES

   August 11, 1746.
     __________________________________________________________________

      ADVERTISEMENT TO THE EDINBURGH EDITION.

   A narrative of the transactions to which the following Treatise refers,
   may be read in the account of the Author's Life, which was printed
   originally at Boston, New England, in 1765, and lately reprinted at
   Glasgow. The works of the Author are now very well known in this
   country. The world, it is apprehended, owe no small obligation to Dr.
   John Erskine, one of the ministers of this city, who first introduced
   them to their acquaintance.

   There are very few persons attentive to the subjects on which President
   Edwards has written who will not acknowledge, that he has cast much
   light upon them. And nothing will prevent Christians from considering
   the present Treatise as one of the most able and interesting parts of
   his works, but prejudice and indifference about the subject of it. His
   own opinion of it may be seen in his Preface. It will there appear, if
   persons should even be inattentive to its internal evidence, that it
   called forth the complete extent of his abilities, and was the fruit of
   dependence on the Father of lights for instruction and preservation
   from error.

   The whole of his works are now reprinted in Britain, excepting only his
   Defence of this Treatise, against the Objections of Mr. Solomon
   Williams. If the present performance, which is exceedingly scarce,
   meets with encouragement, the publisher intends to print it also.

   Edinburgh, May 15, 1790.

        AN

  HUMBLE INQUIRY, &C.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   the question stated and explained.

   The main question I would consider, and for the negative of which I
   would offer some arguments in the following discourse is this; Whether,
   according to the rules of christ, any ought to be admitted to the
   communion and privileges of members of the visible church of christ in
   complete standing, but such as are in profession, and in the eye of the
   church's christian judgment, godly or gracious persons?

   When I speak of members of the visible church of christ, in complete
   standing, I would be understood of those who are received as the proper
   immediate subjects of all the external privileges Christ has appointed
   for the ordinary members of his church. I say ordinary members, in
   distinction from any peculiar privileges and honours of church-officers
   and rulers. All allow, there are some that are in some respect in the
   church of God, who are not members in complete standing, in the sense
   that has been explained. All that acknowledge infant baptism, allow
   infants, who are the proper subjects of baptism, and are baptized, to
   be in some sort members of the christian church; yet none suppose them
   to be members in such standing as to be the proper immediate subjects
   of all ecclesiastical ordinances and privileges: but that some further
   qualifications are requisite in order to this, to be obtained, either
   in a course of nature, or by education, or by divine grace. And some
   who are baptized in infancy, even after they come to be adult, may yet
   remain for a season short of such a standing as has been spoken of;
   being destitute of sufficient knowledge, and perhaps some other
   qualifications, through the neglect of parents, or their own
   negligence, or otherwise; or because they carelessly neglected to
   qualify themselves for ecclesiastical privileges by making a public
   profession of the christian faith, or owning the christian covenant, or
   forbear to offer themselves as candidates for these privileges; and yet
   not be cast out of the church, or cease to be in any respect its
   members: this, I suppose, will also be generally allowed.

   One thing mainly intended in the foregoing question is, whether any
   adult persons but such as are in the profession and appearance endowed
   with the christian grace or piety, ought to be admitted to the
   christian sacraments. Particularly, whether they ought to be admitted
   to the Lord's supper; and, if they are such as were not baptized in
   infancy, ought to be admitted to baptism. Adult persons having those
   qualifications that oblige others to receive them as the proper
   immediate subjects of the christian sacraments, is a main thing
   intended in the question, by being such as ought to be admitted to the
   communion and privileges of members of the visible church, in complete
   standing. There are many adult persons that by the allowance of all are
   in some respects within the church of God, who are not members in good
   standing, in this respect. There are many, for instance, that have not
   at present the qualifications proper to recommend them to the Lord's
   supper: there are many scandalous persons, who are under suspension.
   The late venerable Mr. Stoddard, and many other great divines, suppose,
   that even excommunicated persons are still members of the church of
   God; and some suppose, the worshippers of Baal in Israel, even those
   who were bred up such from their infancy, remained still members of the
   church of God. And very many protestant divines suppose, that the
   members of the church of Rome, though they are brought up and live
   continually in gross idolatry, and innumerable errors and superstitions
   that tend utterly to make void the gospel of Christ, still are in the
   visible church of Christ: yet, I suppose, no orthodox divines would
   hold these to be properly and regularly qualified for the Lord's
   supper. It was therefore requisite, in the question before us, that a
   distinction should be made between the members of the visible church in
   general, and members in complete standing.

   It was also requisite, that such a distinction should be made in the
   question, to avoid lengthening out this discourse exceedingly, with
   needless questions and debates concerning the state of baptized
   infants; that is needless as to my present purpose. Though I have no
   doubts about the doctrine of infant baptism; yet God's manner of
   dealing with such infants as are regularly dedicated to him in baptism,
   is a matter liable to great disputes and many controversies, and would
   require a large dissertation by itself to clear it up; which, as it
   would extend this discourse beyond all bounds, so it appears not
   necessary in order to a clear determination of the present question.
   The revelation of God's word is much plainer and more express
   concerning adult persons, that act for themselves in religious matters,
   than concerning infants. The Scriptures were written for the sake of
   adult persons, or those that are capable of knowing what is written. It
   is to such the apostle speaks in the Epistles, and to such only does
   God speak throughout his word; and the Scriptures especially speak for
   the sake of these, and about those to whom they speak. And therefore if
   the word of God affords us light enough concerning those spoken of in
   the question, as I have stated it, clearly to determine the matter with
   respect to them, we need not wait till we see all doubts and
   controversies about baptized infants cleared and settled, before we
   pass a judgment with respect to the point in hand. The denominations,
   characters, and descriptions, which we find given in the Scripture to
   visible Christians, and to the visible church, are principally with an
   eye to the church of Christ in its adult state and proper standing. If
   any one was about to describe that kind of birds called doves, it would
   be most proper to describe grown doves, and not young ones in the egg
   or nest, without wings or feathers. So if any one should describe a
   palm-tree or olive-tree by their visible form and appearance, it would
   be presumed that they described those of these kinds of trees in their
   natural and proper state; and not as just peeping from the ground, or
   as thunder-struck or blown down. And therefore I would here give
   notice, once for all, that when in the ensuing discourse I use such
   like phrases as visible saints, members of the visible church, &c. I,
   for the most part, mean persons that are adult and in good standing.

   The question is not, whether Christ has made converting grace or piety
   itself the condition or rule of his people's admitting any to the
   privileges of members in full communion with them. There is no one
   qualification of the mind whatsoever, that Christ has properly made the
   term of this; not so much as a common belief that Jesus is the Messiah,
   or a belief of the being of a God. It is the credible profession and
   visibility of these things, that is the church's rule in this case.
   Christian piety or godliness may be a qualification requisite to
   communion in the christian sacraments, just in the same manner as a
   belief that Jesus is the Messiah, and the Scriptures the word of God,
   are requisite qualifications; and in the same manner as some kind of
   repentance is a qualification in one that has been suspended for being
   grossly scandalous, in order to his coming again to the Lord's supper;
   and yet godliness itself not be properly the rule of the church's
   proceeding, in like manner as such a belief and repentance, as I have
   mentioned, are not their rule. It is a visibility to the eye of a
   christian judgment, that is the rule of the church's proceeding in each
   of these cases.-There are two distinctions must be here observed. As,

   1. We must distinguish between such qualifications as are requisite to
   give a person a right to ecclesiastical privileges in foro ecclesiae, or
   a right to be admitted by the church to those privileges; and those
   qualifications that are a proper and good foundation for a man's own
   conduct in coming and offering himself as a candidate for immediate
   admission to these privileges. There is a difference between these.
   Thus, for instance, a profession of the belief of a future state and of
   revealed religion, and some other things that are internal and out of
   sight, and a visibility of these things to the eye of a christian
   judgment, is all relating to these things, that is requisite to give a
   man a right in foro ecclesiae, or before the church; but it is the real
   existence of these things, that is what lays a proper and good
   foundation for his making this profession, and so demanding these
   privileges. None will suppose, that he has good and proper ground for
   such a conduct, who does not believe another world, nor believe the
   Bible to be the word of God. And then,

   2. We must distinguish between that which nextly brings an obligation
   on a man's conscience to seek admission to a christian ordinance, and
   that which is a good foundation for the dictate of an enlightened
   well-informed conscience, and so in properly a solid foundation of a
   right in him to act thus. Certainly this distinction does really take
   place among mankind in innumerable cases. The dictates of men's
   consciences are what bring them under a most immediate obligation to
   act; but it is that which is a good foundation for such a dictate of an
   enlightened conscience, that alone is a solid foundation of a right in
   him so to act. Believing the doctrine of the Trinity with all the
   heart, in some sense, (let us suppose a moral sense,) is one thing
   requisite in order to a person's having a solid foundation of a right
   in him to go and demand baptism in the name of the Trinity; but his
   best judgment or dictate of his conscience, concerning his believing
   this doctrine with this sincerity, or with all his heart, may be
   sufficient to bring an obligation on his conscience. Again, when a
   delinquent has been convicted of scandal, it is repentance in some
   respect sincere, (some moral sincerity,) that is a proper foundation of
   a right in him to offer himself for forgiveness and restoration; but it
   is the dictate of his conscience or his best judgment concerning his
   sincerity, that is the thing which immediately obliges him to offer
   himself. It is repentance itself, that is the proper qualification
   fundamental of his right, and without which he cannot have a proper
   right; for though he may be deceived, and think he has real repentance
   when he has not, yet he has not properly a right to be deceived; and
   perhaps deceit in such cases is always owing to something blamable, or
   the influence of some corrupt principle: but yet his best judgment
   brings him under obligation. In the same manner, and no otherwise, I
   suppose that christian grace itself is a qualification requisite in
   order to a proper solid ground of a right in a person to come to the
   christian sacraments. But of this I may say something more when I come
   to answer objections.

   When I speak, in the question, of being godly or gracious in the eye of
   a christian judgment, by christian judgment I intend something further
   than a kind of mere negative charity, implying that we forbear to
   censure and condemn a man, because we do not know but that he may be
   godly, and therefore forbear to proceed on the foot of such a censure
   or judgment in our treatment of him: as we would kindly entertain a
   stranger, not knowing but in so doing we entertain an angel or precious
   saint of God. But I mean a positive judgment, founded on some positive
   appearance, or visibly, some outward manifestations that ordinarily
   render the thing probable. There is a difference between suspending our
   judgment, or forbearing to condemn, or having some hope that possibly
   the thing may be so, and so hoping the best; and a positive judgment in
   favour of a person. For having some hope, only implies that a man is
   not in utter despair of a thing, though his prevailing opinion may be
   otherwise, or he may suspend his opinion. Though we cannot know a man
   believes that Jesus is the Messiah, yet we expect some positive
   manifestation or visibility of it, to be a ground of our charitable
   judgment: so I suppose the case is here.

   When I speak of christian judgment, I mean a judgment wherein men do
   properly exercise reason, and have their reason under the due influence
   of love and other christian principles; which do not blind reason, but
   regulate its exercises; being not contrary to reason, though they be
   very contrary to censoriousness, or unreasonable niceness and
   rigidness.

   I say in the eye of the Church's christian judgment, because it is
   properly a visibility to the eye of the public charity, and not of a
   private judgment, that gives a person a right to be received as a
   visible saint by the public. If any are known to be persons of an
   honest character, and appear to be of good understanding in the
   doctrines of Christianity, and particularly those doctrines that teach
   the grand condition of salvation, and the nature of true saving
   religion, and publicly and seriously profess the great and main things
   wherein the essence of true religion or godliness consists, and their
   conversation is agreeable; this justly recommends them to the good
   opinion of the public, whatever suspicions and fears any particular
   person, either the minister, or some other, may entertain, from what he
   in particular has observed, perhaps from the manner of his expressing
   himself in giving an account of his experiences, or an obscurity in the
   order and method of his experiences, &c. The minister in receiving him
   to the communion of the church, is to act as a public officer, and in
   behalf of the public society, and not merely for himself, and therefore
   is to be governed, in acting, by a proper visibility of godliness in
   the eye of the public.

   It is not my design, in holding the negative of the foregoing question,
   to affirm, that all who are regularly admitted as members of the
   visible church in complete standing, ought to be believed to be godly
   or gracious persons, when taken collectively, or considered in the
   gross, by the judgment of any person or society. This may not be, and
   yet each person taken singly may visibly be a gracious person to the
   eye of the judgment of Christians in general. These two are not the
   same thing, but vastly diverse; and the latter maybe, and yet not the
   former. If we should know so much of a thousand persons one after
   another, and from what we observed in them should have a prevailing
   opinion concerning each one of them, singly taken, that they were
   indeed pious, and think the judgment we passed, when we consider each
   judgment apart, to be right; it will not follow, when we consider the
   whole company collectively, that we shall have so high an opinion of
   our own judgment, as to think it probable, there was not one erroneous
   judgment in the whole thousand. We all have innumerable judgments about
   one thing or other, concerning religious, moral, secular, and
   philosophical affairs, concerning past, present, and future matters,
   reports, facts, persons, things, &c. And concerning all the many
   thousand dictates of judgment that we have, we think them every one
   right, taken singly; for if there was any one that we thought wrong, it
   would not be our judgment; and yet there is no man, unless he is
   stupidly foolish, who when he considers all in the gross, will say he
   thinks that his every opinion he is of, concerning all persons and
   things whatsoever, important and trifling, is right, without the least
   error. But the more clearly to illustrate this matter, as it related to
   visibility, or probable appearances of holiness in professors:
   supposing it had been found by experience concerning precious stones,
   that such and such external marks were probable signs of a diamond; and
   supposing, by putting together a great number of experiments, the
   probability is as ten to one, that, take one time with another, one in
   ten of the stones which have these marks (and no visible signs to the
   contrary) proves to be not a true diamond. Then it will follow, that
   when I find a particular stone with these marks, and nothing to the
   contrary, there is a probability of ten to one, concerning that stone,
   that it is a diamond; and so concerning each stone that I find with
   these marks: but if we take ten of these together, it is as probable as
   not, that some one of the ten is spurious; because, if it were not as
   likely as not, that one to ten is false, or if taking one ten with
   another, there were not one in ten that was false, then the probability
   of those, that have these marks, being true diamonds, would be more
   than ten to one, contrary to the supposition; because that is what we
   mean by a probability of ten to one, that they are not false, viz. that
   take one ten with another there will be one false stone among them, and
   no more. Hence if we take a hundred such stones together, the
   probability will be just ten to one, that there is one false among
   them; and as likely as not that there are ten false ones in the whole
   hundred. And the probability of the individuals must be much greater
   than ten to one, even a probability of more than a hundred to one in
   order to its making it probable that every one is true. It is an easy
   mathematical demonstration. Hence the negative of the foregoing
   question by no means implies a pretence of any scheme, that shall be
   effectual to keep all hypocrites out of the church, and for the
   establishing in that sense a pure church.

   When it is said, those who are admitted, &c. ought to be by profession
   godly or gracious persons; it is not meant, they should merely profess
   or say that they are converted or are gracious persons, that they know
   so, or think so; but that they profess the great things wherein
   christian piety consists, viz. a supreme respect to God, faith in
   Christ, &c. Indeed it is necessary, as men would keep a good
   conscience, that they should think that these things are in them, which
   they profess to be in them; otherwise they are guilty of the horrid
   wickedness of willfully making a lying profession. Hence it is supposed
   to be necessary, in order to men's regularly and with a good conscience
   coming into communion with the church of Christ in the christian
   sacraments, that they themselves should suppose the essential things,
   belonging to christian piety, to be in them.

   It does not belong to the present question, to consider and determine
   what the nature of christian piety is, or wherein it consists: this
   question may be properly determined, and the determination
   demonstrated, without entering into any controversies about the nature
   of conversion, &c. Nor does an asserting the negative of the question
   determine any thing how particular the profession of godliness ought to
   be, but only that the more essential things, which belong to it, ought
   to be professed. Nor is it determined, but that the public professions
   made on occasion of persons' admission to the Lord's supper, in some of
   our churches, who yet go upon that principle, that persons need not
   esteem themselves truly gracious in order to a coming conscientiously
   and properly to the Lord's supper; I say, it is not determined but that
   some of these professions are sufficient, if those that made them were
   taught to use the words, and others to understand them, in no other
   than their proper meaning, and principle and custom had not established
   a meaning very diverse from it, or perhaps an use of the words without
   any distinct and clear determinate meaning.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   reasons for the negative of the foregoing question.

   Having thus explained what I mean, when I say, That none ought to be
   admitted to the communion and privileges of members of the visible
   church of Christ in complete standing, but such as are in profession,
   and in the eye of the church's christian judgment, godly or gracious
   persons: I now proceed to observe some things which may tend to evince
   the truth of this position.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   None ought to be admitted as members of the visible church of Christ
   but visible and professing saints.

   I begin with observing, I think it is both evident by the word of God,
   and also granted on all hands, that none ought to be admitted as
   members of the visible church of Christ but visible and professing
   saints, or visible and professing Christians.--We find the word saint,
   when applied to men, used two ways in the New Testament. The word in
   some places is so used as to mean those that are real saints, who are
   converted, and are truly gracious persons; as 1 Cor. vi. 2. "Do ye not
   know that the saints shall judge the world?" Eph. i. 18. "The riches of
   the glory of his inheritance in the saints." Eph. iii. 17, 18. "That
   Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
   grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is
   the breadth," &c. 2 Thess. i. 10.. "When he shall come to be glorified
   in his saints, and admitted in all them that believe." So Rev. v. 8;
   viii. 4; xi. 18; xiii. 10; xiv. 12; xix. 8.. In other places the word
   is used so as to have respect not only to real saints, but to such as
   were saints in visibility, appearance, and profession; and so were
   outwardly, as to what concerns their acceptance among men and their
   outward treatment and privileges, of the company of saints. So the word
   is used in very many places, which it is needless to mention, as every
   one acknowledges it.

   In like manner we find the word Christian used two ways: the word is
   used to express the same thing as " a righteous man that shall be
   saved," 1 Pet. iv. 16-18. Elsewhere it is so used as to take in all
   that were Christians by profession and outward appearance; Acts xi.
   26.. So there is a twofold use of the word disciples in the New
   Testament. There were disciples in name, profession, and appearance;
   and there were those whom Christ calls disciples indeed, John viii. 30,
   31.--The word isNOT ENGLISH truly. The expression plainly supposes this
   distinction of true or real disciples, and those who were the same in
   pretence and appearance. See also Luke xiv. 25-27.. and John xv. 8..
   The same distinction is signified, in the New Testament, by those that
   live, being alive from the dead, and risen with Christ, (2 Cor. iv.
   11.. Rom. vi. 11.. and elsewhere,) and those who have a name to live,
   having only a pretence and appearance of life. And the distinction of
   the visible church of Christ into these two, is plainly signified of
   the growth of the good ground, and that in the stony and thorny ground,
   which had the same appearance and show with the other, till it came to
   wither away; and also by the two sorts of virgins, Matt. xxv.. who both
   had a show, profession, and visibility of the same thing. By these
   things, and many others which might be observed, it appears, that the
   distinction of real and visible or professing saints is scriptural, and
   that the visible church was made up of these two, and that none are
   according to Scripture admitted into the visible church of Christ, but
   those who are visible and professing saints or Christians. And it is
   the more needless to insist longer upon it, because it is not a thing
   in controversy; so far as my small reading will inform me, it is owned
   by all protestants. To be sure, the most eminent diving in New England
   who has appeared to maintain the Lord's supper to be properly a
   converting ordinance, was very full in it. In his Appeal to the
   Learned, in the title-page, and through the Treatise, he supposes that
   all who come to the Lord's supper, must be visible saints, and
   sometimes speaks of them as professing saints, page 85, 86: and
   supposes that it is requisite in order to their being admitted to the
   communion of the Lord's table, that they make a personal public
   profession of their faith and repentance to the just satisfaction of
   the church, page 93, 94. In these things the whole of the position that
   I would prove is in effect granted. If it be allowed (as it is allowed
   on all sides) that none ought to be admitted to the communion of the
   christian visible church, but visible and professing saints of
   Christians, if these words are used in any propriety of speech, or in
   any agreement with scripture representations, the whole of that which I
   have laid down is either implied or will certainly follow.

   As real saints are the same with real converts, or really gracious
   persons, so visible saints are the same with visible converts, or those
   that are visibly converted and gracious persons. Visibility is the same
   with manifestation or appearance to our view and apprehension. And
   therefore to be visibly a gracious person, is the same thing as to be a
   truly gracious person to our view, apprehension, or esteem. The
   distinction of real and visible does not only take place with regard to
   saintship or holiness, but with regard to innumerable other things.
   There is visible and real truth, visible and real honesty, visible and
   real money, visible and real gold, visible and real diamonds, &c. &c.
   Visible and real are words that stand related one to another, as the
   words real and seeming, or true and apparent. Some seem to speak of
   visibility with regard to saintship or holiness, as though it had no
   reference to the reality, or as though it were a distinct reality by
   itself; as though by visible saints were not meant those who to
   appearance are real saints or disciples indeed, but properly a distinct
   sort of saints, which is an absurdity. There is a distinction between
   real money and visible money, because all that is esteemed money and
   passes for money is not real money, but some is false and counterfeit.
   By visible money, is not meant that which is taken and passes for a
   different sort from true money, but that which is esteemed and taken as
   real money, or which has that appearance that recommends it to men's
   judgment and acceptance as true money; though men may be deceived, and
   some of it may finally prove not to be so.

   There are not properly two sorts of saints spoken of in Scripture.
   Though the word saints may be said indeed to be used two ways in
   Scripture, or used so as to reach two sorts of persons; yet the word
   has not properly two significations in the New Testament, any more than
   the word gold has two significations among us: the word gold among us
   is so used as to extend to several sorts of substances; it is true, it
   extends to true gold, and also to that which only appears to be gold,
   and is reputed such, and by that appearance or visibility some things
   that are not real obtain the name of gold; but this is not properly
   through a diversity in the signification of the word, but by a
   diversity of the application of it, through the imperfection of our
   discerning. It does not follow that there are properly two sorts of
   saints, because some who are not real saints, do by the show and
   appearance they make obtain the name of saints, and are reputed such,
   and whom by the rules of Scripture (which are accommodated to our
   imperfect state) we are directed to receive and treat as saints; any
   more than it follows that there are two sorts of honest men, because
   some who are not truly honest men, yet being so seemingly or visibly,
   do obtain the name of honest men, and ought to be treated by us as
   such. So there are not properly two distinct churches of Christ, on the
   real, and another the visible; though they that are visibly or
   seemingly of the one only church of Christ, are many more than they who
   are really of his church; and so the visible or seeming church is of
   larger extent than the real.

   Visibility is a relative thing, and has relation to an eye that views
   or beholds. Visibility is the same as appearance or exhibition to the
   eye; and to be a visible saint is the same as to appear to be a real
   saint in the eye that beholds; not the eye of God, but the eye of man.
   Real saints or converts are those that are so in the eye of God;
   visible saints or converts are those who are so in the eye of man; not
   his bodily eye, for thus no man is a saint any more in the eye of a man
   than he is in the eye of a beast; but the eye of his mind, which is his
   judgment or esteem. There is no more visibility of holiness in the
   brightest professor to the eye of our bodies, without the exercise of
   the reason and judgment of our minds, than may be in a machine. But
   nothing short of an apparent probability, or a probable exhibition, can
   amount to a visibility to the eye of man's reason or judgment. The eye
   which God has given to man is the eye of reason: and the eye of a
   Christian is reason sanctified, regulated, and enlightened, by a
   principle of christian love. But it implies a contradiction to say,
   that that is visible to the eye of reason, which does not appear
   probable to reason. And if there be a man that is in the sense a
   visible saint, he is in the eye of a rational judgment a real saint. To
   say a man is visibly a saint, but not visibly a real saint, but only
   visibly a visible saint, is a very absurd way of speaking; it is as
   much as to say, he is to appearance an appearing saint; which is in
   effect to say nothing, and to use words without signification. The
   thing which must be visible and probable, in order to visible
   saintship, must be saintship itself, or real grace and true holiness;
   not visibility of saintship, not unregenerate morality, not mere moral
   sincerity. To pretend, or in any respect to exhibit, moral sincerity,
   makes nothing visible beyond what is pretended to or exhibited. For a
   man to have that visibly, which if he had it really, and have nothing
   more, would not make him a real saint, is not to be visibly a saint.

   Mr. Stoddard, in his Appeal to the Learned, seems to express the very
   same notion of visibility, and that visibility of saintship which is
   requisite to persons coming to the Lord's supper, that I have here
   expressed. In page 10, he makes a distinction between being visibly
   circumcised in heart, and being really so; evidently meaning by the
   latter, saving conversion; and he allows the former, viz. a visibility
   of heart-circumcision, to be necessary to a coming to the Lord's
   supper. So that according to him, it is not a visibility of moral
   sincerity only, but a visibility of circumcision of heart, or saving
   conversion, that is a necessary requisite to a person's coming to the
   Lord's table. And in what manner this must be visible, he signifies
   elsewhere, when he allows, that it must be so to a judgment of charity;
   a judgment of rational charity. This he expressly allows over and over;
   as in page 2, 3, 28, 33, 73, and 95: and having reason to look upon
   them as such, page 28. And towards the close of his book, he declares
   himself stedfastly of the mind, that it is requisite those be not
   admitted to the Lord's supper, who do not make a personal and public
   profession of their faith and repentance, to the just satisfaction of
   the church, page 93, 94. But how he reconciled these passages with the
   rest of his Treatise, I would modestly say, I must confess myself at a
   loss. And particularly, I cannot see how they consist with what this
   venerable and ever-honoured author says, page 16, in these words;
   "Indeed by the rule that God has given for admissions, if it be
   carefully attended, more unconverted persons will be admitted than
   converted." I would humbly inquire, how those visible qualifications
   can be the ground of a rational judgment, that a person is circumcised
   in heart, which nevertheless, at the same time, we are sensible are so
   far from being any probable signs of it, that they are more frequently
   without it than with it. The appearance of that thing surely cannot
   imply an appearing probability of another thing, which at the same time
   we are sensible is most frequently, and so most probably, without that
   other thing.

   Indeed I can easily see, how that may seem visible, and appear
   probable, to God's people, by reason of the imperfect and dark state
   they are in, and so may oblige their charity, which yet is not real,
   and which would not appear at all probable to angels, who stand in a
   clearer light. And the different degrees of light, in which God's
   church stands, in different ages, may make a difference in this
   respect. The church under the New Testament being favoured by God with
   a vastly greater light in divine things, than the church under the Old
   Testament, that might make some difference, as to the kind of
   profession of religion that is requisite, under these different
   dispensations, in order to a visibility of holiness; also a proper
   visibility may fail in the greater number in some extraordinary case,
   and in exempt circumstances. But how those signs can be a ground of a
   rational judgment that a thing is, which, at that very time, and under
   that degree of light we then have, we are sensible do oftener fail than
   not, and this ordinarily, I own myself much at a loss. Surely nothing
   but appearing reason is the ground of a rational judgment. And indeed
   it is impossible in the nature of things, to form a judgment, which at
   that very time we think to be not only without, but against,
   probability.

   If it be said, that although persons do not profess that wherein
   sanctifying grace consists, yet seeing they profess to believe the
   doctrines of the gospel, which God is wont to make use of in order to
   sanctification, and are called the doctrine which is according to
   godliness; and since we see nothing in their lives to make us
   determine, that they have not had a proper effect on their hearts, we
   are obliged in charity to hope, that they are real saints, or gracious
   persons, and to treat them accordingly, and so to receive them into the
   christian church, and to its special ordinances.

   I answer, this objection does in effect suppose and grant the very
   thing mainly in dispute. For it supposes, that a gracious character is
   the thing that ought to be aimed at in admitting persons into the
   communion of the church; and so that it is needful to have this charity
   for persons, or such a favourable notion of them, in order to our
   receiving them as properly qualified members of the society, and
   properly qualified subjects of the special privileges to which they are
   admitted. Whereas, the doctrine taught is, that sanctifying grace is
   not a necessary qualification, and that there is no need that the
   person himself, or any other, should imagine he is a person so
   qualified. The assigned reason is, because it is no qualification
   requisite in itself; the ordinance of the Lord's supper is as proper
   for them that are not qualified as for those that are; it being
   according to the design of the institution a converting ordinance, and
   so an ordinance as much intended for the good of the unconverted, as of
   the converted; even as it is with the preaching of the gospel. Now if
   the case be so, why is there any talk about a charitable hoping they
   are converted, and so admitting them? What need of any charitable hope
   of such a qualification, in order to admitting them to an ordinance
   that is as proper for those who are without this qualification, as for
   those that have it? We need not have any charitable hope of any such
   qualification in order to admit a person to hear the word preached.
   What need have we to aim at any thing beyond the proper qualifications?
   And what need of any charitable opinion or hope of any thing further?
   Some sort of belief, that Jesus is the Messiah, is a qualification
   properly requisite to a coming to the Lord's supper; and therefore it
   is necessary that we should have a charitable hope, that those have
   such a belief whom we admit; though it be not necessary that we should
   know it, it being what none can know of another. But as to grace or
   christian piety, it clearly follows, on the principles which I oppose,
   that no kind of visibility or appearance, whether direct or indirect,
   whether to a greater or less degree, no charity or hope of it, have any
   thing at all to do in the affair of admission to the Lord's supper;
   for, according to them, it is properly a converting ordinance. What has
   any visibility or hope of a person being already in health to do, in
   admitting him into an hospital for the use of those means that are
   appointed for the healing of the sick, and bringing them to health? And
   therefore it is needless here to dispute about the nature of
   visibility; and all arguing concerning a profession of christian
   doctrines, and an orderly life being a sufficient ground of public
   charity, and an obligation on the church to treat them as saints, are
   wholly impertinent and nothing to the purpose. For on the principles
   which I oppose, there is no need of any ground for treating them as
   saints, in order to admitting them to the Lord's supper, the very
   design of which is to make them saints, any more than there is need of
   some ground of treating a sick man as being a man in health, in order
   to admitting him into an hospital. Persons, by the doctrine that I
   oppose, are not taught to offer themselves as candidates for church
   communion under any such notion, or with any such pretence, as their
   being gracious persons; and therefore surely when those that teach
   them, receive them to the ordinance, they do not receive them under any
   such notion, nor has any appearance, hope, or thought of it, any thing
   to do in the case.

   The apostle speaks of the members of the christian church, as those
   that made a profession of godliness. 2 Cor. ix. 13.. "They glorified
   God for your professed subjection to the gospel of Christ." 1 Tim. ii.
   9, 10. "In like manner also that women adorn themselves in modest
   apparel--not with costly array; but which becometh women professing
   godliness, with good works." The apostle is speaking of the women that
   were members of that great church of Ephesus, which Timothy for the
   present had the care of; and he speaks of them as supposing that they
   all professed godliness. By the allowance of all, profession is one
   thing belonging to the visibility of Christianity or holiness, in the
   members of the visible church. Visible holiness is an appearance or
   exhibition of holiness, by those things which are external, and so fall
   under our notice and observation, and these are two, viz. profession,
   and outward behaviour agreeable to that profession. That profession
   which belongs to visible saintship, must be a profession of godliness,
   or real saintship; for a profession makes nothing visible beyond what
   is professed. What is it to be a saint by profession, but to be by
   profession a true saint? For to be by profession a false saint, is to
   be by profession no saint; and only to profess that, which if never so
   true, is nothing peculiar to a saint, is not to be a professing saint.

   In order to a man's being properly a professing Christian, he must
   profess the religion of Jesus Christ: and he surely does not profess
   the religion that was taught my Jesus Christ, if he leaves out of his
   profession the most essential things that belong to that religion. That
   which is most essential in that religion itself, the profession of that
   is essential in a profession of that religion; for (as I have observed
   elsewhere) that which is most essential in a thing, in order to its
   being truly denominated that thing, the same is essentially necessary
   to be expressed or signified in any exhibition or declaration of that
   thing, in order to its being truly denominated a declaration or
   exhibition of that thing. If we take a more inconsiderable part of
   Christ's religion, and leave out the main and most essential, surely
   what we have cannot be properly called the religion of Jesus Christ: so
   if we profess only a less important part, and are silent about the most
   important and essential part, it cannot be properly said that we
   profess the religion of Jesus Christ. And therefore we cannot in any
   propriety be said to profess Christ's religion, unless we profess those
   things wherein consist piety of heart, which is vastly the most
   important and essential part of that religion, and is in effect all;
   being that without which all the rest that belongs to it, is nothing,
   and wholly in vain. But they who are admitted to the Lord's supper,
   proceeding on the principles of those who hold it to be a converting
   ordinance, do in no respect profess christian piety, neither in whole
   nor in part, neither explicitly nor implicitly, directly nor
   indirectly; and therefore are not professing Christians, or saints by
   profession. I mean, though they may be godly persons, yet as they come
   to the ordinance without professing godliness, they cannot properly be
   called professing saints.

   Here it may be said, that although no explicit and formal profession of
   those things which belong to true piety, be required of them; yet there
   are many things they do, that are a virtual and implicit profession of
   these things: such as their owning the christian covenant, their owning
   God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be their God; and by their
   visibly joining in the public prayers and singing God's praises, there
   is a show and implicit profession of supreme respect to God and love to
   him; by joining in the public confessions, they make a show of
   repentance; by keeping Sabbaths and hearing the word, they make a show
   of a spirit of obedience; by offering to come to sacraments, they make
   a show of love to Christ and a dependence on his sacrifice.

   To this I answer; It is a great mistake, if any one imagines, that all
   these external performances are of the nature of a profession, of any
   thing that belongs to saving grace, as they are commonly used and
   understood. None of them are so, according to the doctrines that are
   taught and embraced, and the customs that are established, in such
   churches as proceed on the footing of the principles forementioned. For
   what is professing, but exhibiting, uttering, or declaring, either by
   intelligible words, or by other established signs that are equivalent?
   But in such churches, neither their publicly saying, that they avouch
   God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be their God, and that they
   give themselves up to him, and promise to obey all his commands, nor
   their coming to the Lord's supper, or to any other ordinances, are
   taken for expressions or signs, of any thing belonging to the essence
   of christian piety. But on the contrary, the public doctrine,
   principle, and custom in such churches, establishes a diverse use of
   these words and signs. People are taught, that they may use them all,
   and not so much as make any pretence to the least degree of sanctifying
   grace; and this is the established custom. So they are used, and so
   they are understood. And therefore whatever some of these words and
   signs may in themselves most properly and naturally import, they
   entirely cease to be significations of any such thing among people
   accustomed to understand and use them otherwise; and so cease to be of
   the nature of a profession of christian piety. There can be no such
   thing among such a people, as either an explicit or implicit profession
   of godliness, by any thing which (by their established doctrine and
   custom) an unregenerate man may and ought to say and perform, knowing
   himself to be so. For let the words and actions otherwise signify what
   they will, yet people have in effect agreed among themselves, that
   persons who use them need not intend them so, and that others need not
   understand them so. And hence they cease to be of the nature of any
   pretension to grace. And surely it is an absurdity to say, that men
   openly and solemnly profess grace, and yet do not so much as pretend to
   it. If a certain people should agree, and it should be an established
   principle among them, that men might and ought to use such and such
   words to their neighbours, which according to their proper
   signification were a profession of entire love and devoted friendship
   towards the man they speak to, and yet not think that he has any love
   in his heart to him, yea, and know at the same time that he had a
   reigning enmity against him; and it was known that this was the
   established principle of the people; would not these words, whatever
   their proper signification was, entirely cease to be any profession or
   testimony of friendship to his neighbour? To be sure, there could be no
   visibility of it to the eye of reason.

   Thus it is evident, that those who are admitted into the church on the
   principles that I oppose, are not professing saints, nor visible
   saints; because that thing which alone is truly saintship, is not what
   they profess, or pretend, or have any visibility of, to the eye of a
   christian judgment. Or if they in fact be visible and professing
   saints, yet they are not admitted as such; no profession of true
   saintship, nor any manner of visibility of it, has any thing to do in
   the affair.

   There is one way to evade these things, which has been taken by some.
   They plead, Although it be true, that the Scripture represents the
   members of the visible church of Christ as professors of godliness; and
   they are abundantly called by the name of saints in Scripture,
   undoubtedly because they were saints by profession, and in visibility,
   and the acceptance of others, yet this is not with any reference to
   saving holiness, but to quite another sort of saintship, viz. moral
   sincerity; and that this is the real saintship, discipleship, and
   godliness, which is professed, and visible in them, and with regard to
   which, as having an appearance of it to the eye of reason, they have
   the name of saints, disciples, &c. in Scripture.--It must be noted,
   that in this objection the visibility is supposed to be of real
   saintship, discipleship, and godliness, but only another sort of real
   godliness, than that which belongs to those who shall finally be owned
   by Christ as his people, at the day of judgment.

   To which I answer, This is a mere evasion; the only one, that ever I
   saw or heard of; and I think the only one possible. For it is certain,
   they are not professors of sanctifying grace, or true saintship: the
   principle proceeded on being, that they need make no pretence to that;
   nor has any visibility of saving holiness any thing to do in the
   affair. If then they have any holiness at all, it must be of another
   sort. And if this evasion fails, all fails, and the whole matter in
   debate must be given up. Therefore I desire that this matter may be
   impartially considered and examined to the very bottom; and that it may
   be thoroughly inquired, whether this distinction of these two sorts of
   real Christianity, godliness, and holiness, is a distinction of which
   Christ in his word is the author; or whether it be a human invention of
   something which the New Testament knows nothing of, devised to serve
   and maintain an hypotheses.--And here I desire that the following
   things may be observed:

   1. According to this hypothesis, the words saints, disciples, and
   Christians, are used four ways in the New Testament, as applies to four
   sorts of persons. (1.) To those that in truth and reality are the heirs
   of eternal life, and that shall judge the world, or have indeed that
   saintship which is saving. (2.) To those who profess this, and pretend
   to and make a fair show of a supreme regard to Christ, and to renounce
   the world for his sake, but have not real ground for these pretences
   and appearances. (3.) To those who, although they have not saving
   grace, yet have that other sort of real godliness, or saintship, viz.
   moral sincerity in religion; and so are properly a sort of real saints,
   true Christians, sincerely godly persons, and disciples indeed, though
   they have no saving grace. And, (4.) To those who make a profession and
   have a visibility of this latter sort of sincere Christianity, and are
   nominally such kinds of saints, but are not so indeed.--So that here
   are two sorts of real Christians, and two sorts of visible Christians;
   two sorts of invisible and real churches of Christ, and two sorts of
   visible churches. Now will any one that is well acquainted with the New
   Testament say, there is in that the least appearance or shadow of such
   a four-fold use of the words, saints, disciples, &c.? It is manifest by
   what was observed before, that these words are there used but two ways;
   and that those of mankind to whom these names are applied, are there
   distinguished into but two sorts, viz. Those who have really a saving
   interest in Christ, spiritual conformity and union to him, and those
   who have a name for it, as having a profession and appearance of it.
   And this is further evident by various representations, which we there
   find of the visible church; as in the company of virgins that went
   forth to meet the bridegroom, we find a distinction of them into but
   two sorts, viz. The wise that had both lamps and oil; and those who had
   lamps indeed like the wise virgins, (therein having an external show of
   the same thing,) but really had no oil; signifying that they had the
   same profession and outward show of religion, and entertained the same
   hopes with the wise virgins. So when the visible church is represented
   by the husbandman's floor, we find a distinction but of two sorts, viz.
   the wheat and the chaff. And, when the church is compared to the
   husbandman's field, we find a distinction but of two sorts, the wheat
   and the tares, which (naturalists observe) appear exactly like the
   wheat, till it comes to bring forth its fruit; representing, that those
   who are only visible Christians, have an appearance of the nature of
   wheat, which shall be gathered into Christ's barn, that is, of the
   nature of saving grace.

   2. It is evident, that those who had the name of disciples in the times
   of the New Testament, bore the name with reference to a visibility of
   the same relation to Christ, which they had who should be finally owned
   as his. This is manifest, John viii. 30, 31. "As he spake these words,
   many believed on him. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on
   him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed."
   (Compare Luke xiv. 25, 26, 27.. and John xv. 8..) The phrase, disciples
   indeed, is relative; and has reference to a visibility, pretence, or
   name, only, to which it is set in opposition; which makes it evident,
   that those who then bore the name of disciples, had a visibility and
   pretence of discipleship indeed. For true discipleship is not properly
   set in opposition to any thing else but a pretence to the same thing,
   that is not true. The phrase, gold indeed, is in opposition to
   something that has the appearance of that same metal, and not to an
   appearance of brass. If there were another sort of real discipleship in
   those days, besides saving discipleship, persons might be Christ's
   disciples indeed, or truly, (as the word in the original is,) without
   continuing in his word, and without selling all that they had, and
   without hating father and mother and their own lives, for his sake. By
   this it appears, that those who bore the name of disciples in those
   times were distinguished into but two sorts, disciples in name or
   visibility, and disciples indeed; and that the visibility and
   profession of the former was of the discipleship of the latter.

   3. The same thing is evident by 1 John ii. 19. "They went out from us,
   because they were not of us: If they had been of us, they would no
   doubt have continued with us."--The words naturally suggest and imply,
   that those professing Christians, who at last proved false, did, before
   they went out, seem to belong to the society of the true saints, or
   those endued with persevering grace and holiness. They seemed to be of
   their number, and so were accepted in the judgment of charity.

   4. The name that visible Christians had in the days of the New
   Testament, was of saving Christianity, and not of moral sincerity; for
   they had a name to live, though many of them were dead, Rev. iii. 1..
   Now it is very plain what that is in religion which is called by the
   name of life, all over the New Testament, viz. saving grace; and I do
   not know that any thing else, of a religious nature, is ever so called.

   5. The visibility of saintship in the apostles' days, was not of moral
   sincerity, but gracious sincerity, or saving saintship. For they are
   spoken of as being visibly of the number of those saints who shall
   judge the world, and judge angels. 1 Cor. vi. 1, 2, 3. "Dare any of
   you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and
   not before the saints? Do ye not know, that the saints shall judge the
   world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to
   judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels?"
   These things manifestly imply, that if the christian Corinthians were
   what they supposed they were, what they professed to be, and what they
   were accepted to be, they were some of those saints who at the day of
   judgment should judge angels and men.

   6. That the visibility was not only of moral sincerity but saving
   grace, is manifest, because the apostle speaks of visible christians as
   visible "members of Christ's body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and
   one spirit with him, and temples of the Holy Ghost," Eph. v. 30.. and 1
   Cor. vi. 16, 19.. And the apostle Peter speaks of visible Christians as
   those who were visibly such righteous persons as should be saved; and
   that are distinguished from the ungodly, and them that obey not the
   gospel, who shall perish. 1 Pet. iv. 16, 17, 18. "Yet if any man suffer
   as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this
   behalf. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
   God; "and if first begin at us," (us Christians, comprehending himself,
   and those to whom he wrote, and all of that sort,) "what shall the end
   of them be that obey not the gospel of God? And if the righteous
   scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear?"

   7. That the visibility was not merely of moral sincerity, but of that
   sort of saintship which the saints in heaven have, is manifest by this,
   that they are often spoken of as visibly belonging to heaven, and as of
   the society of the saints in heaven. So the apostle in his Epistle to
   the Ephesians speaks of them as visibly of the same household or family
   of God, a part of which is in heaven. Eph. ii. 19.. "Now therefore ye
   are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the
   saints, and of the household of God." Together with the next chapter,
   verse 15. "Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named."
   Where the context and continuation of discourse demonstrates, that he
   is still speaking of the same family or household he had spoken of in
   the latter part of the preceding chapter. So all visible Christians are
   spoken of as visibly the children of the church which is in heaven.
   Gal. iv. 26. "Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the mother of
   us all." The same apostle speaks of visible Christians as being visibly
   come to the heavenly city, and having joined the glorious company of
   angels there, and as visibly belonging to the "general assembly and
   church of the first-born, that are written in heaven, and to the
   spirits of just men made perfect," Heb. xii. 22, 23.. And elsewhere
   they are spoken of as being visibly of the number of those who have
   their "names written in the book of life," Rev. iii. 5; xxii. 19. They
   who truly have their names written in the book of life, are God's true
   saints, that have saving grace: as is evident by Rev. xiii. 8. "And all
   that dwell on the earth, shall worship him, whose names are not written
   in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
   world." And Rev. xx. 12. "And another book was opened, which was the
   book of life." Verse 15. "And whosoever was not found written in the
   book of life, was cast into the lake of fire." We are told in the
   conclusion of this chapter, how they were disposed of whose names were
   not written in the book of life; and then the prophet proceeds, in the
   next chapter, to tell us, how they were disposed whose names were found
   there written, viz. that they were admitted into the New Jerusalem.
   Verse 27. "And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
   defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but
   they which are written in the Lamb's book of life." And yet in the next
   chapter it is implied, that some who were not truly gracious persons,
   and some that should finally perish, were visibly of the number of
   those that had both a part in the New Jerusalem, and also their names
   written in the book of life. Verse 19. "And if any man shall take away
   from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his
   part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city."

   8. That baptism, by which the primitive converts were admitted into the
   church, was used as an exhibition and token of their being visibly
   "regenerated, dead to sin, alive to God, having the old man crucified,
   being delivered from the reigning power of sin, being made free from
   sin, and become the servants of righteousness, those servants of God
   that have their fruit unto that holiness whose end is everlasting
   life;" as is evident by Rom. vi.. throughout. In the former part of the
   chapter, he speaks of the Christian Romans, as "dead to sin, being
   buried with Christ in baptism, having their old man crucified with
   Christ," &c. He does not mean only, that their baptism laid them under
   special obligations to these things, and was a mark and token of their
   engagement to be thus hereafter; but was designed as a mark, token, and
   exhibition, of their being visibly thus already. As is most manifest by
   the apostle's prosecution of his argument in the following part of the
   chapter. Verse 14. "For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
   are not under the law, but under grace." Verse 17, 18. "God be thanked,
   ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that
   form of doctrine which was delivered you. Being then made free from
   sin, ye became servants of righteousness." Verse 22. "But now being
   made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
   holiness, and the end everlasting life."

   9. It is evident, that it is not only a visibility of moral sincerity
   in religion, which is the scripture qualification of admission into the
   christian church, but a visibility of regeneration and renovation of
   heart, because it was foretold that God's people and the ministers of
   his house in the days of the Messiah, should not admit into the
   christian church any that were not visibly circumcised in heart. Ezek.
   xliv. 6-9. "And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of
   Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, O ye house of Israel, let it suffice
   you all your abominations, in that ye have brought into my sanctuary
   strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in
   my sanctuary to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the
   fat, and the blood; and they have broken my covenant, because of all
   your abominations: and ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things,
   but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.
   Thus saith the Lord, No stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor
   uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger
   that is among the children of Israel."

   The venerable author of the Appeal to the Learned, says, page 10. "That
   this scripture has no particular reference to the Lord's supper." I
   answer, though I do not suppose it has merely a reference to that
   ordinance, yet I think it manifest, that it has a reference to
   admitting persons into the christian church, and to external church
   privileges. It might be easy to prove, that these nine last chapters of
   Ezekiel must be a vision and prophecy of the state of things in the
   church of God in the Messiah's days; but I suppose it will not be
   denied, it being a thing wherein divines are so generally agreed. And I
   suppose, none will dispute but that by the house of God and his
   sanctuary, which it is here foretold the uncircumcised in heart should
   not be admitted into in the days of the gospel, is meant the same
   house, sanctuary, or temple of God, that the prophet had just before
   been speaking of, in the foregoing part of the same chapter, and been
   describing throughout the four preceding chapters. But we all know,
   that the New Testament house of God is his church. Heb. iii. 3. "For
   this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he
   who builded the house, hath more honour than the house." Verse 6. "But
   Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we," &c. 2 Tim. ii.
   20.. "In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver,
   but also of wood and of earth," &c. 1 Tim. iii. 15. "That thou mayest
   know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is
   the church of the living God." Eph. ii. 20, 21. "And are built upon the
   foundation of the prophets and apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
   chief corner-stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together,
   groweth into an holy temple in the Lord." 1 Cor. iii. 9." Ye are God's
   building." Verse 16. "Know ye not, that ye are the temple of God?" 1
   Pet. ii. 5. "Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house."
   1 Pet. iv. 17. "For the time is come, that, judgment must begin at the
   house of God: and if it begin at us, what shall the end be?" &c. Heb.
   x. 21. "And having an high priest over the house of God." Ezekiel's
   temple is doubtless the same which it is foretold the Messiah should
   build. Zech. vi. 12, 13. "The man whose name is the Branch--he shall
   build the temple of the Lord, even he shall build the temple of the
   Lord." And what the temple that Christ builds is, the apostle tells us,
   Heb. iii. 3, 6.. The temple that Ezekiel in his vision was bid to
   observe the measures of, as measured with a reed, (Ezek. xl. 3, 4..) we
   have reason to think, was the same the apostle John in his vision was
   bid to measure with a reed, Rev. xi. 1.. And when it is here foretold,
   that the uncircumcised in heart should not enter into the Christian
   sanctuary or church, nor have communion in the offerings of God's
   bread, of the fat and blood, that were made there, I think so much is
   at least implied, that they should not have communion in those
   ordinances of the christian sanctuary, in which that body and blood of
   Christ were symbolically represented, which used of old to be
   symbolically represented by the fat and the blood. For the admission
   into the christian church here spoken of, is an admission into the
   visible, and not the mystical, church; for such an admission is spoken
   of as is made by the officers of the church. And I suppose it will not
   be doubted, but that by circumcision of heart is meant the spiritual
   renewing of the heart; not any common virtues, which do not in the
   least change the nature, and mortify the corruption of the heart; as is
   held by all orthodox divines, and as Mr. Stoddard in particular
   abundantly insisted. However, if any body disputes it, I desire that
   the Scripture may be allowed to speak for itself; for it very often
   speaks of circumcision of heart, and this every where, both in the Old
   Testament and New, manifestly signifies that great change of heart that
   was typified by the ceremony of circumcision of the flesh. The same
   which afterwards was signified by baptism, viz. regeneration, or else
   the progress of that work in sanctification; as we read of the washing
   of regeneration, &c. The apostle tells us what was signified both by
   circumcision and baptism, Col. ii. 11, 12. "In whom also ye are
   circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off
   the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
   baptism; wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of the
   operation of God." Where I would observe by the way, he speaks of all
   the members of the church of Colosse as visibly circumcised with this
   circumcision; agreeable to Ezekiel's prophecy, that the members of the
   christian church shall visibly have this circumcision. The apostle
   speaks, in like manner, of the members of the church of Philippi as
   spiritually circumcised, (i. e. in profession and visibility,) and
   tells wherein this circumcision appeared. Philip. iii. 3. "For we are
   the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
   Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh." And in Rom. ii. 28,
   29.. the apostle speaks of this christian and Jewish circumcision
   together, calling the former the circumcision of the heart. "But he is
   not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
   outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, the
   circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter;
   whose praise is not of men, but of God." And whereas in this prophecy
   of Ezekiel it is foretold, that none should enter into the christian
   sanctuary or church, but such as are circumcised in heart and
   circumcised in flesh; thereby I suppose is intended, that none should
   be admitted but such as were visibly regenerated, as well as baptized
   with outward baptism.

   By what has been observed, I think it abundantly evident, that the
   saintship, godliness, and holiness, of which, according to Scripture,
   professing Christians and visible saints do make a profession and have
   a visibility, is not any religion and virtue that is the result of
   common grace, or moral sincerity, (as it is called,) but saving
   grace.--Yet there are many other clear evidences of the same thing,
   which may in some measure appear in all the following part of this
   discourse.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   All who are capable of it are bound to make an explicit open profession
   of the true religion.

   I come to another reason, why I answer the question at first proposed,
   in the negative, viz. That it is a duty which in an ordinary state of
   things is required of all that are capable of it, to make an explicit
   open profession of the true religion, by owning God's covenant; or, in
   other words, professedly and verbally to unite themselves to God in his
   covenant, by their own public act.

   Here I would (first) prove this point; and then (secondly) draw the
   consequence, and show how this demonstrates the thing in debate.

   First, I shall endeavour to establish this point, viz. That it is the
   duty of God's people thus publicly to own the covenant; and that it was
   not only a duty in Israel of old, but is so in the christian church,
   and to the end of the world; and that it is a duty required of adult
   persons before they come to sacraments. And this being a point of great
   consequence in this controversy, but a matter seldom handled, (though
   it seems to be generally taken for granted,) I shall be the more
   particular in the consideration of it.

   This not only seems to be in itself most consonant to reason, and is a
   duty generally allowed in New England, but is evidently a great
   institution of the word of God, appointed as a very important part of
   that public religion by which God's people should give honour to his
   name. This institution we have in Deut. vi. 13.. "Thou shalt fear the
   Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name." It is
   repeated, Deut. x. 20.. "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, him alone
   shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name."
   In both places it might have been rendered; thou shalt swear in his
   name, or into his name. In the original, bishmo, with the prefix beth,
   which signifies in or into, as well as by. And whereas, in the latter
   place, in our translation, it is said, to him shalt thou cleave and
   swear by his name. The words are thus in the Hebrew, NOT ENGLISH. The
   literal translation of which is, into him shalt thou cleave, [or
   unite,] and into his name shalt thou swear. There is the same prefix,
   beth, before him, when it is said, Thou shalt cleave to him, as before
   his name, when it is said, Thou shalt swear by his name. Swearing into
   God's name, is a very emphatical and significant way of expressing a
   person's taking on himself, by his own solemn profession, the name of
   God, as one of his people; or by swearing to or covenanting with God,
   uniting himself by his own act to the people that is called by his
   name. The figure of speech is something like that by which Christians
   in the New Testament are said to be baptized NOT ENGLISH into the name
   of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. So Christians are said to
   be baptized into Christ, Gal. iii. 17.. This swearing by the name, or
   into the name, of the Lord, is so often, and in such a manner, spoken
   of by the prophets as a great duty of God's solemn public worship, as
   much as praying or sacrificing, that it would be unreasonable to
   understand it only, or chiefly, of occasionally taking an oath before a
   court of judicature, which, it may be, one tenth part of the people
   never had occasion to do once in their lives. If we well consider the
   matter, we shall see abundant reason to be satisfied, that the thing
   intended in this institution was publicly covenanting with God.
   Covenanting in Scripture is very often called by the name of swearing,
   and a covenant is called an oath. [557] And particularly God's covenant
   is called his oath, Deut. xxxix. 12. "That thou shouldst enter into
   covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath." Verse 14. 1 Chron.
   xvi. 15, 16. "Be ye mindful always of his covenant:--Even of the
   covenant which he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac." 2 Chron.
   xv. 12. "And they entered into covenant to seek the Lord God of their
   fathers." Verses 14, 15. "And they sware unto the Lord with a loud
   voice: and all Judah rejoiced at the oath." Swearing to the Lord, or
   swearing in or into the name of the Lord, are equipollent expressions
   in the Bible. The prefixed beth and lamed are evidently used
   indifferently in this case to signify the same thing, Zeph. i. 5..
   "That swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham." The word
   translated to the Lord, is Laihovah, with the prefix lamed; but to
   Malcham, is Bemalcham with the prefix beth, into Malcham. In 1 Kings
   xviii. 32. it is said, "Elijah built an altar in the name of the Lord;"
   beshem. Here the prefix beth is manifestly of the same force with
   lamed, in 1 Kings viii. 44. "The house I have built for thy name or to
   thy name;" leshem.

   God's people in swearing to his name, or into his name, according to
   the institution, solemnly professed two things, viz. their faith and
   obedience. The former part of this profession of religion was called,
   Saying, the Lord liveth. Jer. v. 2. "And though they say, the Lord
   liveth, yet surely they swear falsely." Verse 7. "They have sworn by
   them that are no gods:" that is, they had openly professed
   idol-worship. Jer. iv. 2. "Thou shalt swear, the Lord liveth, in truth,
   in judgment, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless
   themselves in him, and in him shall they glory." (Compare this with
   Isa. xlv. 23, 24, 25..) Jer. xliv. 26. "Behold I have sworn by my great
   name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth
   of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, the Lord liveth:"
   i.e. They shall never any more make any profession of the true God, and
   of the true religion, but shall be wholly given up to heathenism. See
   also Jer. xii. 16; xvi. 14, 15; xxiii. 7, 8.. Hos. iv. 15.. Amos viii.
   14..

   These words chai jehovah, Jehovah liveth, summarily comprehend a
   profession of faith in that all-sufficiency and immutability of God,
   which is implied in the name jehovah, and which attributes are very
   often signified in Scripture by God's being the living god, as is very
   manifest from Josh. iii. 10.. 1 Sam. xvii. 26, 36.. 2 Kings xix. 4,
   16.. Dan. vi. 26.. Psalm xviii. 46.. and innumerable other places.

   The other thing professed in swearing into the Lord was obedience,
   called, Walking in the name of the Lord. Micah iv. 5. "All people will
   walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of
   the Lord our God for ever and ever." Still with the prefix beth,
   beshem, as they were said to swear beshem, in the name, or into, the
   name of the Lord.

   This institution, in Deuteronomy, of swearing into the name of the
   Lord, or visibly and explicitly uniting themselves to him in covenant,
   was not prescribed as an extraordinary duty, to be preformed on a
   return from a general apostacy, and some other extraordinary occasions:
   but is evidently mentioned in the institution, as a part of the public
   worship of God to be performed by all God's people, properly belonging
   to the visible worshippers of Jehovah; and so it is very often
   mentioned by the prophets, as I observed before, and could largely
   demonstrate, if there was occasion for it, and would not too much
   lengthen out this discourse.

   And this was not only an institution belonging to Israel under the Old
   Testament, but also to Gentile converts, and Christians under the New
   Testament. Thus God declares concerning the Gentile nations, Jer. xii.
   16. "If they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by
   my name, the lord liveth, as they taught my people to swear by Baal:
   then shall they be built in the midst of my people," i. e. They shall
   be added to my church; or as the apostle Paul expresses it, Eph. ii.
   19-22. "They shall be no more strangers and foreigners, but
   fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, and be
   built upon the foundation of Christ; in whom all the building fitly
   framed together, &c.--In whom they also shall be builded for an
   habitation of God through the Spirit." So it is foretold, that the way
   of public covenanting should be the way of the Gentiles joining
   themselves to the church in the days of the gospel, Isa. xliv. 3-5. "I
   will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
   ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
   offspring, and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by
   the water-courses; one shall say, I am the Lord's, and another shall
   call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his
   hand unto the Lord,"--as subscribing an instrument whereby they bound
   themselves to the Lord. This was subscribing and covenanting themselves
   into the name of Israel, and swearing into the name of the Lord, in the
   language of those forementioned texts in Deuteronomy. So taking hold of
   God's covenant, is foretold as the way in which the sons of the
   stranger in the days of the gospel should be joined to God's church,
   and brought into God's sanctuary, and to have communion in its worship
   and ordinances, in Isa. lvi. 3, 6, 7.. So in Isa. xix. 18.. the future
   conversion of the Gentiles in the days of the gospel, and their being
   brought to profess the true religion, is expressed by saying, that they
   should swear to the lord of hosts. "In that day shall five cities in
   the land of Egypt speaks the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord
   of hosts." So in Jer. xxiii. 5-8.. it seems to be plainly foretold,
   that after Christ is come, and has wrought out his great redemption,
   the same way of publicly professing faith in the all-sufficient and
   immutable God, by swearing, The Lord liveth, should be continued, which
   was instituted of old; but only with this difference, that whereas
   formerly they covenanted with God as their Redeemer out of Egypt, now
   they shall as it were forget that work, and have a special respect to a
   much greater redemption. "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I
   will raise unto David a righteous Branch.--Therefore they shall no more
   say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of
   the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, which brought up, and which
   led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country," &c.

   Another remarkable place wherein it is plainly foretold that the like
   method of professing religion should be continued in the days of the
   gospel, is Isa. xlv. 22-25. "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends
   of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else: I have sworn by
   myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall
   not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
   swear: surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and
   strength: even to him shall men come:--in the Lord shall all the seed
   of Israel be justified, and shall glory." This prophecy will have its
   last fulfilment at the day of judgment; but it is plain, that the thing
   most directly intended is the conversion of the Gentile world to the
   christian religion. What is here called swearing, the apostle, in
   citing this place, once and again calls confessing; Rom. xiv.
   11.--"Every tongue shall confess to God." Philip. ii. 10.--"That every
   tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord." Which is the word
   commonly used in the New Testament, to signify making a public
   profession of religion. So Rom. x. 9, 10. "If thou shalt confess with
   thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart, that God
   hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved: for with the heart
   man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
   unto salvation." Where a public profession of religion with the mouth
   is evidently spoken of as a great duty of all Christ's people, as well
   as believing in him; and ordinarily requisite to salvation; not that it
   is necessary in the same manner that faith is, but in like manner as
   baptism is. Faith and verbal profession are jointly spoken of here as
   necessary to salvation, in the same manner as faith and baptism are, in
   Mark xvi. 16. "He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved." And
   I know no good reason why we should not look on moral profession and
   covenanting with Christ, in those who are capable of it, as much of a
   stated duty in the christian church, and an institution universally
   pertaining to the followers of Christ, as baptism.

   And if explicit, open covenanting with God be a great duty required of
   all, as has been represented, then it ought to be expected of persons
   before they are admitted to the privileges of the adult in the church
   of Christ. Surely it is proper, if this explicit covenanting takes
   place at all, that it should take place before persons come to those
   ordinances wherein they, by their own act, publicly confirm and seal
   this covenant. This public transaction of covenanting, which God has
   appointed, ought to have existence, before we publicly confirm and seal
   this transaction. It was that by which the Israelites of old were
   introduced into the communion of God's nominal or visible church and
   holy city: as appears by Isa. xlviii. 1, 2. "Hear ye this, O house of
   Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out
   of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the lord, and make
   mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness:
   for they call themselves of the holy city," &c. When, and after what
   manner particularly, the Israelites ordinarily performed this explicit
   covenanting, I do not know that we can be certain. But, as it was first
   done on occasion of God's first promulgating his law or covenant at
   mount Sinai--on a repetition or renewed promulgation of it on the
   plains of Moab--on the public reading of the law in Josiah's time (2
   Kings xxiii. 3..)--on after the return from the captivity--and on the
   public reading of it at the feast of tabernacles (Neh. viii; ix; x..)
   so it appears to me most likely, that it was done every seventh year,
   when the law or covenant of God was, by divine appointment, read in the
   audience of all the people at the feast of tabernacles; at least by all
   who then heard the law read the first time, and who never had publicly
   owned the covenant of God before. There are good evidences that they
   never had communion in those ordinance which God had appointed as seals
   of his covenant, wherein they themselves were to be active, such as
   their sacrifices, &c. till they had done it. It is plainly implied in
   Psal. 1.. that it was the manner in Israel vocally to own God's
   covenant, or to take it into their mouths, before they sealed that
   covenant in their sacrifices. See verse 16.. taken with the preceding
   part of the psalm, from verse 5.. And that they did it before they
   partook of the passover, (which indeed was one of their sacrifices,) or
   entered into the sanctuary for communion in the temple-worship, is
   confirmed by the words of Hezekiah, when he proclaimed a passover, 2
   Chron. xxx. 8. "Now be ye not stiff-necked, as your fathers were; but
   yield yourselves unto the Lord, (in the Hebrew, Give the hand to the
   Lord,) and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever,
   and serve the Lord your God." To give the hand, seems to be a Hebrew
   phrase for entering into covenant, or obliging themselves by covenant,
   Ezra x. 19. "And they gave their hands that they would put away their
   wives." And, as has been already observed, it was foretold that
   Christians should in this way be admitted to communion in the
   privileges of the church of Christ.--Having thus established the
   premises of the argument, I now come to the consequence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [557] As Gen. xxi. 23-34; xxvi. 28-35; xxxi. 44, 53.. Josh ii. 12.. &c.
   1 Sam. xx. 16, 17, 42.. 2 Kings xi. 4.. Eccl. viii. 2.. Ezek. xvi. 59;
   xvii. 16.. and many other places.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   That none ought to be admitted to the privileges of adult persons in
   the church of Christ, but such as make a profession of real piety.

   The covenant to be owned or professed, is God's covenant, which he has
   revealed as the method of our spiritual union with him, and our
   acceptance as the objects of his eternal favour; which is no other than
   the covenant of grace; at least it is so, without dispute, in these
   days of the gospel. To own this covenant, is to profess the consent of
   our hearts to it; and that is the sum and substance of true piety. It
   is not only professing the assent of our understandings that we
   understand there is such a covenant, or that we understand we are
   obliged to comply with it; but it is to profess the consent of our
   wills, it is to manifest that we do comply with it. There is mutual
   profession in this affair, a profession on Christ's part, and a
   profession on our part; as it is in marriage. And it is the same sort
   of profession that is made on both sides, in this respect, that each
   professes a consent of heart. Christ in his word declares an entire
   consent of heart as to what he offers; and the visible Christian, in
   the answer that he makes to it in his christian profession, declares a
   consent and compliance of heart to his proposal. Owning the covenant is
   professing to make the transaction of that covenant our own. The
   transaction of that covenant is that of espousals to Christ; on our
   part, it is giving our souls to Christ as his spouse. There is no one
   thing that the covenant of grace is so often compared to in Scripture,
   as the marriage-covenant; and the visible transaction, or mutual
   profession, there is between Christ and the visible church, is
   abundantly compared to the mutual profession there is in marriage. In
   marriage the bride professes to yield to the bridegroom's suit, and to
   take him for her husband, renouncing all others, and to give up herself
   to him to be entirely and for ever possessed by him as his wife. But he
   that professes this towards Christ, professes saving faith. They that
   openly covenanted with God according to the tenor of the institution,
   Deut. x. 20.. visibly united themselves to God in the union of that
   covenant. They professed on their parts the union of the covenant of
   God, which was the covenant of grace. It is said in the institution,
   "Thou shalt cleave to the Lord, and swear by his name;" or as the words
   more literally are, "Thou shalt unite unto the Lord, and swear into his
   name." So in Isaiah lvi.. it is called a "joining themselves to the
   Lord." But the union, cleaving, or joining of that covenant, is saving
   faith, the grand condition or the covenant of Christ, by which we are
   in Christ. This is what [on our part] brings us into the Lord. For a
   person explicitly or professedly to enter into the union or relation of
   the covenant of grace with Christ, is the same as professedly to do
   that which on our part is the uniting act, and that is the act of
   faith. To profess the covenant of grace, is to profess it, not as a
   spectator, but as one immediately concerned in the affair, as a party
   in the covenant professed; and this is to profess that in the covenant
   which belongs to us as a party, or to profess our part in the covenant;
   and that is the soul's believing acceptance of the Saviour. Christ's
   part is salvation, our part is a saving faith in him; not a feigned,
   but unfeigned faith; not a common, but special and saving faith; no
   other faith is the condition of the covenant of grace.

   I know the distinction made by some, between the internal and external
   covenant; but, I hope, the divines that make this distinction, would
   not be understood, that there are really and properly two covenants of
   grace; but only that those who profess the one only covenant of grace,
   are of two sorts. There are those who comply with it internally and
   really, and others who do so only externally, that is, in profession
   and visibility. But he that externally and visibly complies with the
   covenant of grace, appears and professes to do so really.--There is
   also this distinction concerning the covenant of grace; it is exhibited
   two ways, the one externally, by the preaching of the word, the other
   internally and spiritually, by enlightening the mind rightly to
   understand the word. But it is with the covenant, as it is with the
   call of the gospel: he that really complies with the external call, has
   the internal call; so he that truly complies with the external proposal
   of God's covenant, as visible Christians profess to do, does indeed
   perform the inward condition of it. But the New Testament affords no
   more foundation for supposing two real and properly distinct covenants
   of grace, than it does to suppose two sorts of real Christians.

   When those persons who were baptized in infancy properly own their
   baptismal covenant, the meaning is, that they now, being capable to act
   for themselves, do professedly and explicitly make their parents' act,
   in giving them up to God, their own, by expressly giving themselves up
   to God. But this no person can do, without either being deceived, or
   dissembling and professing what he himself supposes to be a falsehood,
   unless he supposes that in his heart he consents to be God's. A child
   of christian parents never does that for himself which his parents did
   for him in infancy, till he gives himself wholly to God. But surely he
   does not do it, who not only keeps back a part, but the chief part, his
   heart and soul. He that keeps back his heart, does in effect keep back
   all; and therefore, if he be sensible of it, is guilty of solemn wilful
   mockery, if at the same time he solemnly and publicly professes that he
   gives himself up to God. If there are any words used by such, which in
   their proper signification imply that they give themselves up to God;
   and if these words, as they intend them to be understood, and as they
   are understood by those that hear them, according to their established
   use and custom among that people, do not imply, that they do it really,
   but do truly reserve or keep back the chief part; it ceases to be a
   profession of giving themselves up to God, and so ceases to be a
   professed covenanting with God. The thing which they profess belongs to
   no existing covenant of God; for God has revealed no such covenant, in
   which our transacting of it is a giving up ourselves to him with
   reserve, or holding back our souls, our chief part, and in effect our
   all. And therefore, although such public and solemn professing may be a
   very unwarrantable and great abuse of words, and taking God's name in
   vain, it is no professed covenanting with God.

   One thing, as observed, that belonged to Israel's swearing into the
   name of the Lord, was saying, The Lord liveth; whereby they professed
   their faith in God's all-sufficiency, immutability, and faithfulness.
   But if they really had such a faith, it was a saving grace. To them who
   indeed trust in the all-sufficiency of God, he will surely be an
   all-sufficient portion; and them who trust in God's immutability and
   faithfulness, he surely will never leave nor forsake. There were two
   ways of swearing Jehovah liveth, that we read of in Scripture; one we
   read of, Jer. ii. 2. "Thou shalt swear, The Lord liveth, in truth, in
   judgment, and in righteousness:" and the other way is swearing falsely,
   which we read of in the next chapter, verse 2, 3. "And though they say,
   The Lord liveth, yet surely they swear falsely." And certainly none
   ought to do this. It follows, "O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the
   truth?" i.e. God desires sincerity of heart in those that profess
   religion. Here a gracious sincerity is opposed to a false profession;
   for when it is said, "O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth?" the
   expression is parallel with Ps. li. 6. "Behold thou desirest truth in
   the inward parts." 1 Sam. xvi. 7. "Man looketh on the outward
   appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." Ps. xi. 7. "His
   countenance doth behold the upright." But these texts speak of a
   gracious sincerity. Those spoken of, Jer. iv. 2. that "sware, The Lord
   liveth, in truth, in judgment, and righteousness," were gracious
   persons, who had a thorough conversion to God, as appears by the
   preceding verse, "If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return
   unto me;" i.e. Do not do as Judah was charged with doing in Jer. iii.
   10. "Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
   feignedly." Do not do thus, "but if thou wilt return, return unto me."
   And then it is added in the second verse, "And thou shalt swear, The
   Lord liveth, in truth," &c.; that is, then your profession of religion
   will be worth regarding, you will be indeed what you pretend to be, you
   will be Israelites indeed, in whose profession is no guile. They who
   said, "The Lord liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness;"
   said, The Lord liveth, as David did, Ps. xviii. 46. "The Lord liveth,
   and blessed be my Rock." And as the apostle says he did, 1 Tim. iv. 10.
   "We trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially
   of those that believe." And as he would have Timothy exhort rich men to
   do, 1 Tim. vi. 17. "That they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the
   living God." When the apostle speaks of a profession of our faith in
   Christ, as one duty which all Christians ought to perform as they seek
   salvation, it is the profession of a saving faith. His words plainly
   imply it: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
   shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead,
   thou shalt be saved." The faith which was to be professed with the
   mouth, was the same which the apostle speaks of as in the heart, but
   that is saving faith. The latter is yet plainer in the following words;
   "for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the
   mouth confession is made unto salvation." Believing unto righteousness,
   is saving faith; but it is evidently the same faith which is spoken of,
   as professed with the mouth, in the next words in the same sentence.
   And that the Gentiles, in professing the christian religion, or
   swearing to Christ, should profess saving faith, is implied, Isa. xlv.
   23, 24.--"Every tongue shall swear; surely shall one say, In the Lord
   have I righteousness and strength;" i.e. should profess entirely to
   depend on Christ's righteousness and strength.

   For persons merely to promise, that they will believe in Christ, or
   that they will hereafter comply with the conditions and duties of the
   covenant of grace, is not to own that covenant. Such persons do not
   profess now to enter into the covenant of grace with Christ, or into
   the relation of that covenant to Christ. All they do at present, is to
   say, they will do it hereafter; they profess, that they will hereafter
   obey that command of God, to believe on the name of his Son Jesus
   Christ. But what is such a profession good for, and what credit is to
   be given to such promises of future obedience; when at the same time
   they pretend no other at present, than to live and continue in
   rebellion against those great commands which give no allowance or
   licence for delay? They who do thus, instead of properly owning the
   covenant, do rather for the present visibly reject it. It is not
   unusual, in some churches, where the doctrine I oppose has been
   established, for persons at the same time that they come into the
   church, and pretend to own the covenant, freely to declare to their
   neighbours, they have no imagination that they have any true faith in
   Christ, or love to him. Such persons, instead of being professedly
   united to Christ, in the union of the covenant of grace, are rather
   visibly destitute of the love of Christ; and so, instead of being
   qualified for admission to the Lord's supper, are rather exposed to
   that denunciation of the apostle, 1 Cor. xvi. 22. "If any man love not
   the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha."

   That outward covenanting, which is agreeable to scripture-institution,
   is not only a promising what is future, (though that is not excluded,)
   but a professing what is present, as it is in the marriage-covenant.
   For a woman to promise, that she will hereafter renounce all other men
   for the sake of him who makes suit to her, and will in some future time
   accept of him for her husband, is not for her now to enter into the
   marriage-covenant with him. She that does this with a man, professes
   now to accept of him, renouncing all others; though promises of
   hereafter behaving towards him as a wife, are also included in the
   transaction. It seems the primitive converts to Christianity, in the
   profession they made of religion, in order to their admission into the
   christian church, and in their visibly entering into covenant, in order
   to the initiating seal of the covenant in baptism, did not explicitly
   make any promises of any thing future. They only professed the present
   sentiments and habit of their minds, they professed that they believed
   in Christ, and so were admitted into the church by baptism; and yet
   undoubtedly they were, according to forementioned prophecies, admitted
   in the way of public covenanting. As the covenant-people of God, they
   owned the covenant, before the seal of the covenant was applied. Their
   professing faith in Christ was visibly owing the covenant of grace,
   because faith in Christ was the grand condition of that covenant.
   Indeed, if the faith which they professed in order to baptism, was only
   an historical or doctrinal faith, (as some suppose,) or any common
   faith, it would not have been any visible entering into the covenant of
   grace; for a common faith is not the condition of that covenant; nor
   would there properly have been any covenanting in the case. If we
   suppose, the faith they professed was the grace by which the soul is
   united to Christ, their profession was a covenanting in this respect
   also, that it implied an engagement of future obedience; for true faith
   in Christ includes in its nature an acceptance of him as our Lord and
   King, and devoting ourselves to his service. But a profession of
   historical faith implies no profession of accepting Christ as our King,
   nor engagement to submit to him as such.

   When the Israelites publicly covenanted with God, according to the
   institution in Deuteronomy, they did not only promise something future,
   but professed something present; they avouched Jehovah to be their God,
   and also promised to keep his commands. Thus it was in that solemn
   covenant-transaction between God and the people on the plains of Moab;
   which is summarily described, Deut. xxvi. 17, 18. "Thou hast avouched
   the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
   his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken
   unto his voice; and the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his
   peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldst keep
   all his commandments." The people in avouching God for their God,
   professed a compliance with the terms of the covenant of grace; as
   summarily expressed in those words, "I will be thy God, and thou shalt
   be my people." They that avouch the Lord to be their God, profess to
   accept of Jehovah as their God; and that is to accept him as the object
   of their supreme respect and trust. For that which we choose as the
   object of our highest regard, that, and that only, do we take as our
   God. None therefore that value and love the world more than Jehovah,
   can, without lying, or being deceived, avouch Jehovah to be their God.
   And none that do not trust in Christ, but trust more in their own
   strength or righteousness, can avouch Christ to be their Saviour. To
   avouch God to be our God, is to profess that he is our God by our own
   act; i.e. That we choose him to be our chief good and last end, the
   supreme object of our esteem and regard, to whom we devote ourselves.
   And if we are sensible that we do not do this sincerely, we cannot
   profess that we actually do it; for he that does not do it sincerely,
   does not do it at all. There is no room for the distinction of a moral
   sincerity and gracious sincerity in this case. A supreme respect of
   heart to God, or a supreme love to him, which is real, is but of one
   sort. Whoever does with any reality at all make God the object of the
   supreme regard of his heart, is certainly a gracious person. And
   whoever does not make God the supreme object of his respect with a
   gracious sincerity, certainly does not do it with any sincerity. I
   fear, while leading people in many of our congregations, who have no
   thought of their having the least spark of true love to God in their
   hearts, to say, publicly and solemnly, that they avouch God the Father,
   Son, and Holy Ghost, to be their God, and that they give themselves up
   to him, we have led them to say they know not what. To be sure, they
   are very obscure expressions, if they mean any thing that a carnal man
   does, under the reigning power of sin and enmity against God.

   Here possibly it may be objected, that it is unreasonable to suppose
   any such thing should be intended, in the profession of the
   congregation in the wilderness, as a gracious respect to God, that
   which is the condition of God's covenant, when we have reason to think
   that so few of them were truly gracious. But I suppose, upon mature
   consideration, this will not appear at all unreasonable. It is no more
   unreasonable to suppose this people to make a profession of that
   respect to God, which they had not in their hearts now, than at other
   times when we are informed they did so, as in Ezek. xxxiii. 31. "They
   come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my
   people:" [i. e. as though they were my saints, as they profess to be;]
   "For with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goeth after
   their covetousness." So in the apostle's time, people professed that to
   be in their hearts towards God, which was not there. The apostle is
   speaking of them, when he says, Tit. i. 16. "They profess that they
   know God, but in works they deny him." This was common among that
   people; God declares them to be an hypocritical nation, Isa. x. 6.. And
   it is certain, this was the case with them in the wilderness; they
   there professed that respect to God which they had not; as is evident
   by Psal. lxxviii. 36, 37. "They did flatter him with their mouth, and
   they lied unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not right
   with him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant." In owning the
   covenant with God, they professed their heart was right with him,
   because it is mentioned as an evidence of their having lied or dealt
   falsely in their profession, that their heart was not right with him,
   and so proved not stedfast in God's covenant, which they had owned. If
   their heart had been right with God, they would have been truly pious
   persons; which is a demonstration, that what they professed was true
   piety. It also appears that if they had had such a heart in them, as
   they pretended to have, they would have been truly pious persons, Deut.
   v.. where we have a rehearsal of their covenanting at mount Sinai:
   Concerning this it is said, verse 28, 29. "And the Lord heard the voice
   of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the Lord said unto me, They
   have well said all that they have spoken. O that there were such an
   heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments
   always, that it might be well with them and with their children for
   ever." The people were mistaken about their disposition and preparation
   of heart to go through the business of God's service, as the man in the
   parable, who undertook to build a tower without counting the cost. Nor
   need it seem at all incredible, that the generation who covenanted at
   mount Sinai, should, the greater part of them, be deceived, and think
   their hearts thoroughly disposed to give up themselves for ever to God,
   if we consider how much they had strongly to move their affections.
   They saw the wonders wrought in Egypt and at the Red sea, where they
   were led through on dry ground, and the Egyptians miraculously
   destroyed; whereby their affections were greatly raised, and they sang
   God's praises. And particularly they now saw at mount Sinai, the
   astonishing manifestations of God's majesty. Probably the greater part
   of the sinners among them were deceived with false affections; and if
   there were others less affected and not deceived, it is not incredible
   that they, in those circumstances, should wilfully dissemble in their
   profession, and so in a more gross sense flatter God with their lips,
   and lie to him with their tongues. And these things are more credible
   concerning a generation peculiarly left to hardness and blindness of
   mind in divine matters, and peculiarly noted in the book of Psalms for
   hypocrisy. And the generation of their children, who owned the covenant
   on the plains of Moab, had much to move their affections; they saw the
   awful judgments of God on their fathers. God had brought them through
   the wilderness, and subdued Sihon king of the Amorites and Og the king
   of Bashan before them.--They had heard Moses's affecting rehearsal of
   the whole series of God's wonderful dealings with them, together with
   his most pathetic exhortations. But is was also a time of great revival
   of religion and powerful influence of the Spirit of God, and that
   generation was probably the most excellent that ever was in Israel.
   There is more good and less hurt spoken of them, than of any other
   generation that we have any account of in Scripture. [558] A very great
   part of them swore in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. And no
   wonder that others at such a time fell in, either deceiving, or being
   deceived, with common affections; as is usual in times of great works
   of God for his church, and of the flourishing of religion. In
   succeeding generations, as the people grew more corrupt, I suppose,
   their covenanting or swearing into the name of the Lord degenerated
   into a matter of mere form and ceremony; even as subscribing religious
   articles seems to have done with the church of England; and as, it is
   to be feared, owning the covenant, as it is called, has too much done
   in New England; it being visibly a prevailing custom for persons to
   neglect this, till they come to be married, and then to do it for their
   credit's sake, and that their children may be baptized. And I suppose,
   there was commonly a great laxness in Israel among the priests who had
   the conduct of this affair. There were many things in the nature of
   that comparatively carnal dispensation, which negatively gave occasion
   for such things: that is, whereby it had by no means so great a
   tendency to prevent such irregularities, as the more excellent
   dispensation introduced by Christ and his apostles. And though these
   things were testified against by the prophets, before the Babylonish
   captivity; yet God, who is only wise, did designedly in a great measure
   wink at these and many other great irregularities in the church, till
   the time of reformation should come, which the Messiah was to have the
   honour of introducing. But of these things I may perhaps have occasion
   to say something more, when I come to answer the objection concerning
   the passover.

   Now to return to the argument from the nature of covenanting with God,
   or owning God's covenant. As to the promises, which are herein either
   explicitly or implicitly made; these imply a profession of true piety.
   For, in the covenant of grace universal obedience is engaged, obedience
   to all the commands of God; and the performance of inward spiritual
   duties is as much engaged, as external duties; and in some respects
   much more. Therefore he that visibly makes the covenant of grace his
   own, promises to perform those internal duties, and to perform all
   duties with a gracious sincerity. We have no warrant, in our profession
   of God's covenant, to divide the duties of it, to take some, and leave
   out others: especially to leave out those great commands, of believing
   with the heart, of loving the Lord our God with all our heart and with
   all our soul, and our neighbour as ourselves. He that leaves out these,
   in effect leaves out all; for these are the sum of our whole duty, and
   of all God's commands. If we leave these out of our profession, surely
   it is not the covenant of grace which we profess. The Israelites, when
   they covenanted with God at mount Sinai, and said, when God had
   declared to them the ten commandments, "All that the Lord hath spoken
   will we do, and be obedient;" promised, that as they professed to know
   God, they would in works not deny, but own and honour him, and would
   conform to those two great commandments, which are the sum of all the
   ten, and concerning which God said, "These words which I command thee
   this day, shall be in thine heart," Deut. vi. 6..--And when they
   covenanted on the plains of Moab, they promised to keep and do God's
   commands, "with all their heart, and with all their soul," as is very
   evident by Deut. xxvi. 16, 17.. So it was also when the people owned
   their covenant in Asa's time. 2 Chron. xv. 12. "They entered into a
   covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart,
   and with all their soul." We have also another remarkable instance, 2
   Kings xxiii. 3.. and 2 Chron. xxxiv. 31..

   Now he who is wholly under the power of a carnal mind, which is not
   subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, cannot promise these
   things without either great deceit, or the most manifest and palpable
   absurdity. Promising supposes the person to be conscious to himself, or
   persuaded of himself, that he has such a heart in him; for his lips
   pretend to declare his heart. The nature of a promise implies intention
   or design. And proper real intention implies will, disposition, and
   compliance of heart. But no natural man is properly willing to do these
   duties, nor does his heart comply with them: and to make natural men
   believe otherwise, tends greatly to their hurt. A natural man may be
   willing, from self-love, and from sinister views, to use means and take
   pains that he may obtain a willingness or disposition to these duties:
   but that is a very different thing from actually being willing, or
   truly having a disposition to them. So he may promise, that he will,
   from some considerations or other, take great pains to obtain such a
   heart; but this is not the promise of the covenant of grace. Men may
   make many religious promises to God some way relating to the covenant
   of grace, which yet are not themselves the promises of that covenant;
   nor is there any thing of the nature of covenanting in the case,
   because although they should actually fulfil their promises, God is not
   obliged by promise to them. If a natural man promises to do all that it
   is possible for a natural man to do in religion, and fulfils his
   promises, God is not obliged, by any covenant that he has entered into
   with man, to perform any thing at all for him, respecting his saving
   benefits. And therefore he that promises these things only, enters into
   no covenant with God; because the very notion of entering into covenant
   with any being, is entering into a mutual agreement, doing or engaging
   that which, if done, the other party becomes engaged on his part. The
   New Testament informs us but of one covenant God enters into with
   mankind through Christ, and that is the covenant of grace; in which God
   obliges himself to nothing in us that is exclusive of unfeigned faith,
   and the spiritual duties that attend it. Therefore if a natural man
   makes never so many vows, that he will perform all external duties, and
   will pray for help to do spiritual duties, and for an ability and will
   to comply with the covenant of grace, from such principles as he has,
   he does not lay hold of God's covenant, nor properly enter into any
   covenant with God. For we have no opportunity to covenant with God in
   any other way, than that which he has revealed; he becomes a
   covenant-party in no other covenant. It is true, every natural man that
   lives under the gospel, is obliged to comply with the terms of the
   covenant of grace; and if he promised to do it, his promise may
   increase his obligation, though he flattered God with his mouth, and
   lied to him with his tongue, as the children of Israel did in
   promising. But it will not thence follow, that they ought knowingly to
   make a lying promise, or that ministers and churches should countenance
   them in so doing.

   Indeed there is no natural man but what deceives himself, if he thinks
   he is truly willing to perform external obedience to God, universally
   and perseveringly through the various trials of life. And therefore in
   promising it, he is either very deceitful, or is like the foolish
   deceived man that undertook to build when he had not wherewith to
   finish. And if it be known by the church, before whom he promises to
   build and finish, that at the same time he does not pretend to have a
   heart to finish, his promise is worthy of no credit or regard from
   them, and can make nothing visible to them but his presumption.

   A great confirmation of what has been said under this head of
   covenanting, is Psal. 1. 16. "But unto the wicked God saith, What hast
   thou to do, to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my
   covenant in thy mouth?" This term, the wicked, in the more general use
   of it in Scripture, is applied in that extent as to include all ungodly
   or graceless persons, all that are under the reigning power of sin, and
   are the objects of God's anger, or exposed to his eternal vengeance; as
   might easily be made to appear by a particular enumeration of texts all
   over the Bible. All such are in Scripture called, workers of iniquity,
   the children of the wicked one, Matt. xiii. 38.. All such are said to
   be of the devil, 1 John iii. 8.. And to be the children of the devil, 1
   John iii. 10.. The righteous and the wicked are, in a multitude of
   places in Scripture, evidently opposed one to the other, and
   distinguished as saints and sinners, holy and unholy, those that fear
   God and those that fear him not, those that love him and those that
   hate him. All mankind are in Scripture divided by these distinctions,
   and the Bible knows of no neuters or third sort.

   Indeed those who are really wicked, may be visibly righteous, righteous
   in profession and outward appearance. But a sort of men who have no
   saving grace, and yet are not really wicked, the Scripture is entirely
   ignorant of. It is reasonable to suppose, that by wicked men, in this
   psalm, is meant all that hate instruction, and reject God's word,
   (Psal. l. 17..) and not merely such as are guilty of particular crimes
   mentioned, verse 17-20.. stealing, adultery, fraud, and backbiting.
   Though only some particular ways of wickedness are mentioned, yet we
   are not to understand that all others are excluded; yea the words, in
   the conclusion of the paragraph, are expressly applied to all that
   forget God in such a manner as to expose themselves to be torn in
   pieces by God's wrath in hell, verse 22. "Now consider this, ye that
   forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver."
   We can no more justly argue, that because some gross sins are here
   specified, that no sinners are meant but such as live in those or other
   gross sins, than we can argue from Rev. xxii. 14, 15.. that none shall
   be shut out of heaven but those who have lived in the gross sins there
   mentioned; "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may
   have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
   the city: for without are dogs, and sorcerers, and murderers, and
   idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie." Nothing is more
   common in Scripture, than--in the descriptions it gives both of the
   godly and ungodly, together with their general character--to insert
   some particular excellent practices of the one to which grace tends,
   and some certain gross sins of the other for which there is a
   foundation in the reigning corruption of their hearts. So, lying is
   mentioned as part of the character of all natural men, Psal. lviii. 3,
   4. (there called wicked men, as in Psal. 1.) "The wicked are estranged
   from the womb; they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies:
   their poison is like the poison of a serpent," &c. So it is said of the
   wicked, Psal. x. 2, 3, 4, 7. "His mouth is full of cursing and
   bitterness." This the apostle, Rom. iii.. cites as a description of all
   natural men. So it is said of the wicked, Psal. cxl. 3. "They have
   sharpened their tongues as a serpent; adders' poison is under their
   lips;" which the same apostle, in the same place, also cites as what is
   said of all natural men. The very same gross sins which are here
   mentioned in the fiftieth psalm, are from time to time inserted in
   Solomon's descriptions of the wicked man, as opposed to the righteous,
   in the book of Proverbs. Particularly, the sins mentioned in the 19th
   verse of that psalm, "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue
   frameth deceit;" are thus mentioned, as belonging to the character of
   the wicked man, Prov. xii. 5, 6. "The thoughts of the righteous are
   right; but the counsels of the wicked are deceit. The words of the
   wicked are to lie in wait for blood; but the mouth of the upright shall
   deliver them." Nevertheless it is plain, that the wise man in this
   book, in his distinction of the righteous and the wicked, means the
   same as godly and ungodly. Only reading the two foregoing chapters will
   be enough to satisfy any of this. Observe Prov. x. 3, 7, 16, 20, 21,
   24, 28-32; xi. 3, 5, 9, 11, 18-23, 30, 31.. besides innumerable other
   like texts all over the book. In . it is said of sinners, "Their feet
   run to evil, and make haste to shed blood." This the apostle, in Rom.
   iii. 15.. cites as belonging to the description of all natural men. So
   in the description of the wicked, Prov. iv. 14-19. it is said that
   "they sleep not unless they have done mischief; that they drink the
   wine of violence," &c. and yet by the wicked there is meant the same
   with the graceless man; as appears by the antithesis there made between
   him and the just, or righteous, "whose path is as the shining light,
   that shineth more and more to the perfect day."

   As a further evidence that by the wicked in Psal. 1. 16.. is meant the
   same as the ungodly or graceless, it is to be observed, here is a
   pretty manifest antithesis, or opposition between the wicked, and the
   saints, that shall be gathered to Christ at the day of judgment, verse
   5.. There God speaking of his coming to judgment, says, "Gather my
   saints together, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice:"
   and then, after showing the insufficiency of the sacrifices of beasts,
   implying that it is a greater sacrifice by which these saints make a
   covenant with him, it is added, "But to the wicked" [that are not in
   the number of my saints] "God doth say, What hast thou to do, to take
   my covenant into thy mouth?" Approving of the covenanting of the
   former, but disapproving the covenanting of the latter. As to the
   gathering of God's saints, there mentioned, if we consider the
   foregoing and the following verses, it is evidently the same with the
   gathering of his elect, when Christ comes in the clouds of heaven,
   Matt. xxiv. 30, 31.. and with the gathering of the righteous, as his
   wheat into his barn, at the day of judgment, Matt. xiii.. And therefore
   there is as much reason to suppose, that by the wicked, which are
   opposed to them, is meant all graceless persons, as there is to
   understand the doers of iniquity, Matt. xiii. as opposed to the
   righteous, which shall then "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
   their Father," verse 43..--And there is one thing more which still
   further confirms me in my construction of Psal. l. 16.. which is, That
   the plain reason here given against wicked men taking God's covenant
   into their mouths, holds good with respect to all graceless men, viz.
   Because they do not comply with, but reject, the very covenant, which
   they with their mouths profess to own and consent to. Verse 17. "Seeing
   thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee:" as much as
   to say, "Thou rejectest and hast a reigning enmity against my statutes,
   with which thou declarest and professest a compliance." And this is the
   spirit and practice of all who live in the sin of unbelief and
   rejection of Christ; they live in a way that is altogether inconsistent
   with the covenant of grace; for against the sum and substance of the
   condition and engagement of that covenant every natural man is under
   the reigning power of enmity, and lives in contradiction to it.
   Therefore, I think, it follows, that they who know it is thus with
   them, have nothing to do to take God's covenant into their mouths.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [558] See Num. xiv. 31.. Deut. i. 39; viii. 15, 16.. Josh. xxii. 2,
   11-34; xxiii. 8.. Deut. iv. 4.. Josh. xxiv. 31.. Judg. ii. 17, 22..
   Psal. lxviii. 14.. Jer. ii. 2, 3, 21; xxxi. 2, 3.. Hos. ix. 10..
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   The nature of things seems to afford no good reason why the people of
   Christ should not openly profess a proper respect to him in their
   hearts, as well as a true notion of him in their heads, or a right
   opinion of him in their judgments, and this is confirmed by scripture
   testimony.

   I can conceive of nothing reasonably to be supposed as the design or
   end of a public profession of religion, that does not as much require a
   profession of honour, esteem, and friendship of heart towards Christ,
   as an orthodox opinion about him; or why the former should not be as
   much expected and required in order to be admitted into the company of
   his friends and followers, as the latter. It cannot be because the
   former in itself is not as important as the latter; seeing the very
   essence of religion itself consists in the former, and without it the
   latter is wholly vain, and makes us never the better; neither happier
   in ourselves, nor more acceptable to God.--One end of a public
   profession of religion is giving public honour to God. But surely the
   profession of inward esteem and a supreme respect of heart towards God
   more directly tends to it, than the declaring of right speculative
   notions of him. We look upon it that our friends do the more especially
   and directly put honour upon us, when upon proper occasions they stand
   ready not only to own the truth of such and such facts concerning us,
   but also to testify their high esteem and cordial and entire regard to
   us. When persons only manifest their doctrinal knowledge of religion,
   and express the assent of their judgments, but at the same time make no
   pretence but that they are wholly destitute of all true love to God,
   and are under the dominion of enmity against him, their profession, is,
   in some respects, very greatly to God's dishonour: for they leave
   reason for the public greatly to suspect that they hold the truth in
   unrighteousness, and that they are some of those who have both seen and
   hated Christ and his Father, John xv. 24.. Who of all persons have the
   greatest sin, and are most to God's dishonour.

   I am at a loss, how that visibility of saintship, which the honoured
   author of The Appeal to the Learned, supposes to be all that is
   required in order to admission to the Lord's supper, can be much to
   God's honour, viz. Such a visibility as leaves reason to believe, that
   the greater part of those who have it, are enemies to God in their
   hearts, and inwardly the servants of sin. Such a visibility of religion
   as this, seems rather to increase a visibility of wickedness in the
   world, and so of God's dishonour, than any thing else; i. e. it makes
   more wickedness visible to the eye of a human judgment, and gives men
   reason to think, there is more wickedness in the world than otherwise
   would be visible to them. Because we have reason to think, that those
   who live in a rejection of Christ, under the light of the gospel, and
   the knowledge and common belief of its doctrine, have vastly greater
   sin and guilt than other men. And that venerable divine himself did
   abundantly teach this.

   Christ came into the world to engage in a war with God's enemies, sin
   and Satan; and a great war there is maintained between them; and the
   contest is, who shall have the possession of our hearts. Now it is
   reasonable, under these circumstances, that we should declare on whose
   side we are, whether on Christ's side, or on the side of his enemies.
   If we would be admitted among Christ's friends and followers, it is
   reasonable, that we should profess we are on the Lord's side, and that
   we yield our hearts to him, and not to his rivals. And this seems
   plainly to be the design and nature of a public profession of Christ.
   If this profession is not made, no profession is made that is worth
   regarding, in such a case as this, and to any such purpose as being
   admitted among his visible friends. There is no being on Christ's side,
   in this case, but with an undivided heart preferring him to all his
   rivals, and renouncing them all for his sake. The case admits of no
   neutrality, or lukewarmness, or a middle sort of persons with a moral
   sincerity, or such a common faith as is consistent with loving sin and
   the world better than Christ. He that is not with me (says Christ) is
   against me. And therefore none profess to be on Christ's side, but they
   who profess to renounce his rivals. For those who would be called
   Christians, to profess no higher regard to Christ than what will admit
   of a superior regard to the world, is more absurd than if a woman
   pretending to marry a man, and take him for her husband, should profess
   to take him in some sort, but yet not pretend to take him in such a
   manner as is inconsistent with her allowing other men a fuller
   possession of her, and greater intimacy with her, than she allows him.
   The nature of the case, as it stands between us and Jesus Christ, is
   such, that an open solemn profession of being entirely for him, and
   giving him the possession of our hearts, renouncing all competitors, is
   more requisite in this, than a like profession in any other case. The
   profession of an intermediate sort of state of our mind, is very
   disagreeable to the nature of Christ's work and kingdom in the world,
   and all that belongs to the designs and ends of his administrations;
   and for ministers and churches openly to establish such a profession of
   Christ as part of his public service, which does not imply more than
   lukewarmness, is, I fear, to make a mere sham of a solemn public
   profession of Christianity, and seems to be wholly without warrant from
   the word of God, and greatly to his dishonour.

   It cannot be justly pretended, as a reason why the opinion concerning
   doctrines should be professed, and not friendship or respect of heart,
   that the former is more easily discerned and known by us than the
   latter. For though it be true, that men may be at a loss concerning the
   latter, yet it is as true they may be so concerning the former too.
   They may be at a loss in many cases concerning the fulness of the
   determination of their own inclination and choice; and so they may
   concerning the fulness of the determination of their judgment. I know
   of nothing in human nature that hinders the acts of men's wills being
   properly subject to their own consciousness, any more than the acts of
   their judgment; nor of any reason to suppose that men may not discern
   their own consent, as well as their assent. The Scripture plainly
   supposes gracious dispositions and acts to be things properly under the
   eye of conscience. 2 Cor. xiii. 5. "Know ye not your ownselves?" John
   xxi. 15. "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?" and many other places.
   Nor is the nature of godliness less made known, that the true doctrines
   of religion. Piety of heart, in the more essential things belonging to
   it, is as clearly revealed, as the doctrines concerning the nature of
   God, and person of the Messiah, and the method of his redemption.

   We find in Scripture, that all those of God's professing people or
   visible saints who are not truly pious, are represented as
   counterfeits, as having guile, disguise, and a false appearance, as
   making false pretences, and as being deceitful and hypocrites.--Thus
   Christ says of Nathanael, John i. 47. "Behold an Israelite indeed, in
   whom is no guile;" that is, a truly gracious person; implying, that
   those of God's professing people, who are not gracious, are guileful,
   and deceitful in their profession. So sinners in Zion, or in God's
   visible church, are called hypocrites. Isa. xxxiii. 14. "The sinners in
   Zion are afraid, fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites." Isa. xi.
   17. "Every one is an hypocrite and an evil-doer." So they are called
   lying children, Isa. xxx. 9. and chap. lix. 13. and are represented as
   lying, in pretending to be of the temple or church of God. Jer. vii. 2,
   4. "Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these
   gates to worship the Lord.--Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The
   temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are
   these." These are spoken of as falsely calling themselves of the holy
   city, Isa. xlviii. 1, 2.. They are called silverdross, and reprobate or
   refuse silver, (Ezek. xxii. 18.. Jer. vi. 30..) which glisters and
   shows like true silver, but has not its inward worth. So they are
   compared to adulterated wine, Isa. i. 22.. and to trees full of leaves,
   bidding fair for fruitfulness, Matt. xxi. 19.. Clouds that look as if
   they were full of rain, yet bring nothing but wind, Jude 12.. Wells
   without water, that do but cheat the thirsty traveller, 2 Pet. ii. 13..
   A deceitful bow, that appears good, but fails the archer, Psal.
   lxxviii. 57.. Hos. vii. 16..--Mr. Stoddard, in his Appeal to the
   Learned, from time to time, supposes all visible saints, who are not
   truly pious, to be hypocrites, as in page 15, 17, 18.

   Now what ground or reason can there be thus to represent those to be
   visible saints, or members of God's visible church, who are not truly
   pious, if the profession of such does not imply any pretence to true
   piety; and when they never made a pretence to any thing more than
   common grace, or moral sincerity, which many of them truly have, and
   therefore are not at all hypocritical or deceitful in their pretences,
   and are as much without guile, in what they make a profession of, as
   Nathanael was? The psalmist speaking of sincere piety, calls it truth
   in the inward parts. Psal. li. 6. "Behold, thou desirest truth in the
   inward parts." It is called truth with reference to some declaration or
   profession made by God's visible people; but on the hypothesis which I
   oppose, common grace is as properly truth in the inward parts, in this
   respect, as saving grace. God says concerning Israel, Deut. xxxii. 5.
   "Their spot is not the spot of his children." God here speaks of
   himself, as it were, disappointed; the words having reference to some
   profession they had made. For why should the remark be made, after this
   manner, that spots appeared upon them, and showed marks that they were
   not his children, if they never pretended to be his children, and never
   were accepted under any such notion to any of the privileges of his
   people?

   God is pleased to represent himself in his word as if he trusted the
   profession of his visible people, and as disappointed when they did not
   approve themselves as his faithful, stedfast, and thorough friends.
   Isa. lxiii. 8, 9, 10. "For he said, Surely they are my people, children
   that will not lie. So he was their Saviour: in all their affliction he
   was afflicted. But they rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit: therefore
   he was turned to be their enemy." The same is represented in many other
   places. I suppose that God speaks after this manner, because, in his
   present external dealings with his visible people, he does not act in
   the capacity of the Searcher of hearts, but accommodates himself to
   their nature, and the present state and circumstances of his church,
   and speaks to them and treats them after the manner of men, and deals
   with them in their own way. [559] But supposing the case to be even
   thus, there would be no ground for such representations, if there were
   no profession of true godliness. When God is represented as trusting
   that men will be his faithful friends, we must understand that he
   trusts to their pretences. But how improperly would the matter be so
   represented, if there were no pretences to trust to, no pretences of
   any real thorough friendship! However there may be a profession of some
   common affection that is morally sincere, yet there is no pretence of
   loving him more than, yea not so much as, his enemies.--What reason to
   trust that they will be faithful to God as their master, when the
   religion they profess amounts to no more than serving two masters? What
   reason to trust that they will be stable in their ways, when they do
   not pretend to be of a single heart, and all know that the
   double-minded persons used to be unstable in all their ways? Those who
   only profess moral sincerity or common grace, do not pretend to love
   God above the world. And such grace is what God and man know is liable
   to pass away as the early dew, and the morning cloud.--If what men
   profess amounts to nothing beyond lukewarmness, it is not to be
   expected, that they will be faithful to the death. If men do not
   pretend to have any oil in their vessels, what cause can there be to
   trust that their lamps will not go out? If they do not pretend to have
   any root in them, what cause is there for any disappointment when they
   wither away.

   When God, in the forementioned place, Isa. lxiii.. represents himself
   as trusting Israel's profession, and saying, "Surely they are my
   people, children that will not lie;" it cannot be understood, as if he
   trusted that they were his people in that sense, in which the ten
   tribes were called God's people after they had given up themselves to
   idolatry for two or three hundred years together without once
   repenting. But, surely they are my sincere saints and children, as they
   profess to be, Israelites indeed, without guile; they would not do so
   evil a thing as to make a lying profession. This seems to be the plain
   import of the words. It therefore shows that the profession they made
   was of real vital godliness.

   The eight first verses of the fifty-sixth chapter of Isaiah,. I think,
   afford good evidence, that such qualifications are requisite in order
   to the privileges of a visible church state, as I have insisted on.--In
   the four preceding chapters we have a prophecy of gospel-times, the
   blessed state of things which the Messiah should introduce. The
   prophecy of the same times is continued in the former part of this
   chapter. Here we have a prophecy of the abolishing of the ceremonial
   law, which was a wall of separation, that kept two sorts of persons,
   (viz. eunuchs and Gentiles,) out from the ordinances of the church or
   congregation of the Lord, (for the words congregation and church are
   the same,) the place of whose meeting was in God's house within God's
   walls, verse 5.. and on God's holy mountain, verse 7.. That in the
   ceremonial law which especially kept out the Gentiles, was the law of
   circumcision; and the law that the eunuch shall not enter into the
   congregation or church of the Lord, we have in Deut. xxiii. 1.. Now
   here it is foretold, that in the days when "God's salvation shall be
   come, and his righteousness revealed," by the coming of the Messiah,
   this wall of separation should be broken down, this ceremonial law
   removed out of the way; (but still taking care to note, that the law of
   the Sabbath shall be continued, as not being one of those ceremonial
   observances which shall be abolished;) and then it is declared, what is
   the great qualification which should be looked at in those blessed
   days, when these external ceremonial qualifications of circumcision and
   soundness of body should no more be insisted on, viz. piety of heart
   and practice, "joining themselves to the Lord, loving the name of the
   Lord, to be his servants, choosing the things that please him," &c.
   Verse 3, &c. "Neither let the son of the stranger that hath joined
   himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me
   from his people; neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree;
   for thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and
   choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant, even
   unto them will I give in my house, and within my walls, a place, and a
   name better than of sons and of daughters; I will give unto them an
   everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. Also the sons of the
   stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love
   the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the
   Sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant: even them
   will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
   prayer; their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted
   upon mine altar: for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for
   all people. The Lord God which gathered the outcasts of Israel, saith,
   Yet will I gather others to him besides those that are gathered unto
   him."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [559] This distinction is too vague. A more satisfactory reason is,
   that the very nature of moral government requires this mode of
   treatment. See "An Essay on Equity and Sovereignty," throughout.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   The representations which Christ makes of his visible church, from time
   to time, in his discourses and parables, make the thing manifest which
   I have laid down.

   This is required by the representation which Christ makes in the latter
   end of Matt. vii.. of the final issue of things with respect to the
   different sorts of members of his visible church. Those that only say,
   Lord, Lord, and those who do the will of his Father which is in heaven;
   those who build their house upon a rock, and those who build upon the
   sand. They are all (of both kinds) evidently such as have pretended to
   a high honour and regard to Christ, have claimed an interest in him,
   and accordingly hoped to be finally acknowledged and received as his.
   Those visible Christians who are not true Christians cry, Lord, Lord;
   that is, are forward to profess respect and claim relation to him; and
   will be greatly disappointed hereafter in not being owned by him. They
   shall then come and cry, Lord, Lord. This compellation, Lord, is
   commonly given to Jesus Christ in the New Testament, as signifying the
   special relation which Christ stood in to his disciples, rather than
   his universal dominion. They shall then come and earnestly claim
   relation, as it is represented of Israel of old, in the day of their
   distress, and God's awful judgments upon them, Hos. viii. 2. "Israel
   shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee." To know does not here intend
   speculative knowledge, but knowing as one knows his own, with a
   peculiar respect and interest. These false disciples shall not only
   claim an interest in Christ, but shall plead and bring arguments to
   confirm their claim; "Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in they name,
   and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name have done many
   wonderful works?" It is evidently the language of those that are
   dreadfully disappointed. "Then (says Christ) I will profess unto them,
   I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity:" q.d. "Though
   they profess a relation to me, I will profess none to them; though they
   plead that they know me, and have an interest in me, I will declare to
   them that I never owned them as any of mine; and will bid them depart
   from me as those that I will never own, nor have any thing to do with
   in such a relation as they claim." Thus all the hopes they had lived
   in, of being hereafter received and owned by Christ as in the number of
   his friends and favourites, are dashed in pieces.--This is further
   illustrated by what follows, in the comparison of the wise man who
   built his house on a rock; representing those professed disciples who
   build their hope of an interest in him on a sure foundation, whose
   house shall stand in the trying day: and the foolish man who built his
   house on the sand; representing those professed disciples or hearers of
   his word, who build their opinion and hope of an interest in him on a
   false foundation, whose house in the great time of trial shall have a
   dreadful fall, their vain hope shall issue in dismal disappointment and
   confusion.

   On the whole, it is manifest that all visible Christians or saints, all
   Christ's professing disciples or hearers that profess him to be their
   Lord, according to the scripture notion of professing Christ, are such
   as profess a "saving interest in him and relation to him, and live in
   the hope of being hereafter owned as those that are so interested and
   related."--By those that hear Christ's sayings, in this place, are not
   meant merely auditors of the word preached; for there are many such who
   make no pretence to an interest in Christ, and have no such hope or
   opinion built on any foundation at all; but those who profess to
   hearken, believe, and yield submission to the word of Christ. This is
   confirmed by the manner in which the matter is expressed in Luke vi.
   47. "Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doth them, I
   will show you to whom he is like:" i e. Whosoever visibly comes to me,
   and is one of my professed disciples, &c.

   This matter is confirmed by that parallel representation that Christ
   gives us in Luke xiii. 25-29.. of his final disposal of the two
   different sorts of persons that are in the kingdom or church of God;
   viz. those who shall be allowed in his church or kingdom when it comes
   to its state of glory, and those who though they have visibly been in
   it, shall be thrust out of it. It is represented of the latter, that
   they shall then come and claim relation and interest, and cry, "Lord,
   Lord, open to us;" and "Christ shall answer, and say, I know you not
   whence you are." As much as to say, "Why do you claim relation and
   acquaintance with me? You are strangers to me, I do not own you." "Then
   (it is said) they shall begin to say, We have eaten and drank in thy
   presence, and thou hast taught in our streets." As much as to say,
   "This is a strange thing, that thou dost not own us! We are exceedingly
   surprised, that thou shouldst account us as strangers that have no part
   in thee, when we have eaten and drank in thy presence," &c. And when he
   shall finally insist upon it, that he does not own them, and will have
   nothing to do with them as his, "then there shall be weeping and
   gnashing of teeth;" then they shall be filled with dismal
   disappointment, confusion, and despair, when they shall see Abraham,
   Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, with
   whom they expected to dwell for ever there, and they themselves thrust
   out. By this it is evident, that those visible members of the kingdom
   of God, that hereafter shall be case out of it, are such as look upon
   themselves now interested in Christ and the eternal blessings of his
   kingdom, and make that profession.

   The same is manifest by the parable of the ten virgins, Matt. xxv.. In
   the first verse it is said, "The kingdom of heaven (i.e. the church of
   Christ) is likened unto ten virgins." The two sorts of virgins
   evidently represent the two sorts of members of the visible church of
   Christ; the wise, those who are true Christians; and the foolish, those
   who are apparent but not true Christians. The foolish virgins were to
   all appearance the children of the bride chamber; such as had accepted
   of the invitation to the wedding, which represents the invitations of
   the gospel, wherein the bridegroom and bride say, Come. They herein had
   testified the same respect to the bridegroom and bride that the wise
   had. The parable naturally leads us to suppose, that they were to
   appearance every way of the same society with the wise, pretended to be
   the same sort of persons, in like manner interested in the bridegroom,
   and that they were received by the wise under such a notion. They made
   a profession of the very same kind of honour and regard to the
   bridegroom, in going forth to meet him with their lamps, as his friends
   to show him respect, and had the same hopes of enjoying the privileges
   and entertainments of the wedding: there was a difference with respect
   to oil in their vessels, but there was no difference with respect to
   their lamps. One thing intended by their lamps, as I suppose is agreed
   by all, is their profession. This is the same in both; and in both it
   is a profession of grace, as a lamp (from its known end and use) is a
   manifestation or show of oil. Another thing signified by the blaze of
   their lamps seems to be the light of hope. Their lamps signify in
   general the appearance of grace or godliness, including both the
   appearance of it to the view or judgment of others, and also to their
   own view, and the judgment they entertain of themselves. Their lamps
   shone, not only in the eyes of others, but also in their own eyes. This
   is confirmed because on hearing the midnight cry, they find their lamps
   are gone out; which seems most naturally to represent, that however
   hypocrites may maintain their hopes while they live, and while their
   judge is at a distance, yet when they come to be alarmed by the sound
   of the last trumpet, their hopes will immediately expire and vanish
   away, and very often fail them in the sensible approaches of death.
   Where is the hope of the hypocrite, when God takes away his soul? But
   till the midnight cry the foolish virgins seem to entertain the same
   hopes with the wise. When they first went forth with the wise virgins,
   their lamps shone in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others, in like
   manner with the lamps of the wise virgins.--So that by this parable it
   also appears, that all visible members of the christian church, or
   kingdom of heaven, are those that profess to be gracious persons, as
   looking on themselves, and at least pretending, to be such.

   And that true piety is what persons ought to look at in themselves as
   the qualification that is proper in coming into the visible church of
   Christ, and taking the privileges of its members, I think, is evident
   also from the parable of the marriage, which the king made for his son,
   Matt. xxii.. particularly the 11th and 12th verses, "And when the king
   came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a
   wedding-garment: and he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in
   hither, not having on a wedding-garment? and he was speechless."--Mr.
   Stoddard says, (Appeal, page 4, 5.) "Here is a representation of the
   day of judgment; and such persons as come for salvation without a
   wedding-garment shall be rejected in that day. So that here being
   nothing said about the Lord's supper, all arguing from this scripture
   falls to the ground." Upon which I take leave to observe, that the
   king's coming in to see the guests, means Christ's visiting his
   professing church at the day of judgment, I make no doubt; but, that
   the guests coming into the king's house means persons coming for
   salvation at the day of judgment, I am not convinced. If it may
   properly be represented, that any reprobates will come for salvation at
   the day of judgment, they will not do so before the king appears; but
   Christ will appear first, and then they will come and cry to him for
   salvation.--Whereas, in this parable, the guests are represented as
   gathered together in the king's house before the king appears, and the
   king as coming in and finding them there; where they had entered while
   the day of grace lasted, while the door was kept open, and invitations
   given forth; and not like those who come for salvation at the day of
   judgment, Luke xiii. 25. who come "after the door is shut, and stand
   without knocking at the door." I think it is apparent beyond all
   contradiction, that by the guests coming into the king's house at the
   invitation of the servants, is intended Jews and Gentiles coming into
   the christian church, at the preaching of Christ's apostles and others,
   making profession of godliness, and expecting to partake of the eternal
   marriage supper. I showed before, that what is called the house of God
   in the New Testament, is his church. In this parable, the king first
   sends forth his servants to call them that were bidden, and they would
   not come; and they having repeatedly rejected the invitation, and
   evil-entreated the servants, the king sent forth his armies and burnt
   up their city; representing the Jews being first invited, and rejecting
   the invitations of the gospel, and persecuting Christ's ministers, and
   so provoking God to give up Jerusalem and the nation to destruction.
   Then the king sends forth his servants into the highways, to call in
   all sorts; upon which many flocked into the king's house; hereby most
   plainly representing the preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, and
   their flocking into the christian church. This gathering of the
   Gentiles into the king's house, is before the day of judgment, and the
   man without the wedding-garment among them. It fitly represents the
   resorting that should be to the children church, during the day of
   grace, through all ages; but by no means signifies men's coming for
   salvation after the day of grace is at an end, at Christ's appearing in
   the clouds of heaven. Let this parable be compared with that parallel
   place, Luke xiv. 16-24.. The company gathered to the marriage in this
   parable, plainly represents the same thing with the company of virgins
   gathered to the marriage in the other parable, Matt. xxv.. viz. the
   company of visible saints, or the company belonging to the visible
   kingdom of heaven; and therefore both parables are introduced alike
   with these words, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto," &c. As to the
   man's being cast out of the king's house when the king comes in to see
   his guests, it is agreeable to other representations made of false
   Christians being thrust out of God's kingdom at the day of judgment;
   the "servant's not abiding in the house for ever, though the son
   abideth ever;" God's "taking away their part out of the holy city, and
   blotting their names out of the book of life," &c.

   Mr. Stoddard says. "This person that had not a wedding-garment, was a
   reprobate; but every one that partakes of the Lord's supper without
   grace is not a reprobate." I answer, all that will be found in the
   king's house without grace when the king comes in to see the guests,
   are doubtless reprobates.

   If it be questioned, whether by the wedding-garment be meant true
   piety, or whether hereby is not intended moral sincerity, let the
   Scripture interpret itself; which elsewhere tells us plainly what the
   wedding-garment is at the marriage of the Son of God: Rev. xix. 7, 8.
   "The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself
   ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
   clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints."
   None, I suppose, will say, this righteousness that is so pure, is the
   common grace of lukewarm professors, and those that go about to serve
   God and mammon. The same wedding-garment we have an account of in Psal.
   xlv. 13, 14. "The king's daughter is all glorious within, her clothing
   is of wrought gold: she shall be brought unto the king in raiment of
   needle-work." But we need go no where else but to the parable itself;
   that alone determines the matter. The wedding-garment spoken of as that
   without which professors will be excluded from among God's people at
   the day of judgment, is not moral sincerity, of common grace, but
   special saving grace. If common grace were the wedding-garment
   intended, not only would the king cast out those whom he found without
   a wedding-garment, but also many with a wedding-garment: for all such
   as shall be found then with no better garment than moral sincerity,
   will be bound hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness; such a
   wedding-garment as this will not save them. So that true piety,
   unfeigned faith, or the righteousness of Christ which is upon every one
   that believeth, is doubtless the wedding-garment intended. But if a
   person has good and proper ground to proceed on in coming into the
   king's house, that knows he is without this wedding-garment, why should
   the king upbraid him, saying, "How camest thou in hither, not having a
   wedding-garment?" And why should he be speechless, when asked such a
   question? Would he not have had a good answer to make? viz. "Thou
   thyself hast given me leave to come in hither, without a
   wedding-garment." Or this, "Thy own word is my warrant; which invited
   such as had only common grace, or moral sincerity, to come in."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   What took place, in fact, in the manner and circumstances of the
   admission of members into the primitive christian church, and the
   profession they made in order to their admission, as recorded in the
   Acts of the Apostles, will further confirm the point.

   We have an account, concerning these, of their being first awakened by
   the preaching of the apostles and other ministers, and earnestly
   inquiring what they should do to be saved, and of their being directed
   to repent and believe on the Lord Jesus, as the way to have their sins
   blotted out, and to be saved; and then, upon their professing that they
   did believe, of their being baptized and admitted into the christian
   church. Now can any reasonably imagine, that these primitive converts,
   when they made that profession in order to their admission, had any
   such distinction in view as that which some now make, of two sorts of
   real Christianity, two sorts of sincere faith and repentance, one with
   a moral and another with a gracious sincerity? Or that the apostles,
   who disciplined them and baptized them, had instructed them in any such
   distinction? The history informs us of their teaching them but one
   faith and repentance; Believing in Christ that they might be saved, and
   repentance for the remission of sins; and it would be unreasonable to
   suppose, that a thought of any lower or other kind entered into the
   heads of these converts, when immediately upon their receiving such
   instructions they professed faith and repentance; or that those who
   admitted them understood them as meaning any other but what they
   professed.

   Let us particularly consider what we are informed concerning those
   multitudes, whose admission we have an account of in Acts ii.. We are
   told concerning the three thousand first converts, that they were
   greatly awakened by the preaching of the apostles, pricked in their
   hearts, made sensible of their guilt and misery; "and said to Peter,
   and the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?" i.e.
   What shall we do to be saved, and that our sins may be remitted? Upon
   which they directed them what they should do, viz. "Repent, and be
   baptized, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins."
   They are here directed into the way of salvation, viz. faith and
   repentance, with a proper profession of these.--Then, we are told, that
   they which gladly received the word were baptized; that is, They which
   appeared gladly to receive the word, or manifested and professed a
   cordial and cheerful compliance with the calls of the word, with the
   directions which the apostles had given them. The manifestation was
   doubtless by some profession, and the profession was of that repentance
   for the remission of sins, and that faith in Christ, which the apostles
   had directed them to, in answer to their inquiry, what they should do
   to be saved? I can see no ground to suppose they thought of any lower
   or other kind. And it is evident by what follows, that these converts
   now looked upon it that they had complied with these directions, and so
   were at peace with God. Their business now is to rejoice and praise God
   from day to day; "They continued stedfastly in the apostles' doctrine
   and fellowship--continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and
   breaking bread from house to house, they did eat their meat with
   gladness and singleness of heart, praising God." The account of them
   now is not as of persons under awakenings, weary and heavy-laden
   sinners, under an awful sense of guilt and wrath, pricked in their
   hearts, as before; but of persons whose sorrow was turned into joy,
   looking on themselves as now in a good estate. And in the last verse it
   is said, "The Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved;"
   in the original it is NOT ENGLISH the saved; NOT ENGLISH was a common
   appellation given to all visible Christians, or to all members of the
   visible christian church. It is as much as to say, the converted, or
   the regenerate. Being converted is in Scripture called being saved,
   because it is so in effect; they were "passed from death to life," John
   v. 24.. Tit. i. 4.. "According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing
   of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost." 2 Tim. i. 9..
   "Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling." Not that all
   who were added to the visible church were indeed regenerated, but they
   were so in profession and repute, and therefore were so in name. 1 Cor.
   i. 18.. "The preaching of the cross is to them that perish,
   foolishness; but unto us [i. e. us Christians] which are saved [NOT
   ENGLISH] it is the power of God." So those that from time to time were
   added to the primitive church, were all called NOT ENGLISH the saved.
   Before, while under awakenings, they used to inquire of their teachers,
   what they should do to be saved; and the directions that used to be
   given them, were to repent and believe in Christ; and before they were
   admitted into the church, they professed that they did so; and
   thenceforward, having visibly complied with the terms proposed, they
   were called the saved; it being supposed, that they now had obtained
   what they inquired after when they asked what they should do to be
   saved. Accordingly we find that Christ's ministers treated them no more
   as miserable perishing sinners, but as true converts; not setting
   before them their sin and misery to awaken them, and to convince them
   of the necessity of a Saviour, exhorting them to fly from the wrath to
   come, and seek conversion to God; but exhorting them to hold fast the
   profession of their faith, to continue in the grace of God, and
   persevere on holiness; endeavouring by all means to confirm and
   strengthen them in grace. Thus when a great number believed and turned
   to the Lord at Antioch, Barnabas was sent to them; "who, when he came,
   and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that
   with purpose of heart they should cleave to the Lord." Acts xi. 23..
   See also Acts xiii. 43; xiv. 22; xv. 32, 41; xx. 32.. And when the
   apostles heard of the conversion of the Gentiles to the christian
   faith, visible by their profession when they joined themselves to the
   christian church, they supposed and believed that God had given them
   saving repentance, and a heart-purifying faith. Acts xi. 18. "When they
   heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying,
   Then hath God also granted unto the Gentiles repentance unto life."
   Acts xv. 9. "And put no difference between us and them, purifying their
   hearts by faith."

   If any should here object, that when such multitudes were converted
   from Judaism and heathenism, and received into the christian church in
   so short a season, it was impossible there should be time for each one
   to say so much in his public profession, as to be any credible
   exhibition of true godliness to the church: I answer, This objection
   will soon vanish, if we particularly consider how the case was with
   those primitive converts, and how they were dealt with by their
   teachers. It was apparently the manner of the first preachers of the
   gospel, when their hearers were awakened and brought in good earnest to
   inquire what they should do to be saved, then particularly to instruct
   them in the way of salvation, and explain to them what qualifications
   must be in them, or what they must do in order to their being saved,
   agreeable to Christ's direction, Mark xvi. 15, 16.. This we find was
   the method they took with the three thousand, in the second chapter of
   Acts, verse 37-40.. And it seems, they were particular and full in it:
   they said much more to them than the words recorded. It is said, verse
   40. "With many other words did Peter testify and exhort." And this we
   find to be the course Paul and Silas took with the jailor, Acts xvi..
   Who also gave more large and full instructions than are rehearsed in
   the history. And when they had thus instructed them, they doubtless saw
   to it, either by themselves or some others who assisted them, that
   their instructions were understood by them, before they proceeded to
   baptize them. For I suppose, none with whom I have to do in this
   controversy, will maintain, from the apostles' example, that we ought
   not to insist on a good degree of doctrinal knowledge in the way and
   terms of salvation, as requisite to the admission of members into the
   church. And after they were satisfied that they well understood these
   things, it took up no great time to make a profession of them, or to
   declare that they did, or found in themselves, those things they had
   been told of as necessary to their salvation. After they had been well
   informed what saving faith and repentance were, it took up no more time
   to profess that faith and repentance, than any other.--In this case not
   only the converts' words, but the words of the preacher, which they
   consented to, and in effect made their own, are to be taken into their
   profession. For persons that are known to be of an honest character,
   and manifestly qualified with good doctrinal knowledge of the nature of
   true godliness, in the more essential things which belong to it,
   solemnly to profess they have or do those things, is to make as
   credible a profession of godliness as I insist upon. And we may also
   well suppose, that more words were uttered by the professors, and with
   other circumstances to render them credible, than are recorded in that
   very brief history, which we have of the primitive church in the Acts
   of the Apostles; and also we may yet suppose one thing further, viz.
   that in that extraordinary state of things so particular a profession
   was not requisite in order to the church's satisfaction, either of
   doctrines assented to, or of the consent and disposition of the heart,
   as may be expedient in a more ordinary state of things; for various
   reasons that might be given, would it not too much lengthen out this
   discourse.

   One thing which makes it very evident, that the inspired ministers of
   the primitive christian church looked upon saving faith as the proper
   matter of the profession requisite in order to admission into the
   church, is the story of Philip and the eunuch, in Acts viii.. For when
   the eunuch desires to be baptized, Philip makes answer, verse 37. "If
   thou believest with all tine heart, thou mayst." Which words certainly
   imply, that believing with all his heart was requisite in order to his
   coming to this ordinance properly and in a due manner. I cannot
   conceive what should move Philip to utter these words, or what he
   should aim at in them, if at the same time he supposed, that the eunuch
   had no need to look at any such qualification in himself, or at all to
   inquire whether he had such a faith, in order to determine whether he
   might present himself as the subject of baptism.

   It is said by some, that Philip intended nothing more by believing with
   all his heart, than that he believed that doctrine, that Jesus Christ
   was the Son of God, with a moral sincerity of persuasion. But here
   again I desire, that the Scripture may be allowed to be its own
   interpreter. The Scripture very much abounds with such phrases as this,
   with all the heart, or with the whole heart, in speaking of religious
   matters. And the manifest intent of them is to signify a gracious
   simplicity and godly sincerity. Thus, 1 Sam. xii. 20. "Turn not aside
   from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart." So
   verse 24. "Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your
   heart." 1 Kings viii. 23. "Who keepest covenant and mercy with thy
   servants, that walk before thee with all their heart." 1 Kings xiv. 8.
   "My servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with
   all his heart." 2 Kings x. 31. "But Jehu took no heed to walk in the
   law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart." 2 Chron. xxii. 9.
   "Jehoshaphat sought the Lord with all his heart." 2 Chron. xxxi. 20,
   21. "Hezekiah wrought that which was good and right and truth before
   the Lord his God; and in every work that he began in the service of the
   house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God,
   he did it with all his heart." Ps. ix. 1. "I will praise thee, O Lord,
   with my whole heart." Ps. lxxxvi. 12. "I will praise thee, O Lord my
   God, with all my heart, and will glorify thy name." Ps. cxi. 1. "I will
   praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, in the assembly of the
   upright." And Ps. cxix. 2. "Blessed are they that keep his testimonies,
   and that seek him with the whole heart." Verse 10. "With my whole heart
   have I sought thee." Verse 34. "Give me understanding, and I shall keep
   thy law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart." Verse 69. "The
   proud have forged a lie against me, but I will keep thy precepts with
   my whole heart." Jer. xxiv. 7. "And I will give them an heart to know
   me--for they shall return unto me with their whole heart." Joel ii. 12,
   13. "Turn ye even unto me with all your heart--and rend your heart, and
   not your garments." And we have the like phrases in innumerable other
   places. And I suppose that not so much as one place can be produced,
   wherein there is the least evidence or appearance of their being used
   to signify any thing but a gracious sincerity. And indeed it must be a
   very improper use of language, to speak of those as performing acts of
   religion with all their hearts, whose heart the Scriptures abundantly
   represent as under the reigning power of sin and unbelief--and as those
   that do not give God their hearts, but give them to other things--as
   those who go about to serve two masters, and who draw near to God with
   their lips, but have at the same time their hearts far from him,
   running more after other things; and who have not a single eye, nor
   single heart. The word believe, in the New Testament, answers to the
   word trust in the Old; and therefore the phrase used by Philip, of
   believing with all the heart, is parallel to that in Prov. iii. 5.
   "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart." And believing with the heart
   is a phrase used in the New Testament, to signify saving faith.-- Rom.
   x. 9, 10. "If thou shalt believe in thine heart, that God hath raised
   him from the dead, thou shalt be saved; for with the heart man
   believeth unto righteousness." The same is signified by obeying the
   form of doctrine from the heart, Rom. vi. 17, 18. "But God be thanked,
   that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart
   that form of doctrine which was delivered you; being then made free
   from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness." Here it is
   manifest, that saving faith is intended by obeying the form of doctrine
   from the heart. And the same is signified as if it had been said, "ye
   have believed with the heart" the form of doctrine. But Philip uses a
   yet stronger expression, he does not only say, if thou believest with
   the heart, or from the heart, bur with all thine heart. Besides, for
   any to suppose, that those same persons which the Scriptures represent
   in some places as under the power of an evil heart of unbelief--as
   double-minded with regard to their faith, (James i. 6, 7, 8..) who,
   though they believe for a while, have their hearts like a rock, in
   which faith has no root, (Luke viii. 13.)--and yet that this same sort
   of persons are in other scriptures spoken of as believing with all
   their heart; I say, for any to suppose this, would be to make the voice
   of God's word not very harmonious and consonant to itself.--And one
   thing more I would observe on this head, there is good reason to
   suppose, that Philip, while he sat in the chariot with the eunuch, and
   (as we are told) preached unto him Jesus, had showed to him the way of
   salvation--had opened to him the way of getting an interest in Christ,
   or obtaining salvation by him, viz. believing in him, agreeable to
   Christ's own direction, Mark xvi. 15, 16.. and agreeable to what we
   find to be the manner of the first preachers of the gospel. And
   therefore, when after this discourse he puts it to the eunuch, whether
   he believed with all his heart; it is natural to suppose, that he meant
   whether he found his heart acquiescing in the gospel-way of salvation,
   or whether he sincerely exercised that belief in Christ which he had
   been inculcating; and it would be natural for the eunuch so to
   understand him.

   Here if it be objected, that the eunuch's answer and the profession he
   hereupon made, (wherein he speaks nothing of his heart, but barely
   says,) I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, shows that he
   understood no more by the inquiry, than whether he gave his assent to
   that doctrine: to this I answer; we must take this confession of the
   eunuch together with Philip's words, to which they were a reply, and
   expound the one by the other. Nor is there any reason but to understand
   it in the same sense in which we find the words of the like confession
   elsewhere in the New Testament, and as the words of such a confession
   were wont to be used in those days; as particularly the words of
   Peter's confession, Matt. xvi. 16. "And Simon Peter answered and said,
   Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God." Which was a profession of
   saving faith, as appears by what Christ says upon it. And we read, 1
   Cor. xii. 3. "No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
   Ghost." Not but that a man might make a profession in these words
   without the Holy Ghost, but he could not do it heartily, or with all
   his heart. So 1 John iv. 15. "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the
   Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God." i. e. Whoever makes
   this christian confession (this profession which all Christians were
   wont to make) cordially, or with his whole heart, God dwells in him,
   &c. But it was thus that the eunuch was put upon making this
   confession.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   The epistles of the apostles to the churches, prove what has been
   asserted.

   It is apparent by the epistles of the apostles to the primitive
   christian churches, their manner of addressing and treating them
   throughout all those epistles, and what they say to them and of them,
   that all those churches were constituted of members so qualified as has
   been represented, having such a visibility of godliness as has been
   insisted on. Those who were reputed to be real saints, were taken into
   the church under a notion of their being truly pious persons, made that
   profession, and had this hope of themselves; and that natural and
   graceless men were not admitted designedly, but unawares, and beside
   the aim of the primitive churches and ministers; and that such as
   remained in good standing, and free from an offensive behaviour,
   continued to have the reputation and esteem of real saints, with the
   apostles, and one another.

   There were numbers indeed in these churches, who after their admission
   fell into an offensive behaviour; of some of whom the apostles in their
   epistles speak doubtfully; others that had behaved themselves very
   scandalously, they speak of in language that seems to suppose them to
   be wicked men.--The apostle Paul, in his epistles to the Corinthians,
   oftentimes speaks of some among them that had embraced heretical
   opinions, and had behaved themselves in a very disorderly and
   schismatical manner, whom he represents as exposed to censure, and to
   whom he threatens excommunication. On occasion of so many offences of
   this kind appearing among them that for a while had been thought well
   of, he puts them all upon examining themselves, whether they were
   indeed in the faith, and whether Christ was truly in them, as they and
   others had supposed, 2 Cor. xiii..--And the same apostle speaks of
   great numbers among the Galatians, who had made a high profession, and
   were such as he had thought well of when they were first admitted into
   the church, but since had given him cause to doubt of their state, by
   giving heed to seducers, that denied the great gospel-doctrine of
   justification by faith alone: yet notwithstanding, the apostle speaks
   of them in such language as shows surprise and disappointment, and
   implies that he had looked upon them as true Christians, and hoped that
   his labours among them had had a saving effect upon them. . "I marvel
   that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of
   Christ, unto another gospel." Gal. iv. 11. "I am afraid of you, lest I
   have bestowed upon you labour in vain." And verse 20. "I desire to be
   present with you now, and change my voice; for I stand in doubt of
   you." As much as to say, "I have heretofore addressed you with the
   voice of love and charity, as supposing you the dear children of God;
   but now I begin to think of speaking to you in other language." In the
   same chapter, to show them what little reason he had to expect that
   they would come to this, he puts them in mind of the great profession
   they had made, and the extraordinary appearances there had formerly
   been in them of fervent piety.-- Verse 15. "Where is the blessedness
   you spake of? For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, you
   would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them unto me." The
   apostle James, in his epistle, speaks of scandalous persons among the
   twelve tribes that were scattered abroad; some that were men of
   unbridled tongues; some that seem to have been a kind of antinomians in
   their principles, and of a very bitter and violent spirit, that
   reproached, condemned, and cursed their brethren, and raised wars and
   fightings among professing Christians, and were also very unclean in
   their practice, adulterers and adulteresses, Jam. iv. 4.. And in the
   fifth chapter of his epistle, he seems to speak to the unbelieving
   Jews, who persecuted the Christians, verse 6..--And the apostles also
   often speak of some who had once been admitted into the church, crept
   in unawares, but who apostatized from Christianity, and finally proved
   notoriously wicked men.--But otherwise, and as to such members of the
   visible church as continued in the same good standing and visibility of
   Christianity, wherein they were admitted, it is evident by the epistles
   of the apostles, they were all in the eye of a christian judgment truly
   pious or gracious persons. And here I desire the following things may
   be particularly observed.

   The apostles continually, in their epistles, speak to them and of them,
   as supposing and judging them to be gracious persons. Thus the apostle
   Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, chapter i. 7.. speaks of the
   members of that church as beloved of God. In chapter vi. 17, 18., &c.
   he "thanks God, that they had obeyed from the heart that form of
   doctrine which had been delivered them,--were made free from sin, and
   become the servants of righteousness," &c. The apostle in giving thanks
   to God for this, must not only have a kind of negative charity for
   them, as not knowing but that they were gracious persons, and so
   charitably hoping (as we say) that it was so; but he seems to have
   formed a positive judgment that they were such. His thanksgiving must
   at least be founded on rational probability; since it would be but a
   mocking of God, to give thanks for bestowing a mercy which at the same
   time he did not see reason positively to believe was bestowed. In Rom.
   vii. 4-6.. the apostle speaks of them as those that once were in the
   flesh, and were under the law, but now delivered from the law, and dead
   to it. In Rom. viii. 15., and following verses, he tells them, they had
   received the Spirit of adoption, and speaks of them as having the
   witness of the Spirit that they were the children of God, heirs of God,
   and joint heirs with Christ. And the whole of his discourse, to the end
   of the chapter, implies, that he esteemed them truly gracious persons.
   In Rom. ix. 23, 24.. he speaks of the christian Romans, together with
   all other Christians, both Jews and Gentiles, as vessels of mercy. In
   Rom. xiv. 6, 7, 8.. speaking of the difference that then was among
   professing Christians, in point of regard to the ceremonial
   institutions of the law, he speaks of both parties as acting from a
   gracious principle, and as those that lived to the Lord, and should die
   unto the Lord; "He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord,
   &c. For none of us liveth to himself, and no man [i e. none of us]
   dieth to himself. For whether we life, we live unto the Lord, or
   whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore or die,
   we are the Lord's." In Rom. xv. 14. he says, "I myself also am
   persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye are full of goodness." His being
   thus persuaded implies a positive judgment of charity.

   And the same apostle in his first epistle to the Corinthians, directs
   it "to the church at Corinth, that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
   called to be saints, with all that in every place call on the name of
   the Lord Jesus;" i. e. to all visible Christians through the world, or
   all the members of Christ's visible church every where. And continuing
   his speech, 1 Cor. i. 8.. he speaks of them as those "that God would
   confirm to the end, that they may be blameless in the day of our Lord
   Jesus Christ:" plainly speaking of them all as persons, in christian
   esteem, savingly converted. In the next verse, he speaks of the
   faithfulness of God as engaged thus to preserve them to salvation,
   having called them to the fellowship of his Son. And in the 30th
   verse., he speaks of them as having a saving interest in Christ; "Of
   him are ye in Christ Jesus; who of God is made unto us wisdom,
   righteousness, sanctification, and redemption." In 1 Cor. iii. 21-23..
   he says to the members of the church of Corinth, "All things are yours,
   whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
   or things present, or things to come; all are yours, and ye are
   Christ's." In 1 Cor. iv. 15.. he tells them, he had begotten them
   through the gospel. In 1 Cor. vi. 1-3.. he speaks of them as "those who
   shall judge the world, and shall judge angels." And in verse 11. he
   says to them, "Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified, in
   the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God." And in 1 Cor.
   xv. 49., to the end, he speaks of them as having an interest, with him
   and other Christians, in the happiness and glory of the resurrection of
   the just. And in his second epistle, 2 Cor. i. 7. he says to them, "Our
   hope of you is stedfast; knowing that as you are partakers of the
   sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation." This stedfast hope
   implies a positive judgment. We must here understand the apostle to
   speak of such members of the church of Corinth, as had not visibly
   backslidden. Again, in the 14th and 15th verses., he speaks of a
   confidence which he had, that they should be his rejoicing in the day
   of the Lord Jesus. In all reason we must conclude, there was a
   visibility of grace, carrying with it an apparent probability in the
   eyes of the apostle, which was the ground of this his confidence. Such
   an apparent probability, and his confidence as built upon it, are both
   expressed in 2 Cor. iii. 3, 4. "Ye are manifestly declared to be the
   epistle of Christ, ministered by us; written not with ink, but with the
   Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshy
   tables of the heart; and such trust have we through Christ to
   God-ward." And in verse 18.. the apostle speaks of them, with himself
   and other Christians, as all with open face beholding, as in a glass,
   the glory of the Lord, and being changed into the same image, from
   glory to glory.

   And in the epistle to the churches of Galatia. Gal. iv. 26.. the
   apostle speaks of visible Christians, as visibly belonging to heaven,
   the Jerusalem which is above. And, verse 28, 29.. represents them to be
   the children of the promise, as Isaac was; and born after the Spirit.
   In the 6th verse. of the same chapter, he says to the christian
   Galatians, "Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his
   Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father." And Gal. vi. 1.. he speaks
   of those of them that had not fallen into scandal, as spiritual
   persons.

   In his epistle to that great church at Ephesus, he blesses God on
   behalf of its members, as being, together with himself and all the
   faithful in Christ Jesus, "Chosen in him before the foundation of the
   world, to be holy and without blame before him in love, being
   predestinated to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself,
   according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory
   of his grace, wherein God had made them accepted in the beloved: in
   whom they had redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins."
   In Eph. i. 13, 14.. he thus writes to them, "In whom ye also
   trusted--In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy
   Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
   redemption of the purchased possession."

   And in Eph. ii. at the beginning; "You hath he quickened, who were dead
   in trespasses and sins." With much more, showing that they were, in a
   charitable esteem, regenerated persons, and heirs of salvation.

   So in the epistle to the church at Philippi, the apostle tells them,
   that he "thanks God upon every remembrance of them, for their
   fellowship in the gospel; being confident of this very thing, that he
   which had begun a good work in them, would perform it until the day of
   Christ: even (says he) as it is meet for me to think this of you all."
   If it was meet for him to think this of them, and to be confident of
   it, he had at least some appearing rational probability to found his
   judgment and confidence upon; for surely it is not meet for reasonable
   creatures to think at random, and be confident without reason. In Phil.
   i. 25, 26. he speaks of his "confidence that he should come to them for
   their furtherance and joy of faith, that their rejoicing might be more
   abundant in Christ Jesus." Which words certainly suppose that they were
   persons who had already received Christ, and comfort in him; had
   already obtained faith and joy in Christ, and only needed to have it
   increased.

   In the epistle to the members of the church at Colosse, the apostle
   saluting them in the beginning of the epistle, "gives thanks for their
   faith in Christ Jesus, and love to all saints, and the hope laid up for
   them in heaven;" and speaks of "the gospel bringing forth fruit in
   them, since the day they knew the grace of God in truth;" i. e. since
   the day of their saving conversion. In Col. i. 8. he speaks of "their
   love in the Spirit;" and verse 12-14. as "made meet to be partakers of
   the inheritance of the saints in light; as being delivered from the
   power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son;
   as having redemption through Christ's blood, and the forgiveness of
   sins." In Col. iii. at the beginning, he speaks of them as "risen with
   Christ; as being dead; [i. e. to the law, to sin, and the world;] as
   having their life hid with Christ in God;" and being such as, "when
   Christ their life should appear, should appear with him in glory." In
   verse 7. he speaks of them as "having once walked and lived in lusts,
   but as having now put off the old man with his deeds, and put on the
   new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that
   created him."

   In the first epistle to the members of the church at Thessalonica, in
   words annexed to his salutation, chapter i. he declares what kind of
   visibility there was of their election of God, in the appearance there
   had been of true and saving conversion, and their consequent holy life,
   verse 3-7.. And in the beginning of the second epistle., he speaks of
   their faith and love greatly increasing; and in verse 7.. expresses his
   confidence of meeting them in eternal rest, when the Lord Jesus Christ
   should be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels. And in 2 Thes.
   ii. 13.. he gives thanks to God, that from the beginning he had chosen
   them to salvation.

   In the epistle to the christian Hebrews, though the apostle speaks of
   some that once belonged to their churches, but had apostatized and
   proved themselves hypocrites; yet concerning the rest that remained in
   good standing, he says, Heb. vi. 9. "I am persuaded better things of
   you, and things that accompany salvation." Where we may again note, his
   being thus persuaded evidently implies a positive judgment. And in Heb.
   xii. 22., &c. he speaks of them as visibly belonging to the glorious
   society of heaven. And in Heb. xiii. 5, 6.. he speaks of them as those
   who may boldly say, The Lord is my helper.

   The apostle James, writing to the Christians of the twelve tribes which
   were scattered abroad, speaks of them as regenerated persons, meaning,
   as I observed before, those which were in good standing. Jam. i. 18.
   "Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should be a
   kind of first-fruits of his creatures." The apostle Peter writing to
   the Jewish Christians, scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia,
   Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, (large countries, and therefore they
   must in the whole be supposed to be a great multitude of people,) to
   all these, gives the title of elect, according to the foreknowledge of
   God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience,
   and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And in the verses next
   following, speaks of them as regenerated, "or begotten again to a
   lively hope, to an inheritance incorruptible," &c. And as "kept by the
   power of God through faith unto salvation." And says to them in verse
   8, 9. "Whom (namely, Christ) having not seen, ye love; in whom though
   now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
   full of glory; receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of
   your souls." And in verse 18., to the end, the apostle speaks of them
   as "redeemed from their vain conversation, by the precious blood of
   Christ.--And as having purified their souls in obeying the truth
   through the Spirit.--Being born again of incorruptible seed," &c. And
   in the former part of chapter ii.. he speaks of them as "living stones,
   coming to Christ, and on him built up a spiritual house, an holy
   priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through
   Jesus Christ.--And as those that believe, to whom Christ is
   precious.--As a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a
   peculiar people, called out of darkness into marvellous light." The
   church at Babylon, occasionally mentioned in 1 Pet. v. 13.. is said to
   be elected together with them. And in his second epistle (which appears
   by 2 Pet. iii. 1.. to be written to the same persons) the inscription
   is, To them which have obtained like precious faith with us, i. e. with
   the apostles and servants of Christ. And in the third chapter, he tells
   them, both his epistles were designed to stir up theirpure minds.

   In the first epistle of John, written (for ought appears) to professing
   Christians in general, 1 John. ii. 12, &c the apostle tells them, "He
   writes to them because their sins were forgiven, because they had known
   him that was from the beginning.--Because they had overcome the wicked
   one," &c. In verse 20, 21.. he tells them, they have an unction from
   the Holy One, and know all things; and that he did not write to them
   because they had not known the truth, but because they had known it,
   &c. And in verse 27. he says, "The anointing which ye have received of
   him, abideth in you, and ye need not that any man should teach you; but
   as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is true, and is
   no lie; and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him." And in
   the beginning of chapter iii.. he addresses them as those "who were the
   sons of God, who when he should appear should be like him, because they
   should see him as he is." In 1 John iv. 4. he says, "Ye are of God,
   little children, and have overcome," &c.

   The apostle Jude, in his general epistle, speaks much of apostates and
   their wickedness; but to other professing Christians, that had not
   fallen away, he says, verse 20, 21. "But ye, beloved, building up
   yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep
   yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
   Christ unto eternal life:" plainly supposing, that they had professed
   faith with love to God our Saviour, and were by the apostle considered
   as his friends and lovers.--Many other passages to the like purpose
   might be observed in the epistles, but these may suffice.

   Now how unaccountable would these things be, if the members of the
   primitive christian churches were not admitted into them under any such
   notion as their being really godly persons and heirs of eternal life,
   nor with any respect to such a character appearing on them; and that
   they themselves joined to these churches without any such pretence, as
   having no such opinion of themselves!

   But it is particularly evident that they had such an opinion of
   themselves, as well as the apostles of them, by many things the
   apostles say in their epistles. Thus, in Rom. viii. 15, 16.. the
   apostle speaks of them as "having received the Spirit of adoption, the
   Spirit of God bearing witness with their spirits, that they were the
   children of God."--And Rom. v. 2. of "their rejoicing in hope of the
   glory of God."--In 1 Cor. i. 7. he speaks of them as "waiting for the
   coming of the Lord Jesus." In 1 Cor. xv. 17. the apostle says to the
   members of the church at Corinth, "If Christ be not raised, your faith
   is vain, ye are yet in your sins:" plainly supposing, that they hoped
   their sins were forgiven.--In Philip. i. 25, 26. the apostle speaks of
   his coming to Philippi, to "increase their joy of faith, and that their
   rejoicing in Christ might be more abundant:" implying, (as was observed
   before,) that they had received comfort already, in some degree, as
   supposing themselves to have a saving interest in Christ.--In 1 Thess.
   i. 10. he speaks of the members of the church at Thessalonica as
   "waiting for Christ from heaven, as one who had delivered them from the
   wrath to come."--In Heb. vi. 9, 10. he speaks of the christian Hebrews
   as having that "hope which was an anchor of their souls."--The apostle
   Peter, 1 Pet. i. 3-9. speaks of the visible Christians he wrote to, as
   being "begotten to a lively hope, of an inheritance incorruptible,
   &c.--Wherein they greatly rejoiced," &c.--And even the members of the
   church of Laodicea, the very worst of all the seven churches of Asia,
   yet looked upon themselves as truly gracious persons, and made that
   profession; they "said they were rich, and increased in goods, and knew
   not that they were wretched and miserable," &c. Rev. iii. 17..

   It is also evident, that the members of these primitive churches had
   this judgment one of another, and of the members of the visible church
   of Christ in general. In 1 Thess. iv. 13, &c. the apostle exhorts the
   christian Thessalonians, in mourning for their deceased friends who
   were visible Christians, not to sorrow as the hopeless heathen were
   wont to do for their departed friends; upon this consideration, that
   they had reason to expect to meet them again in glorious circumstances
   at the day of judgment, never to part more. The ground of comfort
   concerning their dead friends, is evidently something more than such a
   hope as we ought to have of all that profess christian doctrines, and
   are not scandalous in life, whom we must forbear to censure, because we
   do not know but they are true saints.--The members of the church of
   Sardis, next to Laodicea, the worst of the seven churches of Asia, yet
   had a name that they lived; though Christ, who speaks to these seven
   churches from heaven, in the character of the Searcher of hearts, (see
   Rev. ii. 23..) explicitly tells them, that they were dead; perhaps all
   in a dead frame, and the most in a dead state.

   These things evidently show, how all the christian churches through the
   world were constituted in those days; and what sort of holiness or
   saintship it was, that all visible Christians in good standing had a
   visibility and profession of, in that apostolic age; and also what sort
   of visibility of this they had, viz. not only that which gave them
   right to a kind of negative charity, or freedom from censure, but that
   which might justly induce a positive judgment in their favour. The
   churches to whom these epistles were written, were all the principal
   churches in the world; some of them very large, as the churches at
   Corinth and Ephesus. Some of the epistles were directed to all the
   churches through large countries where the gospel had great success, as
   the epistle to the Galatians. The epistle to the Hebrews was written to
   all the Jewish Christians in the land of Canaan, in distinction from
   the Jews that lived in other countries, who were called Hellenists or
   Grecians, because they generally spake the Greek tongue. The epistles
   of Peter were written to all the christian Jews through many countries,
   Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; containing great
   numbers of Jews, beyond any other Gentile countries. The epistle of
   James was directed to all christian Jews, scattered abroad through the
   whole world. The epistles of John and Jude, for ought appears in those
   epistles, were directed to all visible Christians through the whole
   world. And the apostle Paul directs the first epistle to the
   Corinthians, not only to the members of that church, but to all
   professing Christians on the face of the earth: 1 Cor. i. 2; xiv. 33..
   calling them all churches of the saints. And by what Christ says to the
   churches of Sardis and Laodicea in the Apocalypse, of whom more evil is
   said than of any christian churches spoken of in the New Testament, it
   appears that even the members of those churches looked on themselves as
   in a state of salvation, and had such a name with others.

   Here possible some may object, and say, It will not follow from the
   apostles speaking to and of the members of the primitive church after
   the manner which has been observed, as though they supposed them to be
   gracious persons, that therefore a profession and appearance of this
   was looked upon in those days as a requisite qualification for
   admission into the visible church; because another reason may be given
   for it, viz. Such was the extraordinary state of things at that day,
   that the greater part of those converted from heathenism and Judaism to
   Christianity, were hopefully gracious persons, by reason of its being a
   day of such large communications of divine grace, and such great and
   unavoidable sufferings of professors, &c.--And the apostles knowing
   those facts, might properly speak to and of the churches, as if they
   were societies of truly gracious persons, because there was just ground
   on such accounts, to think the greater part of them to be so; although
   no profession or visibility of this was requisite in their members by
   the constitution of those churches, and the door of admission was as
   open for others as for such.

   But this cannot be a satisfactory nor a true account of the matter, if
   we consider the following things.

   (1.) The apostles in the very superscription or direction of their
   letters to these churches, and in their salutation at the beginning of
   their epistles speak of them as gracious persons. For instance, the
   apostle Peter, in the direction of his first letter to all professing
   Jewish Christians through many countries, says thus, "To the strangers
   scattered through Pontus, &c. elect, according to the foreknowledge of
   God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience,
   and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." And in his directing his
   second epistle to the same persons, he says, "Simon Peter, a servant
   and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like
   precious faith with us," &c. And the apostle Paul directs his epistle
   to the Romans thus, "To them that be at Rome, beloved of God." So he
   directs his first epistle to the Corinthians thus, "Unto the church of
   God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus."
   In what sense he means sanctified, his following words show, verse
   4-9.. The same was before observed of words annexed to the apostle's
   salutations, in the beginning of several of the epistles. This shows,
   that the apostles extend this character as far as they do the epistles
   themselves. Which surely would be very improper, and not agreeable to
   truth, if the apostles at the same time knew very well that such a
   character did not belong to members of churches, as such, and that they
   were not received into those churches with any regard to such a
   character, or upon the account of any right they had to be esteemed
   such persons. In the superscription of letters to societies of men, we
   are wont to give them that title or denomination which properly belongs
   to them as members of such a body. Thus, if one should write to the
   Royal Society in London, or the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, it
   would be proper and natural to give them the title of Learned; for
   whether every one of the members truly deserve the epithet, or not, yet
   the title is agreeable to their profession, and what is known to be
   aimed at, and is professedly insisted on, in the admission of members.
   But if one should write to the House of Commons, or to the East India
   Company, and in his superscription give them the title of Learned, this
   would be very improper, and ill-judged; because that character does not
   belong to their profession as members of that body, and learning is not
   a qualification insisted on in their admission of members. Nor would it
   excuse the impropriety, though the writer might, from his special
   acquaintance, know it to be fact, that the greater part of them were
   men of learning. To inscribe a letter to them, would be something
   strange; but more strange, if it should appear, by various instances,
   to be a custom so to direct letters to such societies; as it seems to
   be the manner of the apostles, in their epistles to christian churches,
   to address them under titles which imply a profession and visibility of
   true holiness.

   (2.) The apostle John, in his general epistle, very plainly manifests,
   that all to whom he wrote were supposed to have true grace, inasmuch as
   he declares this to be the qualification he respects in writing to
   them; and lets them know, he writes to them for that reason, because
   they are supposed to be persons of the character of such as have known
   God, overcome the wicked one, and have had their sins forgiven them. 1
   John ii. 12-14, 21..

   (3.) The apostles, when speaking of visible Christians, as a society,
   and what belongs to such a kind of society, speak of it as visibly (i.
   e. in profession and reputation) a society of gracious persons. So the
   apostle Peter speaks of them as a spiritual house, an holy and royal
   priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, a chosen or elect
   generation, called out of darkness into marvellous light, 1 Pet. ii.
   9..--The apostle Paul also speaks of them as the family of God, Eph.
   ii. 19.. And in the next chapter he explains himself to mean that
   family a part of which is in heaven; i. e. they were by profession a
   part of that divine family.

   (4.) The apostle Paul speaks often and expressly of the members of the
   churches to whom he wrote, as all of them in esteem and visibility
   truly gracious persons. Philip. i. 6. "Being confident of this very
   thing, that he which has begun a good work in you will perform it until
   the day of the Lord Jesus Christ: even as it is meet for me to think
   this of you all" (that is, all singly taken, not collectively,
   according to the distinction before observed). So Gal. iv. 26.
   "Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of us all."Rom. vi. 3.
   "As many of us as have been baptized into Christ, have been baptized
   into his death." Here he speaks of all that have been baptized; and in
   the continuation of the discourse, explaining what is here said, he
   speaks of their "being dead to sin, no longer under the law, but under
   grace; having obeyed the form of doctrine from the heart, being made
   free from sin, and become the servants of righteousness," &c. Rom. xiv.
   7, 8. "None of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself;"
   (taken together with the context;) 2 Cor. iii. 18. "We all with open
   face beholding as in a glass," &c.; and "Ye are all the children of God
   by faith."

   (5.) It is evident, that even in those churches where the greater part
   of the members were not true saints, as in those degenerate churches of
   Sardis and Laodicea, which we may suppose were become very lax in their
   admissions and discipline; yet they looked upon themselves as truly
   gracious persons, and had with others the reputation of such.

   (6.) If we should suppose, that, by reason of the extraordinary state
   of things in that day, the apostles had reason to think the greater
   part of the members of churches to be true Christians, yet unless
   profession and appearance of true Christianity was their proper
   qualification and the ground of their admission--and unless it was
   supposed that all of them esteemed themselves true Christians--it is
   altogether unaccountable that the apostles in their epistles to them
   never make any express particular distinction between those different
   sorts of members. If the churches were made up of persons who looked on
   themselves in so different a state--some the children of God, and
   others the children of the devil, some the high favourites of heaven
   and heirs of eternal glory, others the children of wrath, being under
   condemnation to eternal death, and every moment in danger of dropping
   into hell--why do the apostles make no distinction in their manner of
   addressing them, and in the counsels, reproofs, and warnings they gave
   them? Why do they never direct their speech to the unconverted members
   of churches, in particular, in a manner tending to awaken them, and
   make them sensible of the miserable condition they were in, and press
   them to seek the converting grace of God? It is to be considered, that
   the apostle Paul was very particularly acquainted with the
   circumstances of most of those churches to whom he wrote; for he had
   been among them, was their spiritual father, had been the instrument of
   gathering and founding those churches, and they had received all their
   instructions and directions relating to Christianity and their
   soul--concerns from him; nor can it be questioned but that many of them
   had opened the case of their souls to him. And if he was sensible, that
   there was a number among them who made no pretensions to a regenerate
   state, and that none had reason to judge them to be in such a state, he
   knew that the sin of such--who lived in the rejection of a Saviour,
   even in the very house of God, in the midst of gospel-light, and in
   violation of the most sacred vows--was peculiarly aggravated, and their
   guilt and state peculiarly dreadful. Why should he therefore never
   particularly and distinctly point his addresses to such, applying
   himself to them in much compassion to their souls, and putting them in
   mind of their awful circumstances? But instead of this, we observe him
   continually lumping all together, and indifferently addressing the
   whole body, as if they were all in happy circumstances, expressing his
   charity for them all, and congratulating them all in their glorious and
   eternal privilege. Instead of speaking to them in such a manner as
   should have a tendency to alarm them with a sense of danger, we see
   him, on the contrary, calling on all without distinction to rejoice.
   Philip. iii. 1. "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord." So, 2 Cor.
   xiii. 11. "Finally, brethren, be of good comfort." Philip. iv. 4..
   "Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again I say, Rejoice." The matter is
   insisted upon, as though rejoicing were a duty especially proper for
   them, and what they had the highest reason for. The apostle not only
   did not preach terror to those to whom he wrote, but is careful to
   guard them against fears of God's wrath. In 1 Thess. v. at the
   beginning, the apostle observes, how that Christ will come on ungodly
   men "as a thief in the night; and when they shall say, Peace and
   safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them, as travail on a
   woman with child, and they shall not escape: "then immediately he uses
   caution, that the members of the church at Thessalonica should not take
   this to themselves, and be terrified, as though they were in danger;
   and says, in the next words, "But ye, brethren, are not in darkness,
   that that day should overtake you as a thief; ye are all the children
   of light, and the children of the day." Verse 9-11. "For God hath not
   appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
   Christ; who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
   together with him. Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one
   another; even as also ye do." And verse 16. "Rejoice evermore." How
   diverse is this way of treating churches, from the method in which
   faithful ministers are wont to deal with their congregations, wherein
   are many that make no pretence to true piety, and from the way in which
   Mr. Stoddard was wont to deal with his congregation. And how would he
   have undoubtedly judged such a way of treating them the most direct
   course in the world eternally to undo them! And shall we determine that
   the apostle Paul was one of those prophets, who daubed with untempered
   mortar, and sewed pillows under all arm-holes, and healed the hurt of
   immortal souls slightly, crying, Peace, peace, when there was no
   peace.--These things make it most evident, that the primitive churches
   were not constituted as those modern churches, where persons knowing
   and owning themselves unregenerate, are admitted, on principle.

   If it be here objected, that the apostle sometimes exhorts those to
   whom he writes, to put off the old man, and put on the new man, and to
   be renewed in the spirit of their minds, &c. as exhorting them to seek
   conversion: I answer, that the meaning is manifestly this, That they
   should mortify the remains of corruption, or the old man, and turn more
   and more from sin to God. Thus he exhorts the Ephesians to be renewed,
   &c. Eph. iv. 22, 23.. whom yet he had before in the same epistle
   abundantly represented as savingly renewed already; as has been before
   observed. And the like might be shown of other instances.

   (7.) It is clear, not only that the greater part of the members of the
   primitive churches were to appearance true Christians; but that they
   were taken in under that notion, and because there appeared in them
   grounds of such an estimation of them. When any happened to be admitted
   that were otherwise, it was beside their aim; inasmuch as when others
   were admitted, they are represented as brought or crept in unawares.
   Thus the matter is represented by the apostles. Jude, verse 4. "There
   are certain men crept in unawares--ungodly men, turning the grace of
   God into lasciviousness." Gal. ii. 4. "False brethren, unawares brought
   in." If it be said, these here spoken of were openly scandalous persons
   and heretics: I answer, they were not openly scandalous when they were
   brought in; nor is there any reason to think they were heretics when
   admitted, though afterwards they turned apostates. Mr. Stoddard says,
   It does not follow that all hypocrites crept in unawares because some
   did. (Appeal, p. 17.) To which I would humbly say, It must be certainly
   true with respect to all hypocrites who were admitted, either that the
   church which admitted them was aware they were such, or else was not.
   If there were some of whom the church was aware that they were
   hypocrites, at the time when they were taken in, then the church, in
   admitting them, did not follow the rule that Mr. Stoddard often
   declares himself to suppose ought to be followed in admitting members,
   viz. to admit none but what in a judgment of rational charity are true
   Christians. (Appeal, p. 2, 3, 10, 28, 33, 67, 73, 93, 94.) But that not
   only heretics and designing dissemblers crept in unawares, but that all
   false brethren, all church-members not truly gracious, did so, appears
   by such being represented as bastards in a family, who are false
   children and false heirs, brought into it unawares, and imposed upon
   the disposers of those privileges by stealth.--Heb. xii. 8. "If ye are
   without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
   and not sons."

   Thus it is abundantly manifest, from the apostolical writings, how the
   visible church of Christ, through the whole world, was at first
   constituted, under the direction of the apostles themselves, who
   regulated it according to the infallible guidance of the Spirit of
   their great Lord and Master.--And doubtless, as the christian church
   was constituted then, so it ought to be constituted now. What better
   rule have we for our ecclesiastical regulations in other respects, than
   what was done in the primitive churches, under the apostles' own
   direction; as particularly the standing officers of the church,
   presbyters and deacons, the method of introducing ministers in their
   ordination, &c.? In this matter that I have insisted on, I think the
   Scripture is abundantly more full, than in those other things.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   The Scripture represents the visible church of Christ, as a society
   having its several members united by the bond of christian brotherly
   love.

   Besides that general benevolence or charity which the saints have to
   mankind, and which they exercise towards both the evil and the good in
   common, there is a peculiar and very distinguishing kind of affection,
   that every true Christian experiences towards those whom he looks upon
   as truly gracious persons. The soul, at least at times, is very
   sensible and sweetly knit to such persons, and there is an ineffable
   oneness of heart with them; whereby, to use the scripture phrase, (Acts
   iv. 32.) "They are of one heart and one soul:" which holy affection is
   exercised towards others on account of the spiritual image of God in
   them, their supposed relation to God as his children, and to Christ as
   his members, and to them as their spiritual brethren in Christ. This
   sacred affection is a very good and distinguishing note of true grace,
   much spoken of as such in Scripture, under the name of NOT ENGLISH the
   love of the brethren, or brotherly love; and is called by Christ, "the
   receiving a righteous man in the name of a righteous man; and receiving
   one of Christ's little ones in the name of a disciple, or because he
   belongs to Christ;" (Matt. x. 41, 42.. Mark ix. 41..) and a "loving one
   another as Christ has loved them;" (John xiii. 34; xv. 13-15..) having
   a peculiar image of that oneness which is between Christ himself and
   his saints. Compare John xvii. 20, to the end..

   This love the apostles are often directing Christians to exercise
   towards fellow-members of the visible church; as in Rom. xii. 10.. "Be
   ye kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love." The words
   are much more emphatical in the original, and represent in a more
   lively manner, that peculiar endearment there is between gracious
   persons, or those that look on one another as such; NOT ENGLISH NOT
   ENGLISH NOT ENGLISH The expressions properly signify, cleaving one to
   another with brotherly, natural, strong endearment. With the like
   emphasis and energy does the apostle Peter express himself, "Seeing ye
   have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto
   unfeigned love of the brethren, (NOT ENGLISH; NOT ENGLISH; NOT ENGLISH)
   see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." Again,
   "Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love
   as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous." The words in the Greek are much
   more significant, elegant, and forcible;

   NOT ENGLISH The same peculiar endearment the apostle has doubtless
   respect to in 1 Pet. iv. 8. "Above all things have fervent charity
   among yourselves." And from time to time, he considers it as a note of
   their piety. Col. i. 4.. "We heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and
   of the love which ye have to all saints." 1 Thess. iv. 9.. "As touching
   brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye yourselves
   are taught of God to love one another." So Philem. 5.. "Hearing of the
   love and faith, which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus Christ, and
   towards all saints." And this is what he exhorts to, Heb. xiii. 1..
   "Let brotherly love continue." 1 Thess. v. 26.. "Greet all the brethren
   with an holy kiss." Compare 1 Cor. xvi. 20.. 2 Cor. xiii. 12.. and 1
   Pet. v. 14..

   This NOT ENGLISH or love to the brethren, is that virtue which the
   apostle John so much insists on in his first epistle, as one of the
   most distinguishing characteristics of true grace, and a peculiar
   evidence that God dwelleth in us, and we in God. By which must needs be
   understood a love to saints as saints, or on account of the spiritual
   image of God supposed to be in them, and their spiritual relation to
   God; according as it has always been understood by orthodox divines. No
   reasonable doubt can be made, but that the apostle John, in this
   epistle, has respect to the same sort of love, which Christ prescribed
   to his disciples, in that which he called by way of eminency his
   commandment, and his new commandment, which he gave as a great mark of
   their being truly his disciples, as this same apostle gives an account
   in his gospel; and to which he plainly refers, when speaking of the
   love of the brethren in his epistle, 1 John. ii. 7, 8.; iii. 23.. But
   that love, which Christ speaks of in his new commandment, is spoken of
   as between those that Christ loves, or is supposed to love; and which
   has his love to them for its ground and pattern. And if this NOT
   ENGLISH this love of the brethren, so much spoken of by Christ, and by
   the apostles Paul and John, be not that peculiar affection which
   gracious persons or true saints have one to another, which is so great
   a part, and so remarkable an exercise, of true grace, where is it
   spoken of at all in the New Testament?

   We see how often the apostles exhort visible Christians to exercise
   this affection to all other members of the visible church of Christ,
   and how often they speak of the members of the visible church as
   actually thus united, in places already mentioned. In 2 Cor. ix. 14..
   the apostle speaks of the members of other churches loving the members
   of the church of Corinth, with this peculiar endearment and oneness of
   heart, for the grace of God in them; "And by their prayer for you,
   which long after you, for the exceeding grace of God in you." The word
   translated long after, is NOT ENGLISH ; which properly signifies to
   love with an exceeding and dear love. And this is represented as the
   bond that unites all the members of the visible church; Acts iv. 32..
   "And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and one
   soul." This is the same thing which elsewhere is called being of one
   mind: 1 Pet. iii. 8. "Finally, be ye all of one mind." And being of the
   same mind; 1 Cor. i. 10.. "That ye he perfectly joined together in the
   same mind." And Philip. iv. 2.. "I beseech Euodias, and beseech
   Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord." And being
   like-minded, (the word is the same in the Greek,) Rom. xv. 5, 6.. "Now
   the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one
   towards another; that ye may with one mind, and one mouth, glorify God,
   even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." There is reason to think,
   that it is this oneness of mind, or being of one heart and soul, is
   meant by that charity which the apostle calls the bond of perfectness,
   Col. iii. 14.. and represents as the bond of union between all the
   members of the body, in Eph. iv. 15, 16.. "But speaking the truth in
   love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even
   Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted
   by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working
   in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the
   edifying itself in love."

   Herein seems much to consist the nature of scandal in the members of a
   church, viz. such an offence as is a wound and interruption to this
   kind of affection, being a stumbling--block to a christian judgment, in
   regard of its esteem of the offender as a real Christian, and what much
   lessens the visibility of his christian character. And therefore when
   scandal is removed by visible repentance, the church is directed to
   confirm their love to the offender, 2 Cor. ii. 8..

   Now this intimate affection towards others as brethren in Christ and
   fellow-members of him, must have some apprehension of the
   understanding, some judgment of the mind for its foundation. To say,
   that we must thus love others as visible members of Christ, if any
   thing else be meant, than that we must love them because they are
   visibly, or as they appear to our judgment, real members of Christ, is
   in effect to say, that we must thus love them without any foundation at
   all. In order to a real and fervent affection to another, on account of
   some amiableness of qualification or relation, the mind must first
   judge there is that amiableness in the object. The affections of the
   mind are not so at command that we can make them strongly to go forth
   to an object as having such loveliness, when at the same time we do not
   positively judge any such thing concerning them, but only hope it may
   be so, because we see no sufficient reason to determine the contrary.
   There must be a positive dictate of the understanding, and some degree
   of satisfaction of the judgment, to be a ground of that oneness of
   heart and soul, which is agreeable to scripture representations of NOT
   ENGLISH , or brotherly love. And a supposition only of that moral
   sincerity and virtue, or common grace, which some insist upon, though
   it may be a sufficient ground of this intimate affection to them as
   brethren in the family of a heavenly Father,--this fervent love to them
   in the bowels of Jesus Christ. For gospel-sinners and domestic enemies
   in the house of God, Christians know, are of all others the most
   hateful enemies to Christ.

   It well agrees with the wisdom of Christ, with that peculiar favour he
   has manifested to his saints, and with his dealings towards them in
   many other respects, to suppose, he has made provision in his
   institutions, that they might have the comfort of uniting with such as
   their hearts are united with, in some special religious exercises and
   duties of worship, and visible intercourse with their Redeemer; that
   they should join with those concerning whom they can have some
   satisfaction of mind, that they are cordially united with them in
   adoring and expressing their love to their common Lord and Saviour,
   that they may with one mind, with one heart, and one soul, as well as
   with one mouth, glorify him; as in the forementioned Rom. xv. 5, 6..
   compared with Acts iv. 32.. This seems to be what this heavenly
   affection naturally inclines to. And how eminently fit and proper for
   this purpose is the sacrament of the Lord's supper, the christian
   church's great feast of love; wherein Christ's people sit together as
   brethren in the family of God, at their Father's table, to feast on the
   love of their Redeemer, commemorating his sufferings for them, and his
   dying love to them, and sealing their love to him and one another!--It
   is hardly credible, that Christ has so ordered things as that there are
   no instituted social acts of worship, wherein his saints are to
   manifest their respect to him, but such as wherein they ordinarily are
   obliged (if the rule for admissions be carefully attended) to join with
   a society of fellow-worshippers, concerning whom they have no reason to
   think but that the greater part of them are unconverted, (and are more
   provoking enemies to that Lord they love and adore, than most of the
   very heathen,) which Mr. Stoddard supposes to be the case with the
   members of the visible church. Appeal, p. 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   It is necessary, that those who partake of the Lord's supper, should
   judge themselves truly and cordially to accept of christ, as their only
   Saviour and chief good; for of this the actions which communicants
   perform at the Lord's table, are a solemn profession.

   There is in the Lord's supper a mutual solemn profession of the two
   parties transacting the covenant of grace, and visibly united in that
   covenant; the Lord Christ by his minister, on the one hand, and the
   communicants (who are professing believers) on the other. The
   administrator of the ordinance acts in the quality of Christ's
   minister, acts in his name, as representing him; and stands in the
   place where Christ himself stood at the first administration of this
   sacrament, and in the original institution of the ordinance. Christ, by
   the speeches and actions of the minister, makes a solemn profession of
   his part in the covenant of grace: he exhibits the sacrifice of his
   body broken and his blood shed; and in the minister's offering the
   sacramental bread and wine to the communicants, Christ presents himself
   to the believing communicants, as their propitiation and bread of life;
   and by these outward signs confirms and seals his sincere engagements
   to be their Saviour and food, and to impart to them all the benefits of
   his propitiation and salvation. And they, in receiving what is offered,
   and eating and drinking the symbols of Christ's body and blood, also
   profess their part in the covenant of grace: they profess to embrace
   the promises and lay hold of the hope set before them, to receive the
   atonement, to receive Christ as their spiritual food, and to feed upon
   him in their hearts by faith. Indeed what is professed on both sides is
   the heart: for Christ, in offering himself, professes the willingness
   of his heart to be theirs who truly receive him; and the communicants,
   on their part, profess the willingness of their hearts to receive him,
   which they declare by significant actions. They profess to take Christ
   as their spiritual food, and bread of life. To accept of Christ as our
   bread of life, is to accept of him as our Saviour and portion; as food
   is both the means of preserving life, and is also the refreshment and
   comfort of life. The signification of the word, manna, that great type
   of this bread of life, is a portion. That which God offers to us as our
   food, he offers as our portion; and that which we accept as our food,
   we accept as our portion. Thus the Lord's supper is plainly a mutual
   renovation, confirmation, and seal of the covenant of grace: both the
   covenanting parties profess their consent to their respective parts in
   the covenant, and each affixes his seal to his profession. And there is
   in this ordinance the very same thing acted over in profession and
   sensible signs, which is spiritually transacted between Christ and his
   spouse in the covenant that unites them. Here we have from time to time
   the glorious bridegroom exhibiting himself with his great love that is
   stronger than death, appearing clothed in robes of grace, and engaging
   himself, with all his glory and love, and its infinite benefits, to be
   theirs, who receive him: and here we have his spouse accepting this
   bridegroom, choosing him for her friend, her only Saviour and portion,
   and relying on him for all his benefits. And thus the
   covenant-transaction of this spiritual marriage is confirmed and
   sealed, from time to time. The actions of the communicants at the
   Lord's table have as expressive and significant a language, as the most
   solemn words. When a person in this ordinance takes and eats and drinks
   those things which represent Christ, the plain meaning and implicit
   profession of these his actions, is this, "I take this crucified Jesus
   as my Saviour, my sweetest food, my chief portion, and the life of my
   soul, consenting to acquiesce in him as such, and to hunger and thirst
   after him only, renouncing all other saviours, and all other portions,
   for his sake." The actions, thus interpreted, are a proper renovation
   and ratification of the covenant of grace; and no otherwise. And those
   that take and eat and drink the sacramental elements at the Lord's
   table with any other meaning, I fear, know not what they do.

   The actions at the Lord's supper thus implying, in their nature and
   signification, a renewing and confirming of the covenant, there is a
   declarative explicit covenanting supposed to precede it; which is the
   profession of religion, before spoken of, that qualifies a person for
   admission to the Lord's supper. And doubtless there is, or ought to be,
   as much explicitly professed in words, as is implicitly professed in
   these actions; for by these significant actions, the communicant sets
   his seal but to his profession. The established signs in the Lord's
   supper are fully equivalent to words; they are a renewing and
   reiterating the same thing which was done before; only with this
   difference, that now it is done by speaking signs, whereas before it
   was by speaking sounds. Our taking the bread and wine is as much a
   professing to accept of Christ, at least, as a woman's taking a ring of
   the bridegroom in her marriage is a profession and seal of her taking
   him for her husband. The sacramental elements in the Lord's supper
   represent Christ as a party in covenant, as truly as a proxy represents
   a prince to a foreign lady in her marriage; and our taking those
   elements is as truly a professing to accept of Christ, as in the other
   case the lady's taking the proxy is her professing to accept the prince
   as her husband. Or the matter may more fitly be represented by this
   similitude: it is as if a prince should send an ambassador to a woman
   in a foreign land, proposing marriage, and by his ambassador should
   send her his picture, and should desire her to manifest her acceptance
   of his suit, not only by professing her acceptance in words to his
   ambassador, but in token of her sincerity openly to take or accept that
   picture, and to seal her profession, by thus representing the matter
   over again by a symbolical action.

   To suppose persons ought thus solemnly to profess that which at the
   same time they do not at all imagine they experience in themselves, and
   do not really pretend to, is a very great absurdity. For a man
   sacramentally to make such a profession of religion, proceeding
   avowedly on the foot of such doctrine, is to profess that which he does
   not profess; his actions being no established signs of the thing
   supposed to be professed, nor carrying in them the least pretension to
   it. And therefore doing thus can be no man's duty; unless it be men's
   duty to make a solemn profession of that which in truth they make no
   profession of. The Lord's supper is most evidently a professing
   ordinance; and the communicants' profession must be such as is adjusted
   to the nature and design of the ordinance; which nothing short of faith
   in the blood of Christ will answer, even faith unfeigned, which worketh
   by love. A profession therefore exclusive of this, is essentially
   defective, and quite unsuitable to the character of a communicant.

   When the apostle says, 1 Cor. xi. 28. "Let a man examine himself, and
   so let him eat;" it seems most reasonable to understand it of trying
   himself with regard to the truth of his Christianity, or the reality of
   his grace; the same as 2 Cor. xiii. 5.. where the same word is used in
   the original. The Greek word (NOT ENGLISH ) will not allow of what some
   have supposed to be the apostle's meaning, viz. that a man should
   consider and inquire into his circumstances, and the necessities of his
   case, that he may know what are the wants for the supply of which he
   should go to the Lord's table. The word properly signifies proving or
   trying a thing with respect to its quality and goodness, or in order to
   determine whether it be true and of the right sort. And so the word is
   always used in the New Testament; unless that sometimes it is used
   metonymically, and in such places is variously translated, either
   discerning, or allowing, approving, liking, &c. these being the effects
   of trial. Nor is the word used more frequently in the New Testament for
   any sort of trial whatever, than for the trial of professors with
   regard to their grace or piety. The word (as Dr. Ames in his
   Catecheseos Sciagraphia, and Mr. Willard in his Body of Divinity,
   observe) is borrowed from goldsmiths, properly signifying the trial
   they make of their silver and gold, whether it be genuine or
   counterfeit: and with a manifest allusion to this original application
   of the word, is often used in the New Testament for trying the piety of
   professors. It is used with this view in all the following texts: 1
   Pet. i. 7. "That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than
   of gold that perisheth, though it be tried by fire, might be found unto
   praise," &c. 1 Cor. iii. 13. "The fire shall try every man's work of
   what sort it is." James i. 3. "The trying of your faith worketh
   patience." 1 Thess. ii. 4. "God who trieth our hearts." The same word
   is used in 2 Cor. viii. 8. "To prove the sincerity of your love." So,
   Gal. vi. 3, 4. "If any man thinketh himself to be something, when he is
   nothing, he deceiveth himself: but let every man prove his own work."
   In all these places there is the same word in the Greek with that in
   the text now under consideration.

   When the apostle directs professing Christians to try themselves, using
   this word indefinitely, as properly signifying the examining or proving
   of a thing whether it be genuine or counterfeit, the most natural
   construction of his advice is, that they should try themselves with
   respect to their spiritual state and religious profession, whether they
   are disciples indeed, real and genuine Christians, or whether they are
   not false and hypocritical professors. As if a man should bring a piece
   of metal that had the colour of gold, with the impress of the king's
   coin, to a goldsmith, and desire him to try that money, without adding
   any words to limit his meaning, would not the goldsmith naturally
   understand, that he was to try whether it was true gold or true money?

   But here it is said by some, that the context of the passage under
   debate (1 Cor. xi. 28..) plainly limits the meaning of the word in that
   place; the apostle there speaking of those things that had appeared
   among the communicants at Corinth, which were of a scandalous nature,
   so doubtless unfitting them for the Lord's supper, and therefore when
   the apostle directs them to examine or prove themselves, it is but
   just, to suppose his meaning to be, that they should try whether they
   be not disqualified by scandal.--To this I answer, though the apostle
   putting the Corinthians upon trying themselves, was on occasion of
   mentioning some scandalous practices found among them, yet this is by
   no means any argument of its being only his meaning, that they should
   try themselves whether they were scandalous persons; and not, that they
   should try whether they were genuine Christians. The very nature of
   scandal (as was observed before) is, that which tends to obscure the
   visibility of the piety of professors, and wound others' charity
   towards them, by bringing the reality of their grace into doubt; and
   therefore what could be more natural, than for the apostle, when
   mentioning such scandals among the Corinthians, to put them upon trying
   the state of their souls, and proving their sincerity? This is
   certainly the case in this apostle's directing the same persons to
   prove themselves, 2 Cor. xiii. 5.. using the same word there which he
   uses here, and giving his direction on the like occasion. For in the
   second epistle (as well as in the first) his putting them on examining
   and proving themselves, was on occasion of his mentioning some scandals
   found among them; as is plain from the foregoing context. And yet there
   it is expressly said, that the thing concerning which he directs them
   to prove themselves, is, whether they be in the faith, and whether
   Christ is in them. Nor is there any thing more in the preceding context
   of one place, than in that of the other, obliging or leading us to
   understand the apostle to intend only a trying whether they were
   scandalous, and not whether they were sincere Christians.

   And as to the words following in the next verse; "For he that eateth
   and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not
   discerning the Lord's body:"--these words by no means make it evident,
   (as some hold,) that what the apostle would have them examine
   themselves about, is, whether they have doctrinal knowledge, sufficient
   to understand, that the bread and wine in the sacrament signify the
   body and blood of Christ: but on the contrary, to interpret the apostle
   in this sense only, is unreasonable, upon several accounts. (1.) None
   can so much as attempt such an examination, without first knowing, that
   the Lord's body and blood is signified by these elements. For merely a
   man putting this question to himself, Do I understand that this bread
   and this wine signify the body and blood of Christ? supposes him
   already to know it from a previous information; and therefore to exhort
   persons to such an examination, would be absurd. And then, (2.) It is
   incredible, that there should be any such gross ignorance in a number
   of the communicants in the Corinthian church, if we consider what the
   Scripture informs us concerning that church. St. Paul was an able and
   thorough instructor and spiritual father, who founded that church,
   brought them out of their heathenish darkness, and initiated them in
   the christian religion. He had instructed them in the nature and ends
   of gospel-ordinances, and continued at Corinth, constantly labouring in
   the word and doctrine for a long while, no less than a year and six
   months; and, we may well suppose, administered the Lord's supper among
   them every Lord's day; for the apostle speaks of it as the manner of
   that church to communicate at the Lord's table with such frequency, 1
   Cor. xvi. 2.. And the Corinthian church, when the apostle wrote this
   epistle, was noted for excelling in doctrinal knowledge; as is evident
   by 1 Cor. i. 5-7.. and several other passages in the epistle. Besides,
   the communicants were expressly told at every communion, every week,
   when the bread and wine were delivered to them in the administration,
   that the bread signified the body, and that the wine signified the
   blood, of Christ. And, (3.) The apostle by his argument in 1 Cor. x.
   16.. supposes the Corinthians doctrinally acquainted with this subject
   already. It therefore appears to me much more reasonable, to apprehend
   the case to be thus: the offensive behaviour of the communicants at
   Corinth gave the apostle reason to suspect, that some of them came to
   the Lord's table without a proper impression and true sense of the
   great and glorious things there signified; having no habitual hunger or
   relish for the spiritual food there represented, no inward vital and
   experimental taste of that flesh of the Son of man, which is meat
   indeed. The word translated discerning, signifies to discriminate or
   distinguish. The taste is the proper sense whereby to discern or
   distinguish food, Job xxxiv. 3.. And it is by a spiritual sense or
   taste we discern or distinguish spiritual food. Heb. v. 14.--"Those who
   by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and
   evil:" NOT ENGLISH &c. a word of the same root with that rendered
   discerning, in 1 Cor. xi. 29.. He that has no habitual relish of that
   spiritual food, which is represented and offered at the Lord's table;
   he that has no spiritual taste, wherewith to perceive any thing more at
   the Lord's supper, than in common food; or that has no higher view,
   than with a little seeming devotion to eat bread, in the way of an
   ordinance, but without regarding in his heart the spiritual meaning and
   end of it, and without being at all suitably affected by the dying love
   of Christ therein commemorated; such a one may most truly and properly
   be said not to discern the Lord's body.-- When therefore the apostle
   exhorts to self-examination as a preparative for the sacramental
   supper, he may well be understood to put professors upon inquiring
   whether they have such a principle of faith, by means whereof they are
   habitually in a capacity and disposition of mind to discern the Lord's
   body, practically and spiritually, (as well as speculatively and
   notionally,) in their communicating at the Lord's table: which is what
   none can do who have a faith short of that which is justifying and
   saving. It is only a living faith that capacitates men to discern the
   Lord's body in the sacrament with that spiritual sensation or spiritual
   gust, which is suitable to the nature and design of the ordinance, and
   which the apostle seems principally to intend.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   objections answered.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. I.

   The Scripture calls the members of the visible church by the name of
   disciples, scholars, or learners: and that suggests to us this notion
   of the visible church, that it is the school of Christ, into which
   persons are admitted in order to their learning of Christ, and coming
   to spiritual attainments, in the use of the means of teaching,
   discipline, and training up, established in the school. Now if this be
   a right notion of the visible church, then reason shows that no other
   qualifications are necessary in order to being members of this school,
   than such a faith and disposition of mind as are requisite to persons'
   putting themselves under Christ as their Master and Teacher, and
   subjecting themselves to the orders of the school. But a common faith
   and moral sincerity are sufficient for this.--Therefore the Scripture
   leads us to suppose the visible church to be properly constituted of
   those who have these qualifications, though they have not saving faith
   and true piety.

   Answer 1. I own, the Scripture calls the members of the visible church
   by the name of disciple; but deny, that it therefore follows that the
   church of which they are members, is duly and properly constituted of
   those who have not true piety. Because, if this consequence was good,
   then it would equally follow, that not only the visible, but also the
   invisible or mystical, church is properly constituted of those who have
   not unfeigned faith and true piety. For the members of the mystical
   church, as such, and to denote the special character of such, are
   called disciples; Luke xiv. 26, 27, 33.. and John viii. 31; xiii. 35;
   xv. 8.. This shows, that in the argument I am answering, there is no
   connexion between the premises and the conclusion. For the force of the
   objection consists in this, that the members of the visible church are
   called disciples in Scripture: this is the sum total of the premises:
   and if there be any connexion between the premises and the conclusion,
   it must lie in the truth of this proposition; The church whose members
   are called by the name of disciples, as signifying their state and
   quality as members of that society, that church is properly and fitly
   constituted, not only of persons truly pious, but of others that have
   merely a common faith and virtue. But this proposition, we have seen,
   is not true; and so there is no connexion between the former and latter
   part of it, which are the same with the premises and conclusion of this
   argument.

   2. Though I do not deny, that the visible church of Christ may fitly be
   represented as a school of Christ, where persons are trained up in the
   use of means, in order to some spiritual attainments: yet it will not
   hence necessarily follow, that this is in order to all good
   attainments; for it will not follow but that certain good attainments
   may be prerequisite, in order to a place in the school. The church of
   Christ is a school appointed for the training up Christ's little
   children, to greater degrees of knowledge, higher privileges, and
   greater serviceableness in this world, and more meetness for the
   possession of their eternal inheritance. But there is no necessity of
   supposing, that it is in order to fit them to become Christ's children,
   or to be introduced into his family; any more than there is a necessity
   of supposing, because a prince puts his children under tutors, that
   therefore it must be in order to their being of the royal family. If it
   be necessary, that there should be a church of Christ appointed as a
   school of instruction and discipline, to bring persons to all good
   attainments whatsoever, then it will follow, that there must be a
   visible church constituted of scandalous and profane persons and
   heretics, and all in common that assume the christian name, that so
   means may be used with them in order to bring them to moral sincerity,
   and an acknowledgment of the christian faith.

   3. I grant, that no other qualifications are necessary in order to
   being members of that school of Christ which is his visible church,
   than such as are requisite in order to their subjecting themselves to
   Christ as their Master and Teacher, and subjecting themselves to the
   laws and orders of his school: nevertheless I deny, that a common faith
   and moral sincerity are sufficient for this; because none do truly
   subject themselves to Christ as their Master, but such as having their
   hearts purified by faith, are delivered from the reigning power of sin:
   for we cannot subject ourselves to obey two contrary masters at the
   same time. None submit to Christ as their Teacher, but those who truly
   receive him as their Prophet, to teach them by his word and Spirit;
   giving up themselves to his teachings, sitting with Mary at Jesus' feet
   to hear his word; and hearkening more to his dictates, than those of
   their blind and deceitful lusts, and relying on his wisdom more than
   their own. The Scripture knows nothing of an ecclesiastical school
   constituted of enemies of the cross of Christ, and appointed to bring
   such to be reconciled to him and submit to him as their Master. Neither
   have they who are not truly pious persons, any true disposition of
   heart to submit to the laws and orders of Christ's school, the rules
   which his word prescribes to all his scholars; such as, to love their
   Master supremely; to love one another as brethren; and to love their
   book, i. e. their Bible, more than vain trifles and amusements, yea,
   above gold and silver; to be faithful to the interest of the Master and
   of the school; to depend on his teachings; to cry to him for knowledge;
   above all their gettings, to get understanding, &c.

   4. Whatever ways of constituting the church may to us seem fit, proper,
   and reasonable, the question is, not what constitution of Christ's
   church seems convenient to human wisdom, but what constitution is
   actually established by Christ's infinite wisdom. Doubtless, if men
   should set their wits to work, and proceed according to what seems good
   in their sight, they would greatly alter Christ's constitution of his
   church, to make it more convenient and beautiful, and would adorn it
   with a vast variety of ingenious inventions; as the church of Rome has
   done. The question is, whether this school of Christ which they talk
   of, made up very much of those who pretend to no experiences or
   attainments but what consist with their being enemies of Christ in
   their hearts, and who in reality love the vilest lust better than him,
   be that church of Christ which in the New Testament is denominated his
   city, his temple, his family, his body, &c. by which names the visible
   church of Christ is there frequently called.

   I acknowledge, that means of Christ's appointment, are to be used with
   those who are Christ's, and do not profess themselves any other, to
   change their hearts, and bring them to be Christ's friends and
   disciples. Such means are to be used with all sorts of persons, with
   Jews, Mahometans, heathens, with nominal Christians that are heretical
   or vicious, the profane, the intemperate, the unclean, and all other
   enemies of Christ; and these means to be used constantly, and
   laboriously. Scandalous persons need to go to school, to learn to be
   Christians, as much as other men. And there are many persons that are
   not morally sincere, who from selfish and sinister views consent
   ordinarily to go to church, and so be in the way of means. And none
   ought to forbid them thus going to Christ's school, that they may be
   taught by him, in the ministry of the gospel. But yet it will not
   follow, that such a school is the church of Christ. Human laws can put
   persons, even those who are very vicious, into the school of Christ, in
   that sense; they can oblige them constantly to be present at public
   teaching, and attend on the means of grace appointed by Christ, and
   dispensed in his name: but human laws cannot join men to the church of
   Christ, and make them members of his body.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. II.

   Visible saintship in the scripture sense cannot be the same with that
   which has been supposed and insisted on, because Israel of old were
   called God's people, when it is certain the greater part of them were
   far from having any such visible holiness as this. Thus the ten tribes
   were called God's people, Hos. iv. 6.. after they had revolted from the
   true worship of God, and had obstinately continued in their idolatrous
   worship at Bethel and Dan for about two hundred and fifty years, and
   were at that time, a little before their captivity especially, in the
   height of their wickedness. So the Jews are called God's people, in
   Ezek. xxxvi. 20.. and other places, at the time of their captivity in
   Babylon, a time when most of them were abandoned to all kinds of the
   most horrid and open impieties, as the prophets frequently represent.
   Now it is certain, that the people at that time were not called God's
   people because of any visibility of true piety to the eye of reason or
   of a rational charity, because most of them were grossly wicked, and
   declared their sin as Sodom. And in the same manner wherein the Jews of
   old were God's people, are the members of the visible christian Gentile
   church God's people; for they are spoken of as graffed into the same
   olive-tree, from whence the former were broken off by unbelief.

   Answ. 1. The argument proves too much, and therefore nothing at all.
   Those whom I oppose in this controversy, will in effect as much oppose
   themselves in it, as me. The objection, if it has any force, equally
   militates against their and my notion of visible saintship. For those
   Jews, which it is alleged were called God's people, and yet were so
   notoriously, openly, and obstinately wicked, had neither any visibility
   of true piety, nor yet of that moral sincerity in the profession and
   duties of the true religion, which the opponents themselves suppose to
   be requisite in order to a proper visible holiness, and a due admission
   to the privileges and ordinances of the church of God. None will
   pretend, that these obstinate idolaters and impious wretches had those
   qualifications which are now requisite in order to an admission to the
   christian sacraments. And therefore to what purpose can they bring this
   objection? which, if it proves any thing, overthrows my scheme and
   their own both together, and both in an equally effectual manner. And
   not only so, but will thoroughly destroy the schemes of all protestants
   through the world, concerning the qualifications of the subjects of
   christian ordinances. And therefore the support of what I have laid
   down against those whom I oppose in this controversy, requires no
   further answer to this objection. Nevertheless, for greater
   satisfaction, I would here observe further:

   2. That such appellations as God's people, God's Israel, and some other
   like phrases, are used and applied in Scripture with considerable
   diversity of intention. Thus, we have a plain distinction between the
   house of Israel and the house of Israel, in Ezek. xx. 38-40.. By the
   house of Israel in the 39th verse is meant literally the nation or
   family of Israel; but by the house of Israel in the 40th verse seems to
   be intended the spiritual house, the body of God's visible saints, that
   should attend the ordinances of his public worship in gospel--times. So
   likewise there is a distinction made between the house of Israel, and
   God's disciples who should profess and visibly adhere to his law and
   testimony, in Isa. viii. 14-17.. And though the whole nation of the
   Jews are often called God's people in those degenerate times wherein
   the prophets were sent to reprove them, yet at the same time they are
   charged as falsely calling themselves of the holy city, Isa. xlviii.
   2.. And God often tells them, they are rather to be reckoned among
   aliens, and as children of the Ethiopians, or posterity of the ancient
   Canaanites, on account of their grossly wicked and scandalous
   behaviour. See Amos ix. 7, &c.. Ezek. xvi. 2, 3, &c. verse 45, &c..
   Isa. i. 10..

   It is evident that God sometimes, according to the methods of his
   marvellous mercy and long-suffering towards mankind, has a merciful
   respect to a degenerate church, become exceeding corrupt, and
   constituted of members who have not those qualifications which ought to
   be insisted on. God continues still to have respect to them so far as
   not utterly to forsake them, or wholly to deny his confirmation of and
   blessing on their administrations. And not being utterly renounced of
   God, their administrations are to be looked upon as in some respect
   valid, and the society as in some sort a people or church of God. This
   was the case with the church of Rome, at least till the Reformation and
   council of Trent; for till then we must own their baptisms and
   ordinations to be valid.--The church that the pope sits in, is called,
   The temple of God, 2 Thess. ii. 4..

   And with regard to the people of Israel, it is very manifest, that
   something diverse is oftentimes intended by that nation being God's
   people, from their being visible saints, visibly holy, or having those
   qualifications which are requisite in order to a due admission to the
   ecclesiastical privileges of such. That nation, that family of Israel
   according to the flesh, and with regard to that external and carnal
   qualification, were in some sense adopted by God to be his peculiar
   people, and his covenant people. This is not only evident by what has
   been already observed, but also indisputably manifest from Rom. ix. 3,
   4, 5. "I have great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart; for I
   could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my
   kinsmen, according to the flesh, who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth
   the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the
   law, and the service of God, and the promises; whose are the fathers;
   and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came." It is to be noted,
   that the privileges here mentioned are spoken of as belonging to the
   Jews, not now as visible saints, not as professors of the true
   religion, not as members of the visible church of Christ; but only as
   people of such a nation, such a blood, such an external and carnal
   relation to the patriarchs their ancestors, Israelites according to the
   flesh. For the apostle is speaking here of the unbelieving Jews,
   professed unbelievers, that were out of the christian church, and open
   visible enemies to it, and such as had no right to the external
   privileges of Christ's people. So, in Rom. xi. 28, 29.. this apostle
   speaks of the same unbelieving Jews, as in some respect an elect
   people, and interested in the calling, promises, and covenants God
   formerly gave to their forefathers, and as still beloved for their
   sakes. Rom. xi. 28, 29."As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for
   your sake; but as touching the election, they are beloved for the
   fathers' sakes: for the gifts and calling of God are without
   repentance." These things are not privileges belonging to the Jews now
   as a people of the right religion, or in the true church of visible
   worshippers of God; but as a people of such a pedigree or blood; and
   that even after the ceasing of the Mosaic administration. But there
   were privileges more especially belonging to them under the Old
   Testament: they were a family that God had chosen in distinction from
   all others, to show special favour to above all other nations. It was
   manifestly agreeable to God's design to constitute things so under the
   Old Testament, that the means of grace and spiritual privileges and
   blessings should be--though not wholly, yet in a great
   measure--confined to a particular family, much more than those
   privileges and blessings are confined to any posterity or blood now
   under the gospel. God purposely by these favours distinguished that
   nation not only from those who were not professed worshippers of the
   true God, but also in a great measure from other nations, by a
   constituted wall of separation. This was not merely a wall between
   professors and non-professors, but between nation and nations. God, if
   he pleases, may by his sovereignty annex his blessing, and in some
   measure fix it, for his own reasons, to a particular blood, as well as
   to a particular place or spot of ground, to a certain building, to a
   particular heap of stones, or altar of brass, to particular garments,
   and other external things. And it is evident, that he actually did
   affix his blessing to that particular external family of Jacob, very
   much as he did to the city Jerusalem, where he chose to place his name,
   and to mount Zion where he commanded the blessing. God did not so affix
   his blessing to Jerusalem or mount Zion, as to limit himself, either by
   confining the blessing wholly to that place, never to bestow it
   elsewhere; nor by obliging himself always to bestow it on those that
   sought him there; nor yet obliging himself never to withdraw his
   blessing from thence, by forsaking his dwelling-place there, and
   leaving it to be a common or profane place. But he was pleased to make
   it the seat of his blessing in a peculiar manner, in great distinction
   from other places. In like manner did he fix his blessing to the
   progeny of Jacob. It was a family which he delighted in, and which he
   blessed in a peculiar manner, and to which in a great measure he
   confined the blessing; but not so as to limit himself, or so as to
   oblige himself to bestow it on all of that blood, or not to bestow it
   on others that were not of that blood. He affixed his blessing both to
   the place and nation, by sovereign election, Psal. cxxxii. 13-15.. He
   annexed and fixed his blessing to both by covenant.

   To that nation he fixed his blessing by his covenant with the
   patriarchs. Indeed the main thing, the substance and marrow of that
   covenant which God made with Abraham and the other patriarchs, was the
   covenant of grace, which is continued in these days of the gospel, and
   extends to all his spiritual seed, of the Gentiles as well as Jews: but
   yet that covenant with the patriarchs contained other things that were
   appendages to that everlasting covenant of grace; promises of lesser
   matters, subservient to the grand promise of the future seed, and
   typical of things appertaining to him. Such were those that annexed the
   blessing to the land of Canaan, and the progeny of Isaac and Jacob.
   Just so it was also as to the covenant God made with David. 2 Sam.
   vii.. and Psal. cxxxii.. If we consider that covenant with regard to
   its marrow and soul, it was the covenant of grace: but there were other
   subservient promises which were typical of its benefits; such were
   promises of blessings to the nation of Israel, of continuing the
   temporal crown to David's posterity, and of fixing the blessing to
   Jerusalem or mount Zion, as the place which he chose to set his name
   there. And in this sense it was that the very family of Jacob were
   God's people by covenant, and his chosen people; even when they were no
   visible saints, when they lived in idolatry, and made no profession of
   the true religion.

   On the whole, it is evident that the very nation of Israel, not as
   visible saints, but as the progeny of Jacob according to the flesh,
   were in some respect a chosen people, a people of God, a covenant
   people, an holy nation; even as Jerusalem was a chosen city, the city
   of God, a holy city, and a city that God had engaged by covenant to
   dwell in.

   Thus a sovereign and all-wise God was pleased to ordain things with
   respect to the nation of Israel. Perhaps we may not be able to give all
   the reasons of such a constitution; but some of them seem to be pretty
   manifest; as,

   1. The great and main end of separating one particular nation from all
   others, as God did the nation of Israel, was to prepare the way for the
   coming of the Messiah. God's covenant with Abraham and the other
   patriarchs implied that the Messiah should be of their blood, or their
   seed according to the flesh. And therefore it was requisite that their
   progeny according to the flesh should be fenced in by a wall of
   separation, and made God's people. If the Messiah had been born of some
   of the professors of Abraham's religion, but of some other nation, that
   religion being propagated from nation to nation, as it is now under the
   gospel, it would not have answered the covenant with Abraham, for the
   Messiah to have been born of Abraham's seed only in this sense. The
   Messiah being by covenant so related to Jacob's progeny according to
   the flesh, God was pleased, agreeable to the nature of such a covenant,
   to show great respect to that people on account of that external
   relation. Therefore the apostle mentions it as one great privilege,
   that of them according to the flesh Christ came, Rom. ix. 5.. As the
   introducing of the Messiah and his salvation and kingdom was the
   special design of all God's dealings and peculiar dispensations towards
   that people, the natural result of this was, that great account should
   be made of their being of that nation, in God's covenant dealings with
   them.

   2. That nation was a typical nation. There was then literally a land,
   which was a type of heaven, the true dwelling-place of God; and an
   external city, which was a type of the spiritual city of God; an
   external temple of God, which was a type of his spiritual temple. So
   there was an external people and family of God, by carnal generation,
   which was a type of his spiritual progeny. And the covenant by which
   they were made a people of God, was a type of the covenant of grace;
   and so is sometimes represented as a marriage-covenant. God, agreeably
   to the nature of that dispensation, showed a great regard to external
   and carnal things in those days, as types of spiritual things. What a
   great regard God did show then to external qualifications for
   privileges and services, appears in this, that there is ten times so
   much said in the books of Moses about such qualifications in the
   institutions of the passover and tabernacle services, as about any
   moral qualifications whatsoever. And so much were such typical
   qualifications insisted on, that even by the law of Moses, the
   congregation of the Lord, or church of visible worshippers of God, and
   the number of public professors of the true religion who were visible
   saints, were not the same. Some were of the latter, that were not of
   the former; as the eunuchs, who were excluded the congregation, though
   never so externally religious, yea truly pious; and so also bastards,
   &c.

   3. It was the sovereign pleasure of God to choose the posterity of
   Jacob according to the flesh, to reserve them for special favours to
   the end of time. And therefore they are still kept a distinct nation,
   being still reserved for distinguishing mercy in the latter day, when
   they shall be restored to the church of God. God is pleased in this way
   to testify his regard to their holy ancestors, and his regard to their
   external relation to Christ. Therefore the apostle still speaks of them
   as an elect nation, and beloved for the fathers' sakes, even after they
   were broken off from the good olive by unbelief. God's covenant with
   Abraham is in some sense in force with respect to that people, and
   reaches them even to this day; and yet surely they are not God's
   Covenant people, in the sense that visible Christians are. See Lev.
   xxvi. 42..

   If it be said, It was often foretold by the prophets, that in
   gospel-days other nations should be the people of God, as well as the
   nation of the Jews: and when Christ sent forth his apostles, he bid
   them go and disciple all nations.

   I answer; By a common figure of speech the prevailing part of a nation
   are called the nation, and what is done to them is said to be done to
   the nation, and what is done by them is said to be done by that nation.
   And it is to be hoped, that the time is coming when the prevailing part
   of many nations, yea of every nation under heaven, will be regularly
   brought into the visible church of Christ. If by nations in these
   prophecies we understand any other than the prevailing part, and it be
   insisted on that we must understand it of all the people belonging to
   those nations; there never yet has been any nation in this sense
   regularly brought into the visible church of Christ, even according to
   the scheme of those whom I oppose. For there never yet has been a whole
   nation outwardly moral. And besides, what Mr. Blake says in his
   Treatise of the Covenant, page 238. may be applied here, and serve as
   an answer to this objection: "The prophecies of the Old Testament (says
   he) of the glory of the New-Testament times, are in Old-Testament
   phrases, by way of allusion to the worship of those times, set forth to
   us." In Rev. xxi. 24.. nations are spoken of, as having an interest in
   the New Jerusalem, which yet is represented as perfectly pure, without
   the least degree of pollution and defilement, verse 27.. And as for the
   command to the apostles, to disciple all nations, it was a direction to
   them as to what they should attempt, not a prediction of what they
   should bring to pass in their day. For they never brought one-half of
   any one nation into the visible christian church, nor any at all in
   one-half of the nations in the world, it is very probable.

   If it should be further objected, that it is an evidence that Gentile
   Christians are visible saints, according to the New-Testament notion of
   visible saintship, in the very same manner as the whole Jewish nation
   were till they were broken off by their obstinate rejection of the
   Messiah; that the Gentile Christians are represented as being grafted
   into the same olive, from whence the Jews were broken off by unbelief,
   Rom. xi. 17, &c.

   I would inquire, What any one can intend by this objection? Whether it
   be this, viz. That we ought to insist on no higher or better
   qualifications, in admitting persons as members of the christian
   church, and to all its privileges, than the whole Jewish nation in
   Christ's time possessed, till they had obstinately persisted in their
   rejection of him? If this is not intended, the objection is nothing to
   the purpose: or, if this be intended, neither then is it to the purpose
   of those with whom I have especially to do in this controversy, who
   hold orthodoxy, knowledge of the fundamental doctrines of religion,
   moral sincerity, and a good conversation, to be qualifications, which
   ought to be insisted on, in order to a visible church-state. For a very
   great part of those Jews were destitute of these qualifications; many
   of them were Sadducees, who denied a future state; others of them
   Herodians, who were occasional conformists with the Romans in their
   idolatries; the prevailing sect among them were Pharisees, who openly
   professed the false doctrine of justification by the works of the law
   and external privileges, that leaven of the Pharisees, which Christ
   warns his disciples to beware of. Many of them were scandalously
   ignorant, for their teachers had taken away the key of knowledge.
   Multitudes were grossly vicious, for it was a generation in which all
   manner of sin and wickedness prevailed.

   I think that text in Rom. xi.. can be understood no otherwise, in any
   consistence with plain fact, than that the Gentile Christians succeeded
   the Jews, who had been, either in themselves or ancestors, the children
   of Abraham, with respect to a visible interest in the covenant of
   grace, until they were broken off from the church, and ceased to be
   visible saints by their open and obstinate unbelief. Indeed their
   ancestors had all been thus broken off from the church of visible
   saints; for every branch or family of the stock of Jacob had been in
   the church of visible saints, and each branch withered and failed
   through unbelief. This was the highest and most important sense, in
   which any of the Jews were externally the children of Abraham, and
   implied the greatest privileges. But there was another sense, in which
   the whole nation, including even those of them who were no visible
   saints, were his children, which (as has been shown) implied great
   privileges, wherein christian Gentiles do not succeed them, though they
   have additional ecclesiastical privileges, vastly beyond the Jews.

   Whether I have succeeded, in rightly explaining these matters, or no,
   yet my failing in it is of no great importance with regard to the
   strength of the objection, that occasioned my attempting it; which was,
   that scandalously wicked men among the Jews are called God's people,
   &c. The objection, as I observed, is as much against the scheme of
   those whom I oppose, as against my scheme; and therefore it as much
   concerns them, to find out some explanation of the matter, that shall
   show something else is intended by it, than their having the
   qualifications of visible saints, as it does me; and a failing in such
   an attempt as much affects and hurts their cause, as it does mine.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. III.

   Those in Israel, who made no profession of piety of heart, did
   according to divine institution partake of the passover; a Jewish
   sacrament, representing the same things, and a seal of the very same
   covenant of grace, with the Lord's supper; and particularly, it would
   be unreasonable to suppose, that all made a profession of godliness
   whom God commanded to keep that first passover in Egypt, which the
   whole congregation were required to keep, and there is no shadow of any
   such thing as all first making a solemn public profession of those
   things wherein true piety consists: and so the people in general
   partook of the passover, from generation to generation; but it would be
   improbable to suppose, that they all professed a supreme regard to God
   in their hearts.

   Answ. 1. The affair of the Israelites' participation of the passover,
   and particularly that first passover in Egypt, is attended with
   altogether as much difficulty in regard to the qualifications which the
   objectors themselves suppose requisite in communicants at the Lord's
   table, as with regard to those which I insist upon; and if there be any
   argument in the case, it is fully as strong an argument against their
   scheme, as mine.

   One thing they insist upon as a requisite qualification for the Lord's
   supper, is a public profession of religion as to the essential
   doctrines of it. But there is no more public profession of this kind,
   preceding that passover in Egypt, than of a profession of godliness.
   Here, not to insist on the great doctrines of the fall of man, of our
   undone state by nature, of the Trinity, of our dependence on the free
   grace of God for justification, &c. let us take only those two
   doctrines of a future state of rewards and punishments, and the
   doctrine of the Messiah to come, that Messiah who was represented in
   the passover. Is there any more appearance, in sacred story, of the
   people making a public profession in Egypt of these doctrines, before
   they partook of the passover, than of their making profession of the
   love of God? And is there any more probability of the former, than of
   the latter? Another thing which they on the other side suppose
   necessary to a due attendance on the Lord's supper, is, that when any
   have openly been guilty of gross sins, they should before they come to
   this sacrament, openly confess and humble themselves for their faults.
   Now it is evident by many scriptures, that a great part of the children
   of Israel in Egypt had been guilty of joining with the Egyptians in
   worshipping their false gods, and had lived in idolatry. But the
   history in Exodus gives us no account of any public solemn confession
   of, or humiliation, for this great sin, before they came to the
   passover. Mr. Stoddard observes, (Appeal, p. 58, 59.) that there was in
   the church of Israel a way appointed by God for the removal of
   scandals; men being required in that case to offer up their sacrifices,
   attended with confession and visible signs of repentance. But where do
   we read of the people offering up sacrifices in Egypt, attended with
   confession, for removing the scandal of that most heinous sin of
   idolatry they had lived in? Or is there any more probability of their
   publicly professing their repentance and humiliation for their sin,
   before their celebrating the passover, than of their publicly
   professing to love God above all? Another thing which they suppose to
   be requisite in order to admission to the Lord's table, and about which
   they would have a particular care to be taken, is, that every person
   admitted give evidence of a competent knowledge in the doctrines of
   religion, and none be allowed to partake who are grossly ignorant. Now
   there is no more appearance of this with regard to the congregation in
   Egypt, than of a profession of godliness; and it is as difficult to
   suppose it. There is abundant reason to suppose, that vast numbers in
   that nation, consisting of more than a million of adult persons, had
   been brought up in a great degree of ignorance, amidst their slavery in
   Egypt, where the people seem to have almost forgotten the true God and
   the true religion. And though pains had been taken by Moses, now for a
   short season, to instruct the people better; yet it must be considered,
   it is a very great work, to take a whole nation under such degrees of
   ignorance and prejudice, and bring every one of them to a competent
   degree of knowledge in religion; and a greater work still for Moses
   both thus to instruct them, and also by examination or otherwise, to
   come to a just satisfaction, that all had indeed attained to such
   knowledge.

   Mr. Stoddard insists, that if grace be requisite in the Lord's supper,
   it would have been as much so in the passover, inasmuch as the chief
   thing which the passover (as well as the Lord's supper) represents, is
   Christ's sufferings. But if, on this account, the same qualifications
   are requisite in both ordinances, then it would be as requisite that
   the partakers should have knowledge to discern the Lord's body, (in Mr.
   Stoddard's sense of 1 Cor. xi. 29..) in the passover, as in the Lord's
   supper. But this certainly is as difficult to suppose, as that they
   professed godliness. For how does it appear, that the people in general
   who partook of the passover--knew that it signified the death of the
   Messiah, and the way in which he should make atonement for sin by his
   blood? Does it look very likely that they should know this, when
   Christ's own disciples had not knowledge thus to discern the Lord's
   body in the passover, of which they partook from year to year with
   their Master? Can it be supposed, they actually knew Christ's death and
   the design of it to be thereby signified, when they did not so much as
   realize the fact itself, that Christ was to die, at least not till the
   year before the last passover? Besides, how unreasonable would it be,
   to suppose, that the Jews understood what was signified, pertaining to
   Christ and salvation by him, in all those many kinds of sacrifices,
   which they attended and partook of, and all the vast variety of
   ceremonies belonging to them; all which sacrifices were sacramental
   representations of Christ's death, as well as the sacrifice of the
   passover! The apostle tells us, that all these things had a shadow of
   good things to come, the things concerning Christ: and yet there are
   many of them, which the church of Christ to this day does not
   understand; though we are under a thousand times greater advantage to
   understand them, than they were. For we have the New Testament, wherein
   God uses great plainness of speech, to guide us, and live in days
   wherein the vail which Moses put over his face is taken away in Christ,
   and the vail of the temple rent, and have the substance and antitype
   plainly exhibited, and so have opportunity to compare these with those
   shadows.

   If it be objected, as a difficulty that lies against our supposing a
   profession of godliness requisite to a participation of the passover,
   that they who were uncircumcised were expressly forbidden to partake,
   and if conversion was as important and a more important qualification
   than circumcision, why were not the unregenerate as expressly
   forbidden? I answer; Why were not scandalous sinners as expressly
   forbidden? And why was not moral sincerity as expressly required as
   circumcision?

   If it be objected, that they were all expressly and strictly required
   to keep the passover; but if grace was requisite, and God knew that
   many of the partakers would have no grace, why would he give such
   universal orders?

   I answer; When God gave those commands, he knew that the commands, in
   all their strictness, would reach many persons who in the time of the
   passover would be without so much as moral sincerity in religion. Every
   man in the nation, from the first institution till the death of Christ,
   were all (excepting such as were ceremonially unclean, or on a journey)
   strictly required to keep the feast of passover; and yet God knew that
   multitudes would be without the qualification of moral seriousness in
   religion. It would be very unreasonable to suppose, that every single
   person in the nation was morally serious, even in the very best time,
   or that ever there was such a happy day with any nation under heaven,
   wherein all were morally sincere in religion. How much then was it
   otherwise many times with that nation, which was so prone to
   corruption, and so often generally involved in gross wickedness! But
   the strict command of God to keep the passover reached the morally
   insincere, as well as others; they are no where excepted, any more than
   the unconverted. And as to any general commands of God's word, these no
   more required men to turn from a state of moral insincerity before they
   came to the passover, than they required them to turn from a graceless
   state.

   But further, I reply, that God required them all to keep the passover,
   no more strictly than he required them all to love the Lord their God
   with their whole heart. And if God might strictly command this, he
   might also strictly command them to keep that ordinance wherein they
   were especially to profess it, and seal their profession of it. That
   evil generation were not expressly forbidden to keep the passover in
   succeeding years, for the whole forty years during which they went on
   provoking God, very often by gross sin and open rebellion; but still
   the express and strict commands for the whole congregation to keep the
   passover reached them, nor were they released from their obligation.

   If it be said, that we must suppose multitudes in Israel attended the
   passover, from age to age, without such a visibility of piety as I have
   insisted on; and yet we do not find their attending this ordinance
   charged on them as a sin, in Scripture: I answer; We must also suppose
   that multitudes in Israel, from age to age, attended the passover, who
   lived in moral insincerity, yea and scandalous wickedness. For the
   people in general very often notoriously corrupted themselves, and
   declined to ways of open and great transgression; and yet there is
   reason to think, that in these times of corruption, for the most part,
   they held circumcision and the passover; and we do not find their
   attending on these ordinances under such circumstances, any more
   expressly charged on them as a sin, than their coming without piety of
   heart. The ten tribes continued constantly in idolatry for about 250
   years, and there is a ground to suppose, that in the mean time they
   ordinarily kept up circumcision and the passover. For though they
   worshipped God by images, yet they maintained most of the ceremonial
   observances of the law of Moses, called the manner of the God of the
   land, which their priests taught the Samaritans who were settled in
   their stead, 2 Kings xvii. 26, 27.. Nevertheless we do not find Elijah,
   Elisha, or other prophets, reproving them for attending these
   ordinances without the required moral qualifications. Indeed there are
   some things in the writings of the prophets, which may be interpreted
   as a reproof of this; but no more as a reproof of this, than of
   attending God's ordinances without a gracious sincerity and true piety
   of heart and life.

   How many seasons were there, wherein the people in general fell into
   and lived in idolatry, that scandal of scandals, in the times of the
   judges, and of the kings both in Judah and Israel! But still amidst all
   this wickedness, they continued to attend the sacrament of
   circumcision. We have every whit as much evidence of it, as that they
   attended the passover without a profession of godliness. We have no
   account of their ever leaving it off at such seasons, nor any hint of
   its being renewed (as a thing which had ceased) when they came to
   reform. Though we have so full an account of the particulars of
   Josiah's reformation, after the long and scandalous reign of Manasseh,
   there is no hint of any reviving of circumcision, or returning to it
   after a cessation. And where have we an account of the people being
   once reproved for attending this holy sacrament while thus involved in
   scandalous sin, in all the Old Testament? And where is this once
   charged on them as a sin, any more than in the case of unconverted
   persons attending the sacrament of the passover?(

   Answ. 2. Whatever was the case with respect to the qualifications for
   the sacraments of the Old-Testament dispensation, I humbly conceive it
   is nothing to the purpose in the present argument, nor needful to
   determine us with respect to the qualifications for the sacraments of
   the christian dispensation, which is a matter of such plain fact in the
   New Testament. Far am I from thinking the Old Testament to be like an
   old almanack out of use; nay, I think it is evident from the New
   Testament, that some things which had their first institution under the
   Old Testament, are continued under the New; for instance, the
   acceptance of the infant-seed of believers as children of the covenant
   with their parents; and probably some things belonging to the order and
   discipline of christian churches, had their first beginning in the
   Jewish synagogue. But yet all allow that the Old-Testament dispensation
   is out of date, with its ordinances; and I think, in a matter
   pertaining to the constitution and order of the New-Testament church--a
   matter of fact, wherein the New Testament itself is express, full, and
   abundant--to have recourse to the Mosaic dispensation for rules or
   precedents to determine our judgment, is quite needless, and out of
   reason. There is perhaps no part of divinity attended with so much
   intricacy, and wherein orthodox divines do so much differ, as the
   stating of the precise agreement and difference between the two
   dispensations of Moses and of Christ. [560] And probably the reason why
   God has left it so intricate, is, because our understanding the ancient
   dispensation, and God's design in it, is not of so great importance,
   nor does it so nearly concern us. Since God uses great plainness of
   speech in the New Testament, which is as it were the charter and
   municipal law of the christian church, what need we run back to the
   ceremonial and typical institutions of an antiquated dispensation,
   wherein God's declared design was, to deliver divine things in
   comparative obscurity, hid under a veil, and involved in clouds?

   We have no more occasion for going to search among the types, dark
   revelations, and carnal ordinances of the Old Testament, to find out
   whether this matter of fact concerning the constitution and order of
   the New-Testament church be true, than we have occasion for going there
   to find out whether any other matter of fact, of which we have an
   account in the New Testament, be true; as particularly, whether there
   were such officers in the primitive church as bishops and deacons,
   whether miraculous gifts of the Spirit were common in the apostles'
   days, whether the believing Gentiles were received into the primitive
   christian church, and the like.

   Answ. 3. I think, nothing can be alleged from, the Holy Scripture,
   sufficient to prove a profession of godliness to be not a qualification
   requisite in order to a due and regular participation of the passover.

   Although none of the requisite moral qualifications for this Jewish
   sacrament, are near so clearly made known in the Old Testament, as the
   qualifications for the christian sacraments are in the New; and
   although a supposed visibility of either moral sincerity or sanctifying
   grace, is involved in some obscurity and difficulty; yet I would humbly
   offer what appears to me to be the truth concerning that matter, in the
   things that follow.

   (1.) Although the people in Egypt before the first passover, probably
   made no explicit public profession at all, either of their humiliation
   for their former idolatry or of present devotedness of heart to God; it
   being before any particular institution of an express public
   profession, either of godliness, or repentance in case of scandal: yet
   I think, there was some sort of public manifestation, or implicit
   profession of both.--Probably in Egypt they implicitly professed the
   same things, which they afterwards professed more expressly and
   solemnly in the wilderness. The Israelites in Egypt had very much to
   affect their hearts, before the last plague, in the great things that
   God had done for them; especially in some of the latter plagues,
   wherein they were so remarkably distinguished from the Egyptians. They
   seem now to be brought to a tender frame, and a disposition to show
   much respect to God; (see Exod. xii. 27..) and were probably now very
   forward to profess themselves devoted to him, and true penitents.

   (2.) After the institution of an explicit public profession of
   devotedness to God, or (which is the same thing) of true piety of
   heart, this was wont to be required in order to a partaking of the
   passover and other sacrifices and sacraments that adult persons were
   admitted to. Accordingly all the adult persons that were circumcised at
   Gilgal, had made this profession a little before on the plains of Moab.
   Not that all of them were truly gracious; but seeing they all had a
   profession and visibility, Christ in his dealings with his church as to
   external things, acted not as the Searcher of hearts, but as the Head
   of the visible church, accommodating himself to the present state of
   mankind; and therefore he represents himself in Scripture as trusting
   his people's profession; as I formerly observed.

   (3.) In degenerate times in Israel, both priests and people were very
   lax with respect to covenanting with God, and professing devotedness to
   him; and these professions were used, as public professions commonly
   are still in corrupt times, merely as matters of form and ceremony, at
   least by great multitudes.

   (4.) Such was the nature of the Levitical dispensation, that it had in
   no measure so great a tendency to preclude and prevent hypocritical
   professions, as the New-Testament dispensation; particularly, on
   account of the vastly greater darkness of it. For the covenant of grace
   was not then so fully revealed, and consequently the nature of the
   conditions of that covenant was not then so well known. There was then
   a far more obscure revelation of those great duties of repentance
   towards God and faith in the Mediator, and of those things wherein true
   holiness consists, and wherein it is distinguished from other things.
   Persons then had not equal advantage to know their own hearts, while
   viewing themselves in this comparatively dim light of Moses' law, as
   now they have in the clear sun-shine of the gospel. In that state of
   the minority of the church, the nature of true piety, as consisting in
   the Spirit of adoption, or ingenuous filial love to God, and as
   distinguished from a spirit of bondage, servile fear, and self-love,
   was not so clearly made known. The Israelites were therefore the more
   ready to mistake for true piety, that moral seriousness and those warm
   affections and resolutions that resulted from that spirit of bondage,
   which showed itself in Israel remarkably at mount Sinai; and to which
   through all the Old-Testament times, they were especially incident.

   (5.) God was pleased in a great measure to suffer (though he did not
   properly allow) a laxness among the people, with regard to the
   visibility of holiness, and the moral qualifications requisite to an
   attendance on their sacraments. This he also did in many other cases of
   great irregularity, under that dark, imperfect, and comparatively
   carnal dispensation; such as polygamy, putting away their wives at
   pleasure, the revenging of blood, killing the man-slayer, &c. And he
   winked at their worshipping in high places in Solomon's time, (1 Kings
   iii. 4, 5..) the neglect of keeping the feast of tabernacles according
   to the law, from Joshua's time till after the captivity, (Neh. viii.
   17..) and the neglect of the synagogue-worship, or the public service
   of God in particular congregations, till after the captivity, [561]
   though the light of nature, together with the general rules of the law
   of Moses, did sufficiently teach and require it.

   (6.) It seems to be foretold in the prophecies of the Old Testament,
   that there would be a great alteration in this respect, in the days of
   the gospel; that under the new dispensation there should be far greater
   purity in the church. Thus, in the forementioned place in Ezekiel it is
   foretold, that "those who are [visibly] uncircumcised in heart, should
   no more enter into God's sanctuary." Again, Ezek. xx. 37, 38.. "And I
   will cause you to pass under the rod, and will bring you into the bond
   of the covenant; and I will purge out from among you the rebels, and
   them that transgress against me." It seems to be a prophecy of the
   greater purity of those who are visibly in covenant with God. Isa. iv.
   3. "And it shall come to pass that he that is left in Zion, and he that
   remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is
   written among the living [i. e. has a name to live, or is enrolled
   among the saints] in Jerusalem." Isa. lii. 1. "Put on thy beautiful
   garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; from henceforth there shall no
   more come to thee the uncircumcised and the unclean." Zech. xiv. 21.
   "And in that day, there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of
   the Lord."

   (7.) This is just such an alteration as might reasonably be expected
   from what we are taught of the whole nature of the two dispensations.
   As the one had carnal ordinances, (so they are called Heb. ix. 10..)
   the other a spiritual service; (John iv. 24..) the one an earthly
   Canaan, the other a heavenly; the one an external Jerusalem, the other
   a spiritual; the one an earthly high priest, the other a heavenly; the
   one a worldly sanctuary, the other a spiritual; the one a bodily and
   temporal redemption, (which is all that they generally discerned or
   understood in the passover,) the other a spiritual and eternal. And
   agreeably to these things, it was so ordered in providence, that
   Israel, the congregation that should enter this worldly sanctuary, and
   attend these carnal ordinances, should be much more a worldly, carnal
   congregation, than the New-Testament congregation. One reason of such a
   difference seems to be this, viz. That the Messiah might have the
   honour of introducing a state of greater purity and spiritual glory.
   Hence God is said to find fault with the ancient dispensation of the
   covenant, Heb. viii. 7, 8.. And the time of introducing the new
   dispensation is called the time of reformation, Heb. ix. 10.. And one
   thing, wherein the amendment of what God found fault with in the former
   dispensation should consist, the apostle intimates, is the greater
   purity and spirituality of the church, Heb. viii. 7, 8, 11..
     __________________________________________________________________

   [560] On this "precise agreement and difference," Dr. Owen has written
   with admirable clearness in his Exposition to the Epistle to the
   Hebrews and the prefixed exercitation.--W.

   [561] Prid. Connect. Part I. p. 354--536. and 555, 556. 9th Edit. The
   word translated synagogues, Psal. lxxiv. 8. signifies assemblies; and
   is supposed by the generality of learned men to relate to another sort
   of assemblies.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. IV.

   it is not reasonable to suppose, that the multitudes which John the
   Baptist baptized, made a profession of saving grace, or had any such
   visibility of true piety, as has been insisted on.

   Answ. Those whom John baptized, came to him confessing their sins,
   making a profession of some kind of repentance; and it is not
   reasonable to suppose, the repentance they professed was specifically
   or in kind diverse from that which he had instructed them in, and
   called them to, which is called repentance for the remission of sins;
   and that is saving repentance. John's baptism is called the baptism of
   repentance for the remission of sins: I know not how such a phrase can
   be reasonably understood any otherwise, than so as to imply, that his
   baptism was some exhibition of that repentance, and a seal of the
   profession of it. Baptism is a seal of some sort of religious
   profession, in adult persons: but the very name of John's baptism
   shows, that it was a seal of a profession of repentance for the
   remission of sins. It is said, Luke iii. 3. "john preached the baptism
   of repentance for the remission of sins." What can be understood by
   this, but his preaching that men should now speedily turn to God, by
   true repentance and faith in the promised Saviour, and come and confess
   their sins, and openly declare this repentance towards God, and faith
   in the Lamb of God, and that they should confirm and seal this their
   profession by baptism, as well as therein receive the seal of God's
   willingness to remit the sins of such as had this faith and repentance.
   Accordingly, we are told, the people came and were baptized of him,
   confessing their sins, manifesting and professing that sort of
   repentance and faith which he preached. They had no notion of any other
   sort of repentance put into their heads, that they could suppose John
   called them to profess in baptism, but this accompanied with faith in
   the Lamb whom he called them to behold; for he preached no other to
   them. The people that John baptized, professed both repentance for the
   remission of sins, and also faith in the Messiah; as is evident by Acts
   xix. 4, 5. "John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
   unto the people, that they should believe on him that should come after
   him;" i. e. on Christ Jesus. "When they heard this [John's preaching]
   they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus."

   If it be objected here, that we are told, Matt. iii. 5, 6. "There went
   out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about
   Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins;" and
   that it is not to be imagined, all these made any credible profession
   of saving repentance and faith: I answer; No more is to be understood
   by these expressions, according to the phraseology of the Scripture,
   than that there was a very great resort of people from these places to
   John. Nor is any more to be understood by the like term of universality
   in John iii. 26.. "They came to John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that
   was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the
   same baptizeth, and all men come to him;" that is, there was a great
   resort to him from all quarters. It is in nowise unreasonable to
   suppose, there was indeed a very great number of people that came to
   John from the places mentioned, who being exceedingly moved by his
   preaching, in that time of extraordinary outpouring of the Spirit, made
   profession of the faith and repentance which John preached. Doubtless
   there were many more professors than real converts: but still in the
   great resort to John, there were many of the latter character; as we
   may infer from the prophecy: as appears by Luke i. 16, 17. "And many of
   the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he
   shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the
   hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the disobedient to the
   wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." And
   from that account of fact in Mark xi. 12. "From the days of John the
   Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the
   violent take it by force." And in Luke xvi. 16. "The law and the
   prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is
   preached, and every man presseth into it." Here the expression is no
   less universal, than that which is objected in Matt. iii. 5, 6.. As to
   those wicked Pharisees, that so much opposed Christ, some of them I
   suppose had been baptized by John, and then had a great show of
   repentance and faith; but they afterwards apostatized, and were much
   worse than ever before: therefore Christ speaks of them as being like a
   house from which the unclean spirit is visibly turned out for a while,
   and is left empty, swept, and garnished, but afterward is repossessed,
   and has many devils instead of one, Luke xi. 24, &c. Yet as to the
   greater part of these Pharisees, they were not baptized by John; as
   appears by Luke vii. 29, 30..

   If it be further objected, that John in baptizing such multitudes could
   not have time to be sufficiently informed of those he baptized, whether
   their profession of godliness was credible, or no: I answer; That we
   are not particularly informed of the circumstances of his teaching, and
   of the assistance he was favoured with, and the means he had of
   information, concerning those whom he baptized: but we may be sure of
   one thing, viz. He had as much opportunity to inquire into the
   credibility of their profession, as he had to inquire into their
   doctrinal knowledge and moral character; which my opponents suppose to
   be necessary, as well as I: and this is enough to silence the present
   objection.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. V.

   Christ says, Matt. xx. 16.. and again, Matt. xxii. 14.. that many are
   called, but few are chosen. By which it is evident, that there are many
   who belong to the visible church, and yet but few real and true saints;
   and that it is ordinarily thus, even under the New Testament, and in
   days of gospel-light: and therefore that visibility of saintship,
   whereby persons are visible saints in a scripture sense, cannot imply
   an apparent probability of their being real saints, or truly gracious
   persons.

   Answ. In these texts, by those that are called, are not meant those who
   are visible saints, and have the requisite qualifications for christian
   sacraments; but all such as have the external call of the word of God,
   and have its offers and invitations made to them. And it is undoubtedly
   true, and has been matter of fact, for the most part, that of those
   called in this sense, many have been but only called, and never truly
   obedient to the call, few have been true saints. So it was in the
   Jewish nation, to which the parable in the twentieth of Matthew has a
   special respect; in general they had the external call of God's word,
   and attended many religious duties, in hopes of God's favour and
   reward, which is called labouring in God's vineyard; and yet but few of
   them eventually obtained salvation; nay, great multitudes of those who
   were called in this sense, were scandalous persons, and gross
   hypocrites. The Pharisees and Sadducees were called, and they laboured
   in the vineyard, in the sense of the parable; for which they expected
   great rewards, above the Gentile converts or proselytes; wherefore
   their eye was evil towards them, and they could not bear that they
   should be made equal to them. But still these Pharisees and Sadducees
   had not generally the intellectual and moral qualifications, that my
   opponents suppose requisite for christian sacraments; being generally
   scandalous persons, denying some fundamental principles of religion,
   and explaining away some of its most important precepts. Thus, many in
   christendom are called, by the outward call of God's word, and yet few
   of them are in a state of salvation: but not all who sit under the
   sound of the gospel, and hear its invitations, are fit to come to
   sacraments.

   That by those who are called, in this saying of our Saviour, is meant
   those that have the gospel-offer, and not those who belong to the
   society of visible saints, is evident beyond all dispute, in Matt.
   xxii. 14.. By the many that are called, are plainly intended the many
   that are invited to the wedding. In the foregoing parable, we have an
   account of those who from time to time were bidden, or called, (for the
   word is the same in the original,) verse 3. "And went forth his
   servants to call them that were called, NOT ENGLISH and they would not
   come." This has respect to the Jews, who refused not only savingly to
   come to Christ, but refused so much as to come into the visible church
   of Christ. Verse 4. "Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell
   them which are bidden, [or called,] Behold I have prepared my dinner,"
   &c. Verse 8. "They which were bidden [or called] were not worthy,"
   Verse 9. "Go ye therefore into the high-ways, and as many as ye shall
   find, bid [or call, NOT ENGLISH ] to the marriage," or nuptial banquet;
   representing the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles; who upon it
   came into the king's house, i. e. the visible church, and among them
   one that had not a wedding-garment, who was bound hand and foot, and
   cast out when the king came: and then, at the conclusion, Christ adds
   this remark, verse 14. "For many are called or bidden [NOT ENGLISH ]
   but few are chosen;" which must have reference, not only to the man
   last mentioned, who came into the wedding-house, the christian visible
   church, without a wedding-garment, but to those also mentioned before,
   who were called, but would not so much as come into the king's house,
   or join to the visible christian church. To suppose this saying to have
   reference only to that one man who came without a wedding-garment,
   (representing one that comes into the visible church, but is not a true
   saint,) would be to make the introduction of this aphorism, and its
   connexion with what went before, very strange and unintelligible, thus,
   "Multitudes came into the king's house, who were called, and the house
   was full of guests; but among them was found one man who was not
   chosen; for many are called, but few are chosen."
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT VI.

   When the servants of the householder, in the parable of the wheat and
   the tares (Matt. xiii..) unexpectedly found tares among the wheat, they
   said to their master, "Wilt thou that we go and gather them up? But he
   said, Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat
   with them; let both grow together until the harvest." Which shows the
   mind of Christ, that we ought not to make a distinction between true
   saints and others in this world, or aim at admitting true saints only
   into the visible church, but ought to let both be together in the
   church till the day of judgment.

   Answ. 1. These things have no reference to introduction into the field,
   or admission into the visible church, as though no care nor measures
   should be taken to prevent tares being sown; or as though the servants
   who had the charge of the field, would have done well to have taken
   tares, appearing to be such, and planted them in the field amongst the
   wheat: no, instead of this, the parable plainly implies the contrary.
   But the words cited have wholly respect to a casting out and purging
   the field, after the tares had been introduced unawares, and contrary
   to design, through men's infirmity and Satan's procurement. Concerning
   purging the tares out of the field, or casting men out of the church,
   there is no difference between me and those whom I oppose in the
   present controversy: and therefore it is impossible there should be any
   objection from that which Christ says here concerning this matter
   against me, but what is as much of an objection against them; for we
   both hold the same thing. It is agreed on all hands, that adult
   persons, actually admitted to communion in the visible church, however
   they may behave themselves so as to bring their spiritual state into
   suspicion, yet ought not to be cast out, unless they are obstinate in
   heresy or scandal; lest, while we go about to root out the tares, we
   should root out the wheat also. And it is also agreed on all hands,
   that when those represented under the name of tares bring forth such
   evil fruit, such scandalous and obstinate wickedness, as is plainly and
   visibly inconsistent with the being of true grace, they ought to be
   cast out. And therefore it is impossible that this objection should be
   any thing to the purpose.

   Answ. 2. I think this parable, instead of being a just objection
   against the doctrine I maintain, is on the contrary a clear evidence
   for it.

   For (1.) the parable shows plainly, that if any are introduced into the
   field of the householder, or church of Christ, who prove to be not
   wheat, (i. e. not true saints,) they are brought in unawares, or
   contrary to design. If tares are as properly to be sown in the field,
   as is the wheat, which must be the case if the Lord's supper be a
   converting ordinance; then surely no care ought to be taken to
   introduce wheat only, and no respect ought to be had more to the
   qualities of wheat in sowing the field, than the qualities of tares;
   nor is there any more impropriety in the tares having a place there,
   than the wheat. But this surely is altogether inconsistent with the
   scope of the parable.

   (2.) This parable plainly shows, that those who are in the visible
   church, have at first a visibility, or appearance to human sight of
   true grace, or of the nature of true saints. For it is observed, tares
   have this property, that when they first appear, and till the products
   of the field arrive to some maturity, they have such a resemblance of
   wheat, that it is next to impossible to distinguish them.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. VII.

   Christ himself administered the Lord's supper to Judas, whom he knew at
   the same time to be graceless; which is a full evidence, that grace is
   not in itself a requisite qualification in order to coming to the
   Lord's supper; and if it be not requisite in itself, a profession of it
   cannot be requisite.

   Answ. 1. It is to me apparent, that Judas was not present at the
   administration of the Lord's supper. It is true, he was present at the
   passover, and dipped with Christ in the paschal dish. The three former
   evangelists do differ in the order of the account they give of this
   dipping in the dish.--Luke gives an account of it after his account of
   the Lord's supper, Luke xxii. 21.. But Matthew and Mark both give an
   account of it before. (Matt. xxvi. 23.. Mark xiv. 20.) And the like
   might be shown in other instances of these three evangelists differing
   one from another in the order of their narratives; one places those
   things in his history after others, which another places first. These
   sacred historians do not undertake to declare precisely the date of
   every incident, but regard more the truth of facts, than the order of
   time. However, in the present case, the nature of the thing speaks for
   itself, and shows, that Judas's dipping with Christ in the dish, or his
   hand being with Christ on the table, or receiving a sop dipped in the
   dish, must be in that order wherein Matthew and Mark place it in their
   history, viz. at the passover, antecedent to the Lord's supper. For
   there is no such thing in the Lord's supper as dipping of sops, and
   dipping together in the dish; but there was in the passover, where all
   had their hands together in the dish, and dipt their sops in the bitter
   sauce. None of these three evangelists give us any account of the time
   when Judas went out: but John--who is vastly more particular as to what
   passed that night, and is every where more exact as to the order of
   time than the other evangelists--is very precise as to the time, viz.
   that Jesus when he gave him the sop, at the same time sent him away,
   bidding him do quickly what he intended to do; and accordingly when he
   had received the sop, he went immediately out, John xiii. 27-30.. Now
   this sop being at the passover, it is evident he was not present at the
   Lord's supper which followed. Many of the best expositors are of this
   opinion, such as Van Mastricht, Dr. Doddridge, and others.

   Answ. 2. If Judas was there, I deny the consequence. As I have observed
   once and again concerning the Lord's dealings with his people under the
   Old Testament, so under the New the same observation takes place.
   Christ did not come to judge the secrets of men, nor did ordinarily act
   in his external dealings with his disciples, and in the administration
   of ordinances, as the Searcher of hearts; but rather as the Head of the
   visible church, proceeding according to what was exhibited in
   profession and visibility; herein setting an example to his ministers,
   who should stand in his place when he was gone, and act in his name in
   the administration of ordinances. Judas had made the same profession of
   regard to his Master, and of forsaking all for him, as the other
   disciples: and therefore Christ did not openly renounce him till he
   himself had destroyed his profession and visibility of saintship, by
   public scandalous apostacy. Supposing then the presence of Judas at the
   Lord's supper, this affords no consequence in favour of what I oppose.

   Answ. 3. If they with whom I have to do in this controversy, are not
   contented with the answers already given, and think there is a
   remaining difficulty in this matter lying against my scheme, I will
   venture to tell them, that this difficulty lies full as hard against
   their own scheme; and if there be any strength at all in the argument,
   it is to all intents of the same strength against the need of those
   qualifications which they themselves suppose to be necessary in order
   to an approach to the Lord's table. For although they do not think
   renewing saving grace necessary, yet they suppose moral seriousness or
   (as they variously speak) moral sincerity in religion to be necessary.
   They suppose it to be requisite, that persons should have some kind of
   serious principle and view in coming to the Lord's table; some
   intention of subjecting themselves to Christ, and of seeking and
   serving him, in general; and in particular some religious end in coming
   to the sacramental supper, some religious respect to Christ in it. But
   now did not Christ at that time perfectly know, that Judas had none of
   these things? He knew he had nothing of sincerity in the christian
   religion, or of regard to Christ in that ordinance, of any sort
   whatsoever; he knew, that Satan had entered into him and filled his
   heart, and that he was then cherishing in himself a malignant spirit
   against his Master, excited by the reproof Christ had lately given him,
   (compare John xii. 8.. with Matt. xxvi. 8-16.. and Mark xiv. 4-11..)
   and that he had already formed a traitorous, murderous design against
   him, and was now in the prosecution of that bloody design, having
   actually just before been to the chief priests, and agreed with them to
   betray him for thirty pieces of silver. (See Matt. xxvi. 14, 15, 16..
   Mark xiv. 10, 11.. Luke xxii. 3-6.. and John xiii. 2..) Christ knew
   these things, and knew that Judas was utterly unqualified for the holy
   sacrament of the Lord's supper; though it had not yet been made known
   to the church, or the disciples.--Therefore it concerns those on the
   contrary part in this controversy, to find out some solution of this
   difficulty, as much as it does me; and they will find they have as much
   need to take refuge in the solution already given, in one or other of
   the two preceding answers to this objection.

   By the way I would observe, that Christ's not excluding Judas from the
   passover, under these circumstances, knowing him to be thus
   unqualified, without so much as moral sincerity, &c. is another thing
   that effectually enervates all the strength of the objection against
   me, from the passover. For Judas did not only in common with others
   fall under God's strict command, in the law of Moses, to keep this
   feast, without any exception of his case there to be found; but Christ
   himself, with his own hand, gave him the sop, a part of the paschal
   feast; even although at the same instant he had in view the man's
   secret wickedness and hypocrisy, the traitorous design which was then
   in his heart, and the horrid conspiracy with the chief priests, which
   he had already entered into, and was now prosecuting. This was then in
   Christ's mind, and he intimated it to him, at the same moment when he
   gave him the sop, saying, "What thou doest, do quickly." This
   demonstrates, that the objection from the passover is no stronger
   argument against my scheme, than the scheme of those whom I oppose;
   because it is no stronger against the necessity of sanctifying grace,
   the qualification for christian sacraments, which I insist upon, than
   it is against the necessity of moral seriousness or sincerity, the
   qualification which they insist upon.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. VIII.

   If sanctifying grace be a requisite qualification in order to due
   access to christian sacraments, God would have given some certain rule,
   whereby those who are to admit them, might know whether they have such
   grace, or not.

   Answ. This objection was obviated in my stating the question. However,
   I will say something further to it in this place; and would observe,
   that if there be any strength in this objection, it lies in the truth
   of this proposition, viz. That whatever qualifications are requisite in
   order to persons' due access to christian sacraments, God has given
   some certain rule, whereby those who admit them, may know whether they
   have those qualifications, or not. If this proposition is not true,
   then there is no force at all in the argument. But I dare say, there is
   not a divine, nor Christian of common sense, on the face of the earth,
   that will assert and stand to it, that this proposition is true. For
   none will deny, that some sort of belief of the being of a God, some
   sort of belief that the Scriptures are the word of God, that there is a
   future state of rewards and punishments, and that Jesus is the Messiah,
   are qualifications requisite in order to a due access to christian
   sacraments; and yet God has given those who are to admit persons no
   certain rule, whereby they may know whether they believe any one of
   these things. Neither has he given his ministers or churches any
   certain rule, whereby they may know whether any person that offers
   himself for admission to the sacrament, has any degree of moral
   sincerity, moral seriousness of spirit, or any inward moral
   qualification whatsoever. These things have all their existence in the
   soul, which is out of our neighbour's view. Not therefore a certainty,
   but a profession and visibility, of these things, must be the rule of
   the church's proceeding; and it is as good and as reasonable a rule of
   judgment concerning saving grace, as it is concerning any other
   internal invisible qualifications, which cannot be certainly known by
   any but the subject himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. IX.

   If sanctifying grace be requisite to a due approach to the Lord's
   table, then no man may come but he that knows he has such grace. A man
   must not only think he has a right to the Lord's supper, in order to
   his lawful partaking of it; but he must know he has a right. If nothing
   but sanctification gives him a real right to the Lord's supper, then
   nothing short of the knowledge of sanctification gives him a known
   right to it: only an opinion and probable hopes of a right will not
   warrant his coming.

   Answ. 1. I desire those who insist on this as an invincible argument,
   to consider calmly whether they themselves ever did, or ever will,
   stand to it. For here these two things are to be observed:

   (1.) If no man may warrantably come to the Lord's supper, but such as
   know they have a right, then no unconverted persons may come unless
   they not only think, but know, it is the mind of God, that unconverted
   persons should come, and know that he does not require grace in order
   to their coming. For unless they know that men may come without grace,
   they cannot know that they themselves have a right to come, being
   without grace. And will any one assert and stand to it, that of
   necessity all adult persons, of every age, rank, and condition of life,
   must be so versed in this controversy, as to have a certainty in this
   matter, in order to their coming to the Lord's supper? It would he most
   absurd for any to assert it to be a point of easy proof, the evidence
   of which is so clear and obvious to every one of every capacity, as to
   supersede all occasion for their being studied in divinity, in order to
   a certainty of its truth, that persons may come to the sacred table of
   the Lord, notwithstanding they know themselves to be unconverted!
   Especially considering, that the contrary to this opinion has been in
   general the judgment of protestant divines and churches, from the
   Reformation to this day; and that the most of the greatest divines that
   have ever appeared in the world, who have spent their lives in the
   diligent prayerful study of divinity, have been fixed in the reverse of
   that opinion. This is sufficient at least to show, that this opinion is
   not so plain as not to be a disputable point; and that the evidence of
   it is not so obvious to persons of the lowest capacity and little
   inquiry, as that all may come to a certainty in the matter, without
   difficulty and without study. I would humbly ask here, What has been
   the case in fact in our churches, who have practised for so many years
   on this principle? Can it be pretended, or was it ever supposed, that
   the communicants in general, even persons of mean intellects and low
   education, not excepting the very boys and girls of sixteen years old,
   that have been taken into the church, had so studied divinity, as not
   only to think, but know, that our pious forefathers, and almost all the
   protestant and christian divines in the world, have been in an error in
   this matter? And have people ever been taught the necessity of this
   previous knowledge? Has it ever been insisted upon, that before persons
   come to the Lord's supper, they must look so far into the case of a
   right to the Lord's supper, as to come not only to a full settled
   opinion, but even certainty, in this point? And has any one minister or
   church in their admissions ever proceeded on the supposition, that all
   whom they took into communion were so versed in this controversy, as
   this comes to? Has it ever been the manner to examine them as to their
   thorough acquaintance with this particular controversy? Has it been the
   manner to put by those who had only an opinion and not a certainty;
   even as the priests who could not find their register, were put by,
   till the matter could be determined by Urim and Thummim? And I dare
   appeal to every minister, and every member of a church that has been
   concerned in admitting communicants, whether they ever imagined, or it
   ever entered into their thought, concerning each one to whose admission
   they have consented, that they had looked so much into this matter, as
   not only to have settled their opinion, but to be arrived to a proper
   certainty?

   (2.) I desire it may be remembered, that the venerable author of the
   Appeal to the Learned, did in his ministry ever teach such doctrine
   from whence it will unavoidably follow, that no one unconverted man in
   the world can know he has a warrant to come to the Lord's supper. For
   if any unconverted man has a warrant to worship his Maker in this way,
   it must be because God has given him such warrant by the revelation of
   his mind in the Holy Scriptures. And therefore if any unconverted man
   not only thinks, but knows, he has a warrant from God, he must of
   consequence, not only think, but know, that the Scriptures are the word
   of God. But I believe all that survive of the stated hearers of that
   eminent divine, and all who were acquainted with him, well remember it
   to be a doctrine which he often taught and much insisted on, that no
   natural man knows the Scripture to be the word of God; that although
   such may think so, yet they do not know it; and that at best they have
   but a doubtful opinion: and he often would express himself thus; No
   natural man is thoroughly convinced, that the Scriptures are the word
   of God; if they were convinced, they would be gained. Now if so, it is
   impossible any natural man in the world should ever know, it is his
   right, in his present condition, to come to the Lord's supper. True, he
   may think it is his right, he may have that opinion: but he cannot know
   it; and so must not come, according to this argument. For it is only
   the word of God in the Holy Scriptures, that gives a man a right to
   worship the Supreme Being in this sacramental manner, and to come to
   him in this way, or any other, as one in covenant with him. The Lord's
   supper being no branch of natural worship, reason without institution
   is no ground of duty or right in this affair. And hence it is plainly
   impossible for those that do not so much as know the Scriptures are the
   word of God, to know they have any good ground of duty or right in this
   matter. Therefore, supposing unconverted men have a real right, yet
   since they have no known right, they have no warrant (according to the
   argument before us) to take and use their right; and what good then can
   their right do them? Or how can they excuse themselves from
   presumption, in claiming a right, which they do not know belongs to
   them?--It is said, a probable hope that persons are regenerate, will
   not warrant them to come; if they come, they take a liberty to do that
   which they do not know God gives them leave to do, which is horrible
   presumption in them. But if this be good arguing, I may as well say, a
   probable opinion that unregenerate men may communicate, will not
   warrant such to do it. They must have certain knowledge of this; else
   their right being uncertain, they run a dreadful venture in coming.

   Answ. 2. Men are liable to doubt concerning their moral sincerity, as
   well as saving grace. Suppose an unconverted man, sensible of his being
   under the reigning power of sin, was about to appear solemnly to own
   the covenant, (as it is commonly called,) and to profess to give up
   himself to the service of God in an universal and persevering
   obedience; and suppose at the same time he knew, that if he sealed this
   profession at the Lord's supper, without moral sincerity, (supposing
   him to understand the meaning of that phrase,) he should eat and drink
   judgment to himself; and if accordingly, his conscience being awakened,
   he was afraid of God's judgment; in this case, I believe, the man would
   be every whit as liable to doubts about his moral sincerity, as godly
   men are about their gracious sincerity. And if it be not matter of
   fact, that natural men are so often exercised and troubled with doubts
   about their moral sincerity, as godly men are about their regeneration,
   I suppose it to be owing only to this cause, viz. that godly men being
   of more tender consciences than those under the dominion of sin, are
   more afraid of God's judgments, and more ready to tremble at his word.
   The divines on the other side of the question, suppose it to be
   requisite, that communicants should believe the fundamental doctrines
   of religion with all their heart, (in the sense of Acts viii. 37..) the
   doctrine of Three Persons and one God, in particular. But I think there
   can be no reasonable doubt, that natural men--who have so weak and poor
   a kind of faith in these mysteries--if they were indeed as much afraid
   of the terrible consequences of their being deceived in being not
   morally sincere in their profession of the truth, as truly gracious men
   are wont to be of delusion concerning their experience of a work of
   grace--or whether they are evangelically sincere in choosing God for
   their portion--the former would be as frequently exercised with doubts
   in the one case, as the latter in the other. And I very much question,
   whether any divine on the other side of the controversy would think it
   necessary, that natural men in professing those things should mean that
   they know they are morally sincere, or intend any more than that they
   trust they have that sincerity, so far as they know their own hearts.
   If a man should come to them, proposing to join with the church, and
   tell them, though indeed he was something afraid whether he believed
   the doctrine of the Trinity with all his heart, (meaning in a moral
   sense,) yet that he had often examined himself as to that matter with
   the utmost impartiality and strictness he was capable of, and on the
   whole he found reasons of probable hope, and his preponderating thought
   of himself was, that he was sincere in it; would they think such an one
   ought to be rejected, or would they advise him not to come to the
   sacrament, because he did not certainly know he had this sincerity, but
   only thought he had it?

   Answ. 3. If we suppose sanctifying grace requisite in order to be
   properly qualified, according to God's word, for an attendance on the
   Lord's supper; yet it will not follow, that a man must know he has this
   qualification, in order to his being capable of conscientiously
   attending it. If he judges that he has it, according to the best light
   he can obtain, on the most careful examination, with the improvement of
   such helps as he can get, the advice of his pastor, &c. he may be bound
   in conscience to attend. And the reason is this; Christians partaking
   of the Lord's supper is not a matter of mere claim, or right and
   privilege, but a matter of duty and obligation; being an affair wherein
   God has a claim and demand on us. And as we ought to be careful, on the
   one hand, that we proceed on good grounds in taking to ourselves a
   privilege, lest we take what we have no good claim to; so we should be
   equally careful, on the other hand, to proceed on good grounds in what
   we withhold from another, lest we do not withhold that from him which
   is his due, and which he justly challenges from us. Therefore in a case
   of this complex nature, where a timing is both a matter of right or
   privilege to us, and also a matter of obligation to another, or a right
   of his from us, the danger of proceeding without right and truth is
   equal both ways; and consequently, if we cannot be absolutely sure
   either way, here the best judgment we can form, after all proper
   endeavours to know the truth, must govern and determine us; otherwise
   we shall designedly do that whereby, according to our own judgment, we
   run the greatest risk; which is certainly contrary to reason. If the
   question were only what a man has a right to, he might forbear till he
   were sure: but the question is, not only whether he has right to attend
   the supper, but whether God also has not a right to his attendance
   there? Supposing it were merely a privilege which I am allowed but not
   commanded, in a certain specified case, then, supposing I am uncertain
   whether that be the case with we or no, it will be safest to abstain.
   But supposing I am not only forbidden to take it, unless that be the
   case with me, but positively commanded and required to take it, if that
   be the case in fact, then it is equally dangerous to neglect on
   uncertainties, as to take on uncertainties. In such a critical
   situation, a man must act according to the best of his judgment on his
   case; otherwise he wilfully runs into that which he thinks the greatest
   danger of the two.

   Thus it is in innumerable cases in human life. I shall give one plain
   instance: A man ought not to take upon him the work of the ministry,
   unless called to it in the providence of God; for a man has no right to
   take this honour to himself unless called of God. Now let us suppose a
   young man, of a liberal education, and well accomplished, to be at a
   loss whether it is the will of God that he should follow the work of
   the ministry; and he examines himself, and examines his circumstances,
   with great seriousness and solemn prayer, and well considers and weighs
   the appearances in divine providence: and yet when he has done all, he
   is not come to a proper certainty, that God calls him to this work; but
   however, it looks so to him, according to the best light he can obtain,
   and the most careful judgment he can form: now such an one appears
   obliged in conscience to give himself to this work. He must by no means
   neglect it under a notion that he must not take this honour to himself,
   till he knows he has a right to it; because, though it be indeed a
   privilege, yet it is not a matter of mere privilege, but a matter of
   duty too; and if he neglects it under these circumstances, he neglects
   what, according to his own best judgment, he thinks God requires of
   him, and calls him to; which is to sin against his conscience.

   As to the case of the priests, that could not find their register,
   (Ezra ii..) alleged in the Appeal to the Learned, p. 64. it appears to
   me of no force in this argument; for if those priests had never so
   great assurance in themselves of their pedigree being good, or of their
   being descended from priests, and should have professed such assurance,
   yet it would not have availed. Nor did they abstain from the
   priesthood, because they wanted satisfaction themselves, but they were
   subject to the judgment of the Sanhedrim. God had never made any
   profession of the parties themselves, but the visibility of the thing,
   and evidence of the fact to their own eyes, as the rule to judge of the
   qualification; this matter of pedigree being an external object,
   ordinarily within the view of man; and not any qualification of heart.
   But this is not the case with regard to requisite qualifications for
   the Lord's supper. These being many of them internal invisible things,
   seated in the mind and heart, such as the belief of a Supreme Being,
   &c. God has made a credible profession of these things the rule to
   direct in admission of persons to the ordinance. In making this
   profession they are determined and governed by their own judgment of
   themselves, and not by any thing within the view of the church.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. X.

   The natural consequence of the doctrine which has been maintained, is
   the bringing multitudes of persons of a tender conscience and true
   piety into great perplexities; who being at a loss about the state of
   their souls, must needs be as much in suspense about their duty: and it
   is not reasonable to suppose, that God would order things so in the
   revelations of his will, as to bring his own people into such
   perplexities.

   Answ. 1. It is for want of the like tenderness of conscience which the
   godly have, that the other doctrine which insists on moral sincerity,
   does not naturally bring those who are received to communion on those
   principles, into the same perplexities, through their doubting of their
   moral sincerity, of their believing mysteries with all their heart, &c.
   as has been already observed. And being free from perplexity, only
   through stupidity and hardness of heart, is worse than being in the
   greatest perplexity through tenderness of conscience.

   Answ. 2. Supposing the doctrine which I have maintained, be indeed the
   doctrine of God's word, yet it will not follow, that the perplexities
   true saints are in through doubting of their state, are effects owing
   to the revelations of God's word. Perplexity and distress of mind, not
   only on occasion of the Lord's supper, but innumerable other occasions,
   is the natural and unavoidable consequence of true Christians doubting
   of their state. But shall we therefore say, that all these perplexities
   are owing to the word of God? No, it is not owing to God, nor to any of
   his revelations, that true saints ever doubt of their state; his
   revelations are plain and clear, and his rules sufficient for men to
   determine their own condition by. But, for the most part, it is owing
   to their own sloth, and giving way to their sinful dispositions. Must
   God's institutions and revelations be answerable for all the
   perplexities men bring on themselves, through their own negligence and
   unwatchfulness? It is wisely ordered that the saints should escape
   perplexity in no other way than that of great strictness, diligence,
   and maintaining the lively, laborious, and self-denying exercises of
   religion.

   It might as well be said, it is unreasonable to suppose that God should
   order things so as to bring his own people into such perplexities, as
   doubting saints are wont to be exercised with, in the sensible
   approaches of death; when their doubts tend to vastly greater
   perplexity, than in their approaches to the Lord's table. If Christians
   would more thoroughly exercise themselves unto godliness, labouring
   always to keep a conscience void of offence both towards God and
   towards man, it would be the way to have the comfort and taste the
   sweetness of religion. If they would so run, not as uncertainly; so
   fight, not as they that beat the air; it would be the way for them to
   escape perplexity, both in ordinances and providences, and to rejoice
   and enjoy God in both.--Not but that doubting of their state sometimes
   arises from other causes, besides want of watchfulness; it may arise
   from melancholy, and some other peculiar disadvantages. But however, it
   is not owing to God's revelations nor institutions; which, whatsoever
   we may suppose them to be, will not prevent the perplexities of such
   persons.

   Answ. 3. It appears to me reasonable to suppose, that the doctrine I
   maintain, if universally embraced by God's people--however it might be
   an accidental occasion of perplexity in many instances, through their
   own infirmity and sin--would, on the whole, be a happy occasion of much
   more comfort to the saints than trouble, as it would have a tendency,
   on every return of the Lord's supper, to put them on the strictest
   examination and trial of the state of their souls, agreeable to that
   rule of the apostle, 1 Cor. xi. 28.. The neglect of which great duty of
   frequent and thorough self-examination, seems to be one main cause of
   the darkness and perplexity of the saints, and the reason why they have
   so little comfort in ordinances, and so little comfort in general.--Mr.
   Stoddard often taught his people, that assurance is attainable, and
   that those who are true saints might know it, if they would; i. e. if
   they would use proper means and endeavours in order to it.--And if so,
   then certainly it is not just, to charge those perplexities on God's
   institutions, which arise through men's negligence; nor would it be
   just on the supposition of God's institutions being such as I suppose
   them to be.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XI.

   You may as well say, that unsanctified persons may not attend any duty
   of divine worship whatsoever, as that they may not attend the Lord's
   supper; for all duties of worship are holy and require holiness, in
   order to an acceptable performance of them, as well as that.

   Answ. If this argument has any foundation at all, it has its foundation
   in the supposed truth of the following propositions, viz. Whosoever is
   qualified for admission to one duty of divine worship, is qualified for
   admission to all; and he that is unqualified for one, and may be
   forbidden one, is unqualified for all, and ought to be allowed to
   attend none. But certainly these propositions are not true. There are
   many qualified for some duties of worship, and may be allowed to attend
   them, who yet are not qualified for some others, nor by any means to be
   admitted to them. As every body grants, the unbaptized, the
   excommunicated, heretics, scandalous livers, &c. may be admitted to
   hear the word preached; nevertheless they are not to be allowed to come
   to the Lord's supper. Even excommunicated persons remain still under
   the law of the Sabbath, and are not to be forbidden to observe the
   Lord's day. Ignorant persons, such as have not knowledge sufficient for
   an approach to the Lord's table, yet are not excused from the duty of
   prayer: they may pray to God to instruct them, and assist them in
   obtaining knowledge. They who have been educated in Arianism and
   Socinianism, and are not yet brought off from these fundamental errors,
   and so are by no means to be admitted to the Lord's supper, yet may
   pray to God to assist them in their studies, and guide them into the
   truth, and for all other mercies which they need. Socrates, that great
   Gentile philosopher, who worshipped the true God, as he was led by the
   light of nature, might pray to God, and he attended his duty when he
   did so; although he knew not the revelation which God had made of
   himself in his word. That great philosopher, Seneca, who was
   contemporary with the apostle Paul, held one Supreme Being, and had in
   many respects right notions of the divine perfections and providence,
   though he did not embrace the gospel, which at that day was preached in
   the world: yet might pray to that Supreme Being whom he acknowledged.
   And if his brother Gallio at Corinth, when Paul preached there, had
   prayed to this Supreme Being to guide him into the truth, that he might
   know whether the doctrine Paul preached was true, he therein would have
   acted very becoming a reasonable creature, and any one would have acted
   unreasonably in forbidding him; but yet surely neither of these men was
   qualified for the christian sacrament. So that it is apparent there is
   and ought to be a distinction made between duties of worship, with
   respect to qualifications for them; and that which is a sufficient
   qualification for admission to one duty, is not so for all. And
   therefore the position is not true, which is the foundation whereon the
   whole weight of this argument rests. To say, that although it be true
   there ought to be a distinction made, in admission to duties of
   worship, with regard to some qualifications, yet sanctifying grace is
   not one of those qualifications that make the difference; would be but
   giving up the argument, and a perfect begging the question.

   It is said, there can be no reason assigned, why unsanctified persons
   may attend other duties of worship, and not the Lord's supper. But I
   humbly conceive this must be an inadvertence. For there is a reason
   very obvious from that necessary and very notable distinction among
   duties of worship, which follows:

   1. There are some duties of worship, that imply a profession of God's
   covenant; whose very nature and design is an exhibition of those vital
   active principles and inward exercises, wherein consists the condition
   of the covenant of grace, or that union of soul to God, which is the
   union between Christ and his spouse, entered into by an inward hearty
   consenting to that covenant. Such are the christian sacraments, whose
   very design is to make and confirm a profession of compliance with that
   covenant, and whose very nature is to exhibit or express the uniting
   acts of the soul: those sacramental duties therefore cannot be attended
   by any whose hearts do not really consent to that covenant, and whose
   souls do not truly close with Christ, without either their being
   self-deceived, or else wilfully making a false profession, and lying in
   a very aggravated manner.

   2. There are other duties, which are not in their own nature an
   exhibition of a covenant-union with God, or of any compliance with the
   condition of the covenant of grace; but are the expression of general
   virtues, or virtues in their largest extent, including both special and
   common. Thus prayer, or asking mercy of God, is in its own nature no
   profession of a compliance with the covenant of grace. It is an
   expression of some belief of the being of a God, some sense of our
   wants, and of a need of God's help, some sense of our dependence, &c.
   but not merely such a sense of these things as is spiritual and saving.
   Indeed there are some prayers proper to be made by saints, and many
   things proper to be expressed by them in prayer, which imply the
   profession of a spiritual union of heart to God through Christ; but
   such as no heathen, no heretic, nor natural man whatever, can or ought
   to make. Prayer in general, and asking mercy and help from God, is no
   more a profession of consent to the covenant of grace, than reading the
   Scriptures, or meditation, or performing any duty of morality and
   natural religion. A Mahometan may as well ask mercy, as hear
   instruction: and any natural man may as well express his desires to
   God, as hear when God declares his will to him. It is true, when an
   unconverted man prays, the manner of his doing it is sinful: but when a
   natural man, knowing himself to be so, comes to the Lord's supper, the
   very matter of what he does, in respect of the profession he there
   makes, and his pretension to lay hold of God's covenant, is a lie, and
   a lie told in the most solemn manner.

   In a word, the venerable Mr. Stoddard himself, in his Doctrine of
   Instituted Churches, has taught us to distinguish between instituted
   and natural acts of religion: the word and prayer he places under the
   head of moral duty, and considers as common to all; but the sacraments,
   according to what he says there, being instituted, are of special
   administration, and must be limited agreeable to the institution.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XII.

   The Lord's supper has a proper tendency to promote men's conversion,
   being an affecting representation of the greatest and most important
   things of God's word: it has a proper tendency to awaken and humble
   sinners; here being a discovery of the terrible anger of God for sin,
   by the infliction of the curse upon Christ, when sin was imputed to
   him; and the representation here made of the dying love of Christ has a
   tendency to draw the hearts of sinners from sin to God, &c.

   Answ. Unless it be an evident truth, that what the Lord's supper may
   have tendency to promote, the same it was appointed to promote, nothing
   follows from this argument. If the argument affords any consequence,
   the consequence is built on the tendency of the Lord's supper. And if
   the consequence be good and strong on this foundation, as drawn from
   such premises, then wherever the premises hold, the consequence holds;
   otherwise it must appear, that the premises and consequence are not
   connected. And now let us see how it is in fact. Do not scandalous
   persons need to have these very effects wrought in their hearts which
   have been mentioned? Yes, surely; they need them in a special manner:
   they need to be awakened; they need to have an affecting discovery of
   that terrible wrath of God against sin, which was manifested in a
   peculiar manner by the terrible effects of God's wrath in the
   sufferings of his own incarnate Son. Gross sinners need this in some
   respect more than others. They need to have their hearts broken by an
   affecting view of the great and important things of God's word. They
   need especially to fly to Christ for refuge, and therefore need to have
   their hearts drawn. And seeing the Lord's supper has so great a
   tendency to promote these things, if the consequence from the tendency
   of the Lord's supper, as inferring the end of its appointment, be good,
   then it must be a consequence also well inferred, that the Lord's
   supper was appointed for the reclaiming and bringing to repentance
   scandalous persons.

   To turn this off, by saying, Scandalous persons are expressly forbid,
   is but giving up the argument, and begging the question. It is giving
   up the argument; since it allows the consequence not to be good. For it
   allows, that notwithstanding the proper tendency of the Lord's supper
   to promote a design, yet it may be the Lord's supper was not appointed
   with a view to promote that end.--And it is a begging the question;
   since it supposes, that unconverted men are not evidently forbidden, as
   well as scandalous persons; which is the thing in controversy. If they
   be evidently forbid, that is as much to reasonable creatures (who need
   nothing but good evidence) as if they were expressly forbidden.--To say
   here, that the Lord's supper is a converting ordinance only to orderly
   members, and that there is another ordinance appointed for bringing
   scandalous persons to repentance, this is no solution of the
   difficulty; but is only another instance of yielding up the argument,
   and begging the question. For it plainly concedes, that the tendency of
   an ordinance does not prove it appointed to all the ends, which it
   seems to have a tendency to promote; and also supposes, that there is
   not any other ordinance, appointed for converting sinners that are
   moral and orderly in their lives, exclusive of this, which is the thing
   in question.

   It is at best but very precarious arguing from the seeming tendency of
   things, to the divine appointment, or God's will and disposition with
   respect to the use of those things. Would it not have had a great
   tendency to convince the scribes and Pharisees, and to promote their
   conversion, if they had been admitted into the mount when Christ was
   transfigured? But yet it was not the will of Christ, that they should
   be admitted there, or any other but Peter, James, and John. Would it
   not have had a very great tendency to convince and bring to repentance
   the unbelieving Jews, if they had been allowed to see and converse
   freely with Christ after his resurrection, and see him ascend into
   heaven? But yet it was the will of God, that none but disciples should
   be admitted to these privileges. Might it not have had a good tendency,
   if all that were sincere followers of Christ, women as well as men, had
   been allowed to be present at the institution of the Lord's supper? But
   yet it is commonly thought, none were admitted beside the apostles.

   Indeed the ever honoured author of the Appeal to the Learned has
   supplied me with the true and proper answer to this objection, in the
   following words, p. 27, 28. "The efficacy of the Lord's supper does
   depend upon the blessing of God. Whatever tendency ordinances have in
   their own nature to be serviceable to men, yet they will not prevail
   any further than God doth bless them. "The weapons of our warfare are
   mighty through God," 2 Cor. x. 4. It is God that teaches men to profit,
   and makes them profitable and serviceable to men's souls. There is
   reason to hope for a divine blessing on the Lord's supper, when it is
   administered to those that it ought to be administered to; God's
   blessing is to be expected in God's way. If men act according to their
   own humours and fancies, and do not keep in the way of obedience, it is
   presumption to expect God's blessing, Matt. xv. 9. "In vain do they
   worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." But when
   they are admitted to the Lord's supper that God would have to be
   admitted, there is ground to hope that he will make it profitable.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XIII.

   All that are members of the visible church and in the external
   covenant, and neither ignorant nor scandalous, are commanded to perform
   all external covenant duties; and particularly they are commanded to
   attend the Lord's supper, in those words of Christ, This do in
   remembrance of me.

   Answ. This argument is of no force, without first taking for granted
   the very thing in question. For this is plainly supposed in it, that
   however these commands are given to such as are in the external
   covenant, yet they are given indefinitely, but with exceptions and
   reserves, and do not immediately reach all such; they do not reach
   those who are unqualified, though they be in the external covenant. Now
   the question is, Who are these that are unqualified? The objection
   supposes, that only ignorant and scandalous persons are so. But why are
   they only supposed unqualified; and not unconverted persons too?
   Because it is taken for granted, that these are not unqualified. And
   thus the grand point in question is supposed, instead of being proved.
   Why are these limitations only singled out, neither ignorant nor
   scandalous; and not others as well? The answer must be, because these
   are all the limitations which the Scripture makes: but this now is the
   very thing in question. Whereas, the business of an argument is to
   prove, and not to suppose, or to take for granted, the very thing which
   is to be proved.

   If it be here said, It is with good reason that those who are ignorant
   or scandalous alone are supposed to be excepted in God's command, and
   obligations of the covenant; for the covenant spoken of in the
   objection, is the external covenant, and this requires only external
   duties; which alone are what lie within the reach of man's natural
   power, and so in the reach of his legal power: God does not command or
   require what men have no natural power to perform, and which cannot be
   performed before something else, some antecedent duty, is performed,
   which antecedent duty is not in their natural power.

   I reply, Still things are but supposed, which should be proved, and
   which want confirmation.

   (1.) It is supposed, that those who have externally (i. e. by oral
   profession and promise) entered into God's covenant, are thereby
   obliged to no more than the external duties of that covenant: which is
   not proved, and I humbly conceive, is certainly not the true state of
   the case. They who have externally entered into God's covenant, are by
   external profession and engagements entered into that one only covenant
   of grace, which the Scripture informs us of; and therefore are obliged
   to fulfil the duties of that covenant, which are chiefly internal. The
   children of Israel, when they externally entered into covenant with God
   at mount Sinai, promised to perform all the duties of the covenant, to
   obey all the ten commandments spoken by God in their hearing, and
   written in tables of stone, which were therefore called The Tables of
   the Covenant; the sum of which ten commands was, to love the Lord their
   God with all their heart, and with all their soul, and to love their
   neighbour as themselves; which principally at least are internal
   duties. In particular, they promised not to covet; which is an internal
   duty.--They promised to have no other god before the Lord; which
   implied, that they would in their hearts regard no other being or
   object whatever above God, or in equality with him, but would give him
   their supreme respect.

   (2.) It is supposed, that God does not require impossibilities of men,
   in this sense, that he does not require those things of them which are
   out of their natural power, and particularly that he does not require
   them to be converted. But this is not proved; nor can I reconcile it
   with the tenor of the scripture revelation. And the chief advocates for
   the doctrine I oppose, have themselves abundantly asserted the
   contrary. The venerable author fore-mentioned, as every body knows,
   that knew him, always taught, that God justly requires men to be
   converted, to repent of their sins, and turn to the Lord, to close with
   Christ, and savingly to believe in him; and that in refusing to accept
   of Christ and turn to God, they disobeyed the divine commands, and were
   guilty of the most heinous sin; and that their moral inability was no
   excuse.

   (3.) It is supposed, that God does not command men to do those things
   which are not to be done till something else is done, that is not
   within the reach of men's natural ability. This also is not proved; nor
   do I see how it can be true, even according to the principles of those
   who insist on this objection. The fore-mentioned memorable divine ever
   taught, that God commandeth natural men without delay to believe in
   Christ: and yet he always held, that it was impossible for them to
   believe till they had by a preceding act submitted to the sovereignty
   of God; and yet he held, that men never could do this of themselves,
   till humbled and bowed by powerful convictions of God's Spirit. Again,
   he taught, that God commandeth natural men to love him with all their
   heart: and yet he held, that this could not be till men had first
   believed in Christ; the exercise of love being a fruit of faith; and
   believing in Christ, he supposed not to be within the reach of man's
   natural ability. Further, he held, that God requireth of all men holy,
   spiritual, and acceptable obedience; and yet that such obedience is not
   within the reach of their natural ability; and not only so, but that
   there must first be love to God, before there could be new obedience,
   and that this love to God is not within the reach of men's natural
   ability. Yet, before this love there must be faith, which faith is not
   within the reach of man's natural power; and still, before faith there
   must be the knowledge of God, which knowledge is not in natural men's
   reach: and, once more, even before the knowledge of God there must be a
   thorough humiliation, which humiliation men could not work in
   themselves by any natural power of their own. Now, must it needs be
   thought, notwithstanding all these unreasonable things, that God should
   command those whom he has nourished and brought up, to honour him by
   giving an open testimony of love to him; only because wicked men cannot
   testify love till they have love, and love is not in their natural
   power? And is it any good excuse in the sight of God, for one who is
   under the highest obligations to him, and yet refuses him suitable
   honour by openly testifying his love of him, to plead that he has no
   love to testify; but on the contrary, has an infinitely unreasonable
   hatred? God may most reasonably require a proper testimony and
   profession of love to him; and yet it may also be reasonable to
   suppose, at the same time, he forbids men to lie; or to declare that
   they have love, when they have none: because, though it be supposed,
   that God requires men to testify love to him, yet he requires them to
   do it in a right way, and in the true order, viz. first loving him, and
   then testifying their love.

   (4.) I do not see how it can be true, that a natural man has not a
   legal power to be converted, accept of Christ, love God, &c. By a legal
   power to do a thing, is plainly meant such power as brings a person
   properly within the reach of a legal obligation, or the obligation of a
   law or command to do that thing. But he that has such natural
   faculties, as render him a proper subject of moral government, may
   properly be commanded, and put under the obligation of a law to do
   things so reasonable; notwithstanding any native aversion and moral
   inability in him to do his duty, arising from the power of sin. This
   also, I must observe, was a known doctrine of Mr. Stoddard's, and what
   he ever taught.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XIV.

   Either unsanctified persons may lawfully come to the Lord's supper, or
   it is unlawful for them to carry themselves as saints; but it is not
   unlawful for them to carry themselves as saints.

   Answ. It is the duty of unconverted men both to become saints, and to
   behave as saints. The scripture rule is, Matthew xii. 33 . Make the
   tree good, that the fruit may be good. Mr. Stoddard himself never
   supposed, that the fruit of saints was to be expected from men, or
   could possibly be brought forth by them in truth, till they were
   saints.

   And I see not how it is true, that unconverted men ought, in every
   respect, to do those external things, which it is the duty of a godly
   man to do. It is the duty of a godly man, conscious of his having given
   his heart unto the Lord, to profess his love to God and his esteem of
   him above all, his unfeigned faith in Christ, &c. and in his
   closet-devotions to thank God for these graces as the fruit of the
   Spirit in him. But it is not the duty of another that really has no
   faith, nor love to God, to do thus. Neither any more is it a natural
   man's duty to profess these things in the Lord's supper.--Mr. Stoddard
   taught it to be the duty of converts, on many occasions, to profess
   their faith and love and other graces before men, by relating their
   experiences in conversation: but it would be great wickedness, for such
   as know themselves to be not saints, thus to do; because they would
   speak falsely, and utter lies in so doing. Now, for the like reason, it
   would be very sinful, for men to profess and seal their consent to the
   covenant of grace in the Lord's supper, when they know at the same time
   that they do not consent to it, nor have their hearts at all in the
   affair.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XV.

   This scheme will keep out of the church some true saints; for there are
   some such who determine against themselves, and their prevailing
   judgment is, that they are not saints: and we had better let in several
   hypocrites, than exclude one true child of God.

   Answ. I think, it is much better to insist on some visibility to
   reason, of true saintship, in admitting members, even although this,
   through men's infirmity and darkness, and Satan's temptations, be an
   occasion of some true saints abstaining; than by express liberty given,
   to open the door to as many as please, of those who have no visibility
   of real saintship, and make no profession of it, nor pretension to it;
   and that because this method tends to the ruin and great reproach of
   the christian church, and also to the ruin of the persons admitted.

   1. It tends to the reproach and ruin of the christian church. For by
   the rule which God hath given for admissions, if it be carefully
   attended, (it is said,) more unconverted than converted persons, will
   be admitted. It is then confessedly the way to have the greater part of
   the members of the christian church ungodly men; yea, so much greater,
   that the godly shall be but few in comparison of the ungodly; agreeable
   to their interpretation of that saying of Christ, many are called, but
   few are chosen. Now, if this be an exact state of the case, it will
   demonstrably follow, on scripture principles, that opening the door so
   wide has a direct tendency to bring into christian churches such as are
   without even moral sincerity, and do not make religion at all their
   business, neglecting and casting off secret prayer and other duties,
   and living a life of carnality and vanity, so far as they can,
   consistently with avoiding church-censures; which possibly may be
   sometimes to a great degree. Ungodly men may be morally sober, serious,
   and conscientious, and may have what is called moral sincerity, for a
   while; and even may have these things in a considerable measure, when
   they first come into the church: but if their hearts are not changed,
   there is no probability at all of these things continuing long. The
   Scripture has told us, that this their goodness is apt to vanish like
   the morning cloud and early dew. How can it be expected but that their
   religion should in a little time wither away, when it has no root? How
   can it be expected, that the lamp should burn long, without oil in the
   vessel to feed it? If lust be unmortified, and left in reigning power
   in the heart, it will sooner or later prevail; and at length sweep away
   common grace and moral sincerity, however excited and maintained for a
   while by conviction and temporary affections. It will happen to them
   according to the true proverb, The dog is returned to his vomit; and
   the swine that was washed, to his wallowing in the mire. It is said of
   the hypocrite, Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always
   call upon God?--And thus our churches will be likely to be such
   congregations as the psalmist said he hated, and would not sit with.
   Psal. xxvi. 4, 5. "I have not sat with vain persons, nor will I go in
   with dissemblers; I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, nor will
   I sit with the wicked."--This will be the way to have the Lord's table
   ordinarily furnished with such guests as allow themselves to live in
   known sin, meeting together only to crucify Christ afresh, instead of
   commemorating his crucifixion with the repentance, faith, gratitude,
   and love of friends. And this is the way to have the governing part of
   the church such as are not even conscientious men, and are careless
   about the honour and interest of religion. And the direct tendency of
   that is, in process of time, to introduce a prevailing negligence in
   discipline, and carelessness in seeking ministers of a pious and worthy
   character. And the next step will be, the church being filled with
   persons openly vicious in manners, or else scandalously erroneous in
   opinions. It is well if this be not already the case in fact with some
   churches that have long professed and practised on the principles I
   oppose. And if these principles should be professed and proceeded on by
   christian churches every where, the natural tendency of it would be, to
   have the greater part of what is called the church of Christ, through
   the world, made up of vicious and erroneous persons. And how greatly
   would this be to the reproach of the christian church, and of the holy
   name and religion of Jesus Christ in the sight of all nations! [562]

   And now is it not better, to have a few real living Christians kept
   back through darkness and scruples, than to open a door for letting in
   such universal ruin as this? To illustrate it by a familiar comparison;
   Is it not better, when England is at war with France, to keep out of
   the British realm a few loyal Englishmen, than to give leave for as
   many treacherous Frenchmen to come in as please?

   2. This way tends to the eternal ruin of the parties admitted; for it
   lets in such, yea, it persuades such to come in, as know themselves to
   be impenitent and unbelieving, in a dreadful manner to take God's name
   in vain; in vain to worship him, and abuse sacred things, by performing
   those external acts and rites in the name of God, which are instituted
   for declarative signs and professions of repentance toward God, faith
   in Christ, and love to him, at the same time that they know themselves
   destitute of those things which they profess to have. And is it not
   better, that some true saints, through their own weakness and
   misunderstanding, should be kept away from the Lord's table, which will
   not keep such out of heaven, than voluntarily to bring in multitudes of
   false professors to partake unworthily, and in effect to seal their own
   condemnation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [562] And this by the way answers another objection, which some have
   made, viz. That the way I plead for, tends to keep the church of Christ
   small, and hinder the growth of it. Whereas, I think, the contrary
   tends to keep it small, as it is the wickedness of its members, that
   above all things in the world prejudices mankind against it; and is the
   chief stumbling-block, that hinders the propagation of Christianity,
   and so the growth of the christian church. But holiness would cause the
   light of the church to shine so as to induce others to resort to it.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XVI.

   You cannot keep out hypocrites, when all is said and done; but as many
   graceless persons will be likely to get into the church in the way of a
   profession of godliness, as if nothing were insisted on, but a freedom
   from public scandal.

   Answ. It may possibly be so in some places through the misconduct of
   ministers and people, by remissness in their inquiries, carelessness as
   to the proper matter of a profession, or setting up some mistaken rules
   of judgment; neglecting those things which the Scripture insists upon
   as the most essential articles in the character of a real saint; and
   substituting others in the room of them; such as impressions on the
   imagination, instead of renewing influences on the heart; pangs of
   affection, instead of the habitual temper of the mind; a certain method
   and order of impressions and suggestions, instead of the nature of
   things experienced, &c. But to say, that in churches where the nature,
   the notes, and evidences of true Christianity, as described in the
   Scriptures, are well understood, taught, and observed, there as many
   hypocrites are likely to get in; or to suppose, that there as many
   persons of an honest character, who are well instructed in these rules,
   and well conducted by them--and judging of themselves by these rules,
   do think themselves true saints, and accordingly make profession of
   godliness, and are admitted as saints in a judgment of rational
   charity--are likely to be carnal, unconverted men, as of those who make
   no such pretence and have no such hope, nor exhibit any such evidences
   to the eye of a judicious charity, is not so much an objection against
   the doctrine I am defending, as a reflection upon the Scripture itself,
   with regard to the rules it gives, either for persons to judge of their
   own state, or for others to form a charitable judgment, as if they were
   of little or no service. We are in miserable circumstances indeed, if
   the rules of God's holy word in things of such infinite importance, are
   so ambiguous and uncertain, like the heathen oracles. And it would be
   very strange, if in these days of the gospel, when God's mind is
   revealed with such great plainness of speech, and the canon of
   Scripture is completed, it should ordinarily be the case in fact, that
   those who, having a right doctrinal understanding of the Scripture, and
   judging themselves by its rules, do probably conclude or seriously hope
   of themselves, that they are real saints, are as many of them in a
   state of sin and condemnation, as others who have no such rational hope
   concerning their good estate, nor pretend to any special experiences in
   religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XVII.

   IF a profession of godliness be a thing required in order to admission
   into the church, there being some free saints who doubt of their state,
   and from a tender conscience will not dare to make such a profession;
   and there being others, that have no grace, nor much tenderness of
   conscience, but great presumption and forwardness, who will boldly make
   the highest profession of religion, and so will get admittance: it will
   hence come to pass, that the very thing, which will in effect procure
   for the latter an admission, rather than the former, will be their
   presumption and wickedness.

   Answ. 1. It is no sufficient objection against the wholesomeness of a
   rule established for regulating the civil state of mankind, that in
   some instances men's wickedness may take advantage by that rule, so
   that even their wickedness shall be the very thing, which, by an abuse
   of that rule, procures them temporal honours and privileges. For such
   is the present state of man in this evil world, that good rules, in
   many instances, are liable to be thus abused and perverted. As for
   instance, there are many human laws, accounted wholesome and necessary,
   by which an accused or suspected person's own solemn profession of
   innocency, upon oath, shall be the condition of acquittance and
   impunity; and the want of such a protestation or profession shall
   expose him to the punishment. And yet, by an abuse of these rules, in
   some instances, nothing but the horrid sin of perjury, or that most
   presumptuous wickedness of false swearing, shall be the very thing that
   acquits a man: while another of a more tender conscience, who fears an
   oath, must suffer the penalty of the law.

   2. Those rules, by all wise lawgivers, are accounted wholesome, which
   prove of general good tendency, notwithstanding any bad consequences
   arising in some particular instances. And as to the ecclesiastical rule
   now in question, of admission to sacraments on a profession of
   godliness, when attended with requisite circumstances; although in
   particular instances it may be an occasion of some tender-hearted
   Christians abstaining, and some presumptuous sinners being admitted,
   yet that does not hinder but that a proper visibility of holiness to
   the eye of reason, or a probability of it in a judgment of rational
   christian charity, may this way be maintained, as the proper
   qualification of candidates for admission. Nor does it hinder but that
   it may be reasonable and wholesome for mankind, in their outward
   conduct, to regulate themselves by such probability; and that this
   should be a reasonable and good rule for the church to regulate
   themselves by in their admissions; notwithstanding it may happen in
   particular instances, that things are really diverse from, yea the very
   reverse of, what they are visibly. Such a profession as has been
   insisted on, when attended with requisite circumstances, carries in it
   a rational credibility in the judgment of christian charity: for it
   ought to be attended with an honest and sober character, and with
   evidences of good doctrinal knowledge, and with all proper, careful,
   and diligent instructions of a prudent pastor. And though the pastor is
   not to act as a searcher of the heart, or a lord of conscience in this
   affair, yet that hinders not but that he may and ought to inquire
   particularly into the experiences of the souls committed to his care
   and charge, that he may be under the best advantages to instruct and
   advise them, to apply the teachings and rules of God's word unto them,
   for their self-examination, to be helpers of their joy, and promoters
   of their salvation. However, finally, not any pretended extraordinary
   skill of his in discerning the heart, but the person's own serious
   profession concerning what he finds in his own soul, after he has been
   well instructed, must regulate the public conduct with respect to him,
   where there is no other external visible thing to contradict and
   overrule it. And a serious profession of godliness, under these
   circumstances, carries in it a visibility to the eye of the church's
   rational and christian judgment.

   3. If it be still insisted on, that a rule of admission into the church
   cannot be good, if liable to such abuse as that forementioned, I must
   observe, This will overthrow the rules that the objectors themselves go
   by in their admissions. For they insist upon it, that a man must not
   only have knowledge and be free of scandal, but must appear orthodox
   and profess the common faith. Now presumptuous lying, for the sake of
   the honour of being in the church, having children baptized, and voting
   in ecclesiastical affairs, may possibly be the very thing that brings
   some men into the church by this rule; while greater tenderness of
   conscience may be the very thing that keeps others out. For instance, a
   man who secretly in his mind gives no credit to the commonly received
   doctrine of the Trinity, yet may, by pretending an assent to it, and in
   hypocrisy making a public profession of it, get into the church; when
   at the same time another that equally disbelieves it, but has a more
   tender conscience than to allow himself in solemnly telling a lie, may
   by that very means be kept off from the communion.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XVIII.

   It seems hardly reasonable to suppose, that the only wise God has made
   men's opinion of themselves, and a profession of it, the term of their
   admission to church-privileges; when we know, that very often the worst
   men have the highest opinion of themselves.

   Answ. 1. It must be granted me, that in fact this is the case, if any
   proper profession at all is expected and required, whether it be of
   sanctifying grace, or of moral sincerity, or any thing else that is
   good: and to be sure, nothing is required to be professed, or is worthy
   to be professed, any further than it is good.

   Answ. 2. If some things, by the confession of all, must be professed,
   because they are good, and of great importance; then certainly it must
   be very unreasonable, to say, that those things wherein true holiness
   consists are not to be professed, or that a profession of them should
   not be required, because they are good, even in the highest degree, and
   infinitely the most important and most necessary things of any in the
   world. And it is unreasonable to say, that it is the less to be
   expected we should profess sincere friendship to Christ, because
   friendship to Christ is the most excellent qualification of any
   whatsoever, and the contrary the most odious. How absurd is it to say
   this, merely under a notion that for a man to profess what is so good
   and so reasonable, is to profess a high opinion of himself!

   Answ. 3. Though some of the worst men are apt to entertain the highest
   opinion of themselves, yet their self-conceit is no rule to the church;
   but the apparent credibility of men's profession is to be the ground of
   ecclesiastical proceedings.
     __________________________________________________________________

      OBJECT. XIX.

   If it be necessary that adult persons should make a profession of
   godliness, in order to their own admission to baptism, then undoubtedly
   it is necessary in order to their children being baptized on their
   account. For parents cannot convey to their children a right to this
   sacrament by virtue of any qualifications lower than those requisite in
   order to their own right: children being admitted to baptism only as
   being, as it were, parts and members of their parents. And besides, the
   act of parents in offering up their children in a sacrament, which is a
   seal of the covenant of grace, is in them a solemn attending that
   sacrament as persons interested in the covenant, and a public
   manifestation of their approving and consenting to it, as truly as if
   they then offered up themselves to God in that ordinance. Indeed it
   implies a renewed offering up themselves with their children, and
   devoting both jointly to God in covenant; themselves, with their
   children, as parts of themselves. But now what fearful work will such
   doctrine make amongst us! We shall have multitudes unbaptized, who will
   be without the external badge of Christianity, and so in that respect
   will be like heathens. And this is the way to have the land full of
   persons who are destitute of that which is spoken of in Scripture as
   ordinarily requisite to men's salvation; and it will bring a reproach
   on vast multitudes, with the families they belong to. And not only so,
   but it will tend to make them profane and heathenish; for by thus
   treating our children, as though "they had no part in the Lord, we
   shall cause them to cease from fearing the Lord;" Josh. xxii. 24, 25.

   Answ. 1. As to children being destitute of that which is spoken of in
   Scripture as one thing ordinarily requisite to salvation; I would
   observe, that baptism can do their souls no good any otherwise than
   through God's blessing attending it: but we have no reason to expect
   his blessing with baptism, if administered to those that it does not
   belong to by his institution.

   Answ. 2. As to the reproach, which will be brought on parents and
   children, by children going without baptism, through the parents
   neglecting a profession of godliness, and so visibly remaining among
   the unconverted; if any insist on this objection, I think it will
   savour of much unreasonableness and even stupidity.

   It will savour of an unreasonable spirit. Is it not enough, if God
   freely offers men to own their children and to give them the honour of
   baptism, in case the parents will turn from sin and relinquish their
   enmity against him, heartily give up themselves and their children to
   him, and take upon them the profession of godliness?--If men are truly
   excusable, in not turning to God through Christ, in not believing with
   the heart, and in not confessing with the mouth, why do not we openly
   plead that they are so? And why do we not teach sinners, that they are
   not to blame for continuing among the enemies of Christ, and neglecting
   and despising his great salvation? If they are not at all excusable in
   this, and it be wholly owing to their own indulged lusts, that they
   refuse sincerely to give up themselves and their children to God, then
   how unreasonable is it for them to complain that their children are
   denied the honour of having God's mark set upon them as some of his? If
   parents are angry at this, such a temper shows them to be very
   insensible of their own vile treatment of the blessed God. Suppose a
   prince send to a traitor in prison, and upon opening the prison doors
   make him the offer, that if he would come forth and submit himself to
   him, he should not only be pardoned himself, but both he and his
   children should have such and such badges of honour conferred upon
   them; and yet the rebel's enmity and stoutness of spirit against his
   prince is such, that he cannot find in his heart to comply with the
   gracious offer, will he have any cause to be angry, that his children
   have not those badges of honour given them? Besides, it is very much
   owing to parents, that there are so many young people who can make no
   profession of godliness. They have themselves therefore to blame, if
   proceeding on the principles which have been maintained, there is like
   to rise a generation of unbaptized persons. If ancestors had thoroughly
   done their duty to their posterity in instructing, praying for, and
   governing their children, and setting them good examples, there is
   reason to think, the case would have been far otherwise.

   Insisting on this objection would savour of much stupidity. For the
   objection seems to suppose the country to be full of those that are
   unconverted, and so exposed every moment to eternal damnation; yet it
   seems we do not hear such great and general complaints and lamentable
   outcries concerning this. Now why is it looked upon so dreadful, to
   have great numbers going without the name and honourable badge of
   Christianity, when at the same time it is no more resented and laid to
   heart, that such multitudes go without the thing, which is infinitely
   more dreadful? Why are we so silent about this? What is the name good
   for, without the thing? Can parents bear to have their children go
   about the world in the most odious and dangerous state of soul, in
   reality the children of the devil, and condemned to eternal burnings;
   when at the same time they cannot bear to have them disgraced by going
   without the honour of being baptized? A high honour and privilege this
   is; yet how can parents be contented with the sign, exclusive of the
   thing signified? Why should they covet the external honour for their
   children, while they are so careless about the spiritual blessing? Does
   not this argue a senselessness of their own misery, as well as of their
   children's, in being in a Christless state? If a man and his child were
   both together bitten by a viper, dreadfully swollen, and like to die,
   would it not argue stupidity in the parent, to be anxiously concerned
   only about his child's having on a dirty garment in such circumstances,
   and angry at others for not putting some outward ornament upon it? But
   the difference in this present case is infinitely greater, and more
   important. Let parents pity their poor children because they are
   without baptism; and pity themselves who are in danger of everlasting
   misery, while they have no interest in the covenant of grace, and so
   have no right to covenant favours and honours, for themselves nor
   children. No religious honours, to be obtained in any other way than by
   real religion, are much worth contending for. And in truth, it is no
   honour at all to a man, to have merely the outward badges of a
   Christian, without being a Christian indeed; any more than it would be
   an honour to a man that has no learning, but is a mere dunce, to have a
   degree at college; or than it is for a man who has no valour, but is a
   grand coward, to have an honourable commission in an army; which only
   serves, by lifting him up, to expose him to deeper reproach, and sets
   him forth as the more notable object of contempt.

   Answ. 3. Concerning the tendency of this way of confining baptism to
   professors of godliness and their children, to promote irreligion and
   profaneness; I would observe, first, That Christ is best able to judge
   of the tendency of his own institutions. Secondly, I am bold to say,
   that supposing this principle and practice to have such a tendency, is
   a great mistake, contrary to Scripture and plain reason and experience.
   Indeed such a tendency it would have, to shut men out from having any
   part in the Lord, (in the sense of the two tribes and half, Josh. xxii.
   25..) or to fence them out by such a partition-wall as formerly was
   between Jews and Gentiles; and so to shut them out as to tell them, if
   they were never so much disposed to serve God, he was not ready to
   accept them; according to the notion the Jews seem to have had of the
   uncircumcised Gentiles.--But to forbear giving men honours to which
   they have no title, and not to compliment them with the name and badge
   of God's people and children, while they pretend to nothing but what is
   consistent with their being his enemies, this has no such tendency. But
   the contrary has very much this tendency. For is it not found by
   constant experience through all ages, that blind, corrupt mankind, in
   matters of religion, are strongly disposed to rest in a name instead of
   the thing; in the shadow, instead of the substance; and to make
   themselves easy with the former, in the neglect of the latter? This
   over-valuing of common grace, and moral sincerity, as it is called;
   this building so much upon them, making them the conditions of enjoying
   the seals of God's covenant, and the appointed privileges, and
   honourable and sacred badges, of God's children; this, I cannot but
   think, naturally tends to sooth and flatter the pride of vain man,
   while it tends to aggrandize those things in men's eyes, which they of
   themselves are strongly disposed to magnify and trust in, without such
   encouragements to prompt them to it, yea, against all discouragements
   and dissuasives that can possibly be used with them.

   This way of proceeding greatly tends to establish the negligence of
   parents, and to confirm the stupidity and security of wicked
   children.--If baptism were denied to all children, whose parents did
   not profess godliness, and in a judgment of rational charity appear
   real saints, it would tend to excite pious heads of families to more
   thorough care and pains in the religious education of their children,
   and to more fervent prayer for them, that they might be converted in
   youth, before they enter into a married state; and so if they have
   children, the entail of the covenant be secured.--And it would tend to
   awaken young people themselves, as yet unconverted, especially when
   about to settle in the world. Their having no right to christian
   privileges for their children, in case they should become parents,
   would tend to lead them at such a time seriously to reflect on their
   own awful state; which, if they do not get out of it, must lay a
   foundation for so much calamity and reproach to their families. And if
   after their becoming parents, they still remain unconverted, the
   melancholy thought of their children going without so much as the
   external mark of Christians, would have a continual tendency to affect
   them with their own sin and folly in neglecting to turn to God, by
   which they bring such visible calamity and disgrace on themselves and
   families. They would have this additional motive continually to stir
   them up to seek grace for themselves and their children. Whereas, the
   contrary practice has a natural tendency to quiet the minds of persons,
   both in their own and their children's unregeneracy. Yea, may it not be
   suspected, that the way of baptizing the children of such as never make
   any proper profession of godliness, is an expedient originally invented
   for that very end, to give ease to ancestors with respect to their
   posterity, in times of general declension and degeneracy?

   This way of proceeding greatly tends to establish the stupidity and
   irreligion of children, as well as the negligence of parents. It is
   certain, that unconverted parents do never truly give up their children
   to God; since they do not truly give up themselves to him. And if
   neither of the parents appear truly pious, in the judgment of rational
   charity, there is not in this case any ground to expect that the
   children will be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
   or that they will have any thing worthy the name of a christian
   education, how solemnly soever the parents may promise it. The
   faithfulness of Abraham was such as might be trusted in this matter.
   See Gen. xviii. 19.. But men that are not so much as visibly godly,
   upon what grounds are they to be trusted? How can it be reasonably
   expected, that they should faithfully bring up their children for god,
   who were never sincerely willing that their children or themselves
   should be his? And it will be but presumption, to expect that those
   children who are never given up to God, nor brought up for him, should
   prove religious, and be God's children. There is no manner of reason to
   expect any other than that such children ordinarily will grow up in
   irreligion, whether they are baptized or not. And for persons to go
   about with the name and visible seal of God, and the sacred badge of
   Christianity upon them, having had their bodies, by a holy ordinance,
   consecrated to God as his temples, yet living in irreligion and ways of
   wickedness; this serves to tend exceedingly to harden them, and
   establish in them an habitual contempt of sacred things. Such persons,
   above all men, are like to be the most hardened and abandoned, and
   reclaimed with most difficulty: as it was with the wicked Jews, who
   were much more confirmed in their wickedness, than those heathen cities
   of Tyre and Sidon. To give that which is holy to those who are profane,
   or whom we have no reason, from the circumstances of parentage and
   education, to expect will be otherwise, is not the way to make them
   better, but worse. It is the way to have them habitually trample holy
   things under their feet, and increase in contempt of them, yea, even to
   turn again and rend us, and be more mischievous and hurtful enemies of
   that which is good, than otherwise they would be.
     __________________________________________________________________

   ministers have been greatly blessed in the other way of proceeding, and
   some men have been converted at the Lord's supper.

   Answ. Though we are to eye the providence of God, and not disregard his
   works, yet to interpret them to a sense, or to apply them to an use,
   inconsistent with the scope of the word of God, is a misconstruction
   and misapplication of them. God has not given us his providence, but
   his word, to be our governing rule. God is sovereign in his
   dispensations of providence; he bestowed the blessing on Jacob, even
   when he had a lie in his mouth. He was pleased to meet with Solomon,
   and make known himself to him, and bless him in an extraordinary
   manner, while he was worshipping in a high place. He met with Saul,
   when in a course of violent opposition to him, and out of the way of
   his duty in the highest degree, going to Damascus to persecute Christ;
   and even then bestowed the greatest blessing upon him, that perhaps
   ever was bestowed on a mere man. The conduct of Divine Providence, with
   its reasons, is too little understood by us, to be improved as our
   rule. "God has his way in the sea, his path in the mighty waters, and
   his footsteps are not known: and he gives none account of any of his
   matters." But God has given us his word, to this very end, that it
   might be our rule; and therefore has so ordered it that it may be
   understood by us. And strictly speaking, this is our only rule. If we
   join any thing else to it, as making it our rule, we do that which we
   have no warrant for, yea, that which God himself has forbidden. See
   Deut. iv. 2.. Prov. xxx. 6.. And with regard to God's blessing and
   succeeding ministers, have not some had remarkable experience of it in
   the way which I plead for, as well as some who have been for the way I
   oppose? However, we cannot conclude, that God sees nothing at all amiss
   in ministers, because he blesses them. In general, he may see those
   things in them which are very right and excellent; these he approves
   and regards, while he overlooks and pardons their mistakes in opinion
   or practice, and, notwithstanding these, is pleased to crown their
   labours with his blessing.

   As to the two last arguments in the Appeal to the Learned, concerning
   the subjects of the christian sacraments, their being members of the
   visible church, and not the invisible; the force of those arguments
   depends entirely on the resolution of this question, Who are visible
   saints? or what adult persons are regularly admitted to the privileges
   of members of the visible church? Which question has already been
   largely considered; and, I think, it has been demonstrated that they
   are those who exhibit a credible profession and visibility of gospel
   holiness or vital piety, and not merely of moral sincerity. So that
   there is no need of further debating the point in this place.

   I might here mention many things not yet noticed, which some object as
   inconveniences attending the scheme I have maintained. If men should
   set up their own wit and wisdom in opposition to God's revealed will,
   there is no end of objections of this kind, which might be raised
   against any of God's institutions. Some have found great fault even
   with the creation of the world, as being very inconveniently done, and
   have imagined that they could tell how it might be mended in a great
   many respects. But however God's altar may appear homely to us, yet if
   we lift up our hand to mend it, we shall pollute it. Laws and
   institutions are given for the general good, and not to avoid every
   particular inconvenience. And however it may so happen, that sometimes
   inconveniences (real or imaginary) may attend the scheme I have
   maintained; yet, I think, they are in no measure equal to the manifest
   conveniences and happy tendencies of it, or to the palpable
   inconveniences and pernicious consequences of the other.--I have
   already mentioned some things of this aspect, and would here briefly
   observe some others.

   Thus, the way of making such a difference between outward duties of
   morality, and worship, and those great inward duties of our love of God
   and acceptance of Christ, that the former must be visible, but that
   there need be no exhibition nor pretence of the latter, in order to
   persons being admitted into the visible family of God; and that under a
   notion of the latter being impossibilities, but the other being within
   men's power; this, I think, has a direct tendency to confirm in men an
   insensibility of the heinousness of unbelief and enmity against God our
   Saviour, which are the source and sum of all wickedness. It tends to
   prevent their coming under an humbling conviction of the greatness and
   utter inexcusableness of these sins, which men must be brought to if
   ever they obtain salvation. Indeed it is a way that not only has this
   tendency, but has actually and apparently this effect, and that to a
   great degree.

   The effect of this method of proceeding in the churches in New England,
   which have fallen into it, is actually this.--There are some that are
   received into these churches under the notion of their being in the
   judgment of rational charity visible saints or professing saints, who
   yet at the same time are actually open professors of heinous
   wickedness; I mean, the wickedness of living in known impenitence and
   unbelief, the wickedness of living in enmity against God, and in the
   rejection of Christ under the gospel. Or, which is the same thing, they
   are such as freely and frequently acknowledge, that they do not profess
   to be as yet born again, but look on themselves as really unconverted,
   as having never unfeignedly accepted of Christ; and they do either
   explicitly or implicitly number themselves among those that love not
   the Lord Jesus Christ; of whom the apostle says, let such be Anathema
   Maran-atha! And accordingly it is known, all over the town where they
   live, that they make no pretensions to any sanctifying grace already
   obtained; nor of consequence are they commonly looked upon as any other
   than unconverted persons. Now, can this be judged the comely order of
   the gospel? or shall God be supposed the author of such confusion?

   In this way of church-proceeding, God's own children and the true
   disciples of Christ are obliged to receive those as their brethren,
   admit them to the communion of saints, and embrace them in the highest
   acts of christian society, even in their great feast of love, where
   they feed together on the body and blood of Christ, whom yet they have
   no reason to look upon otherwise than as enemies of the cross of
   Christ, and haters of their heavenly Father and dear Redeemer. For they
   make no pretension to any thing at all inconsistent with those
   characters; yea, in many places, as I said before, freely professing
   this to be actually the case with them.

   Christ often forbids the members of his church to judge one another.
   But in this way of ecclesiastical proceeding, it is done continually,
   and looked upon as no hurt; a great part of those admitted into the
   church are by others of the same communion judged unconverted,
   graceless persons; and it is impossible to avoid it, while we stretch
   not beyond the bounds of a rational charity.

   This method of proceeding must inevitably have one of these two
   consequences: either there must be no public notice at all given of it,
   when so signal a work of grace is wrought, as a sinner being brought to
   repent and turn to God, and hopefully become the subject of saving
   conversion; or else this notice must be given in the way of
   conversation, by the persons themselves, frequently, freely, and in all
   companies, declaring their own experiences. But surely, either of these
   consequences must be very unhappy.--The former is so, viz. forbidding
   and preventing any public notice being given on earth of the repentance
   of a sinner, an event so much to the honour of God, and so much taken
   notice of in heaven, causing joy in the presence of the angels of God,
   and tending so much to the advancement of religion in the world. For it
   is found by experience, that scarce any one thing has so great an
   influence to awaken sinners, and engage them to seek salvation, and to
   quicken and animate saints, as the tidings of a sinner's repentance, or
   hopeful conversion. God evidently makes use of it as an eminent means
   of advancing religion in a time of remarkable revival. And to take a
   course effectually to prevent its being notified on earth, appears to
   me a counteracting of God, in that which he ever makes use of as a
   chief means of the propagation of true piety, and which we have reason
   to think he will make use of as one principal means of the conversion
   of the world in the glorious latter day.--But now as to the other
   way--the way of giving notice to the public of this event, by
   particular persons themselves publishing their own experiences, from
   time to time and from place to place, on all occasions and before all
   companies--I must confess, it is a practice that appears to me attended
   with many inconveniences, yea, big with mischiefs. The abundant trial
   of this method lately made, and the large experience we have had of the
   evil consequences of it, is enough to put all sober and judicious
   people for ever out of conceit with it. I shall not pretend to
   enumerate all the mischiefs attending it, which would be very tedious;
   but shall now only mention two things. One is, the bad effect it has
   upon the persons themselves that practise it, in the great tendency it
   has to spiritual pride; insensibly begetting and establishing an evil
   habit of mind in that respect, by the frequent return of the
   temptation, and this many times when they are not guarded against it,
   and have no time, by consideration and prayer, to fortify their minds.
   And then it has a very bad effect on the minds of others that hear
   their communication, and so on the state of religion in general, in
   this way. It being thus the custom for persons of all sorts, young and
   old, wise and unwise, superiors and inferiors, freely to tell their own
   experiences before all companies, it is commonly done very
   injudiciously, often very rashly and foolishly, out of season, and in
   circumstances tending to defeat any good end. Even sincere Christians
   too frequently in their conversation insist mainly on those things that
   are no part of their true spiritual experience; such as impressions on
   their imagination, suggestions of facts by passages of Scripture, &c.;
   in which case children and weak persons that hear, are apt to form
   their notions of religion and true piety by such experimental
   communications, and much more than they do by the most solid and
   judicious instructions they hear from the pulpit. This is found to be
   one of the devices whereby Satan has an inexpressible advantage to ruin
   the souls of men, and utterly to confound the interest of
   religion.--This matter of making a public profession of godliness or
   piety of heart, is certainly a very important affair, and ought to be
   under some public regulation, and under the direction of skilful
   guides, and not left to the management of every man, woman, and child,
   according to their humour or fancy. And when it is done, it should be
   done with great seriousness, preparation, and prayer, as a solemn act
   of public respect and honour to God, in his house and in the presence
   of his people. Not that I condemn, but greatly approve of, persons
   speaking sometimes of their religious experiences in private
   conversation, to proper persons and on proper occasions, with modesty
   and discretion, when the glory of God and the benefits or just
   satisfaction of others require it of them.

   In a word, the practice of promiscuous admission--or that way of taking
   all into the church indifferently, as visible saints, who are not
   either ignorant or scandalous--and at the same time that custom taking
   place of persons publishing their own conversion in common
   conversation; where these two things meet together, they unavoidably
   make two distinct kinds of visible churches, or different bodies of
   professing saints, one within another, openly distinguished one from
   another, as it were by a visible dividing line. One company consisting
   of those who are visibly gracious Christians, and open professors of
   godliness; another consisting of those who are visibly moral livers,
   and only profess common virtues, without pretending to any special and
   spiritual experiences in their hearts, and who therefore are not
   reputed to be converts. I may appeal to those acquainted with the state
   of the churches, whether this be not actually the case in some, where
   this method of proceeding has been long established. But I leave the
   judicious reader to make his own remarks on this case, and to
   determine, whether there be a just foundation in Scripture or reason
   for any such state of things; which to me, I confess, carries the face
   of glaring absurdity.

   And now I commit this whole discourse (under God's blessing) to the
   reader's candid reflection and impartial judgment. I am sensible, it
   will be very difficult for many to be truly impartial in this affair;
   their prejudices being very great against the doctrine which I have
   maintained. And, I believe, I myself am the person, who, above all
   other upon the face of the earth, have had most in my circumstances to
   prejudice me against this doctrine, and to make me unwilling to receive
   conviction of its truth. However, the clear evidence of God's mind in
   his word, as things appear to me, has constrained me to think and act
   as I have now done. I dare not go contrary to such texts as these, Lev.
   x. 10.. Jer. xv. 19.. Ezek. xxii. 26; xliv. 6-8.. And having been fully
   persuaded in my own mind, as to what is the scripture rule in this
   matter, after a most careful, painful, and long search, I am willing,
   in the faithful prosecution of what appears to me of such importance
   and so plainly the mind and will of God, to resign to his providence,
   and leave the event in his hand.

   It may not be improper to add here, as I have often had suggested to me
   the probability of my being answered from the press: If any one shall
   see cause to undertake this, I have these reasonable requests to make
   to him, viz. That he would avoid the ungenerous and unmanly artifices
   used by too many polemic writers, while they turn aside to vain
   jangling, in carping at incidental passages, and displaying their wit
   upon some minute particulars, or less material things, in the author
   they oppose, with much exclamation, if possible to excite the ignorant
   and unwary reader's disrelish of the author, and to make him appear
   contemptible, and so to get the victory that way; perhaps dwelling
   upon, and glorying in, some pretended inconsistencies in some parts of
   the discourse, without ever entering thoroughly into the merits of the
   cause, or closely encountering any of the main arguments. If any one
   opposes me from the press, I desire he would attend to the true state
   of the question, and endeavour fairly to take off the force of each
   argument, by answering the same directly, and distinctly, with calm and
   close reasoning; avoiding (as much as may be) both dogmatical assertion
   and passionate reflection. Sure I am, I shall not envy him the applause
   of a victory over me, however signal and complete, if only gained by
   superior light and convincing evidence.--I would also request him to
   set his name to his performance, that I may in that respect stand on
   even ground with him before the world, in a debate wherein the public
   is to judge between us. This will be the more reasonable, in case he
   should mingle any thing of accusation with his arguing. It was the
   manner even of the heathen Romans, and reputed by them but just and
   equal, to have accusers face to face.

   May the God of all grace and peace unite us more in judgment,
   affection, and practice, that with one heart, and one mouth, we may
   glorify his name through Jesus Christ. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      APPENDIX.

   Being a letter to the author, in answer to his request of information
   concerning the opinion of Protestant Divines and Churches in general,
   of the Presbyterians in Scotland and Dissenters in England in
   particular, respecting five questions that relate to this controversy.

   rev. and dear sir,

   If you look into Mr. Baxter's controversial writings against Mr. Blake,
   you will meet with such accounts of principles and facts, as I think
   may reasonably give an inquirer much satisfaction as to the common
   judgment of protestant churches and divines in the points you mention.
   I particularly refer you to his five disputations of Right to
   Sacraments, and the true Nature of Visible Christianity; where all or
   the most of your queries are considered and answered, with a multitude
   of testimonies produced in favour of sentiments contrary to those of
   your excellent predecessor, the late Mr. Stoddard. I have not said this
   from any disposition to excuse myself from the labour of making some
   further inquiry, if it be thought needful. And as it may show my
   willingness to gratify your desire, I will now say something on your
   questions distinctly, but with as much brevity as I can.

   Quest. I. What is the general opinion respecting that self-examination
   required in 1 Cor. xi. 28. Whether communicants are not here directed
   to examine themselves concerning the truth of grace, or their real
   godliness?

   Answ. This construction of the text, as far as I have had opportunity
   to inquire, appears to me very generally received; if I may judge by
   what many celebrated expositors have said on the place, and by what
   many famous divines have written in treatises of preparation for the
   Lord's supper, besides what is contained in public confessions,
   catechisms, directories, &c. I think Dr. Reynolds, in his Meditations
   on the Lord's Supper, has summarily expressed the common judgment of
   Calvinists in these strong lines of his: "The sacrament is but a seal
   of the covenant; and the covenant essentially includes conditions; and
   the condition on our part is faith. No faith, no covenant; no covenant,
   no seal; no seal, no sacrament.--The matter then of this trial (says
   he) must be that vital qualification, which predisposeth a man for
   receiving of these holy mysteries; and that is faith."

   However, I may venture to be confident, that Mr. Stoddard's gloss on
   the text, who tells us in his controverted sermon, "The meaning is,
   that a man must come solemnly to that ordinance, examining what need he
   has of it," is quite foreign from the current sense of Calvinist
   writers. And, though he makes a different comment in his Appeal to the
   Learned, saying, "The examination called for is, whether they
   understood the nature of the ordinance, that so they may solemnly
   consider what they have to do when they wait upon God in it," neither
   can I find any appearance of a general consent of the learned and
   orthodox to this new gloss, at least as exhibiting the full meaning of
   the text. I might easily confront it with numerous authorities: but the
   Palatine Catechism, and that of the Westminster Assembly, with the
   common explanations and catechizings upon them, may be appealed to as
   instar omnium. And I shall only add here, if it be allowed a just
   expectation that the candidate for the communion examine himself about
   the same things at least as the pastor, to whom he applies for
   admission, ought to make the subject of his examination, then it was
   worth while to hear the opinion of those unnamed ministers in New
   England, (among whom the late Dr. Colman, I have reason to think, was
   the principal,) that answered Dr. Mather's Order of the Gospel, (anno
   1700,) who, in the Postscript to their Review, thus express themselves:
   "We highly approve--that the proponant of the Lord's table be examined
   of his baptismal vow; his sense of spiritual wants, sinfulness, and
   wretchedness; his hope, faith, experiences, resolutions through the
   grace of God." This, I think, is something beyond Mr. Stoddard.

   Quest. II. Whether it be the general opinion of those aforesaid, that
   some who know themselves to be unregenerate, and under the reigning
   power of sin, ought notwithstanding, in such a state, to come to the
   Lord's table?

   Answ. I am aware, Sir, though you have seen fit to take no notice of it
   to me, that Mr. Stoddard (in his Doctrine of Instituted Churches) is
   peremptory in the affirmative; but I have met with no author among
   Calvinists, at home or abroad, consenting with him, unless it be Mr.
   Blake, and some that were for a promiscuous admission, with little or
   no limitation. If divines in general, of the Calvinistic character,
   were for such a latitude as Mr. Stoddard's, what can we suppose to be
   the reason, that in treating on the Lord's supper, they so constantly
   consider it as one of the rights of the church, belonging to the truly
   faithful alone, exclusively of all others? Why do we hear them
   declaring, It is certain that the right of external fellowship resides
   in the faithful only: and as to the rest, they are in that communion
   only by accident, and it is also only by accident that they are
   suffered there; but being what they are, they have not any part in the
   rights of that society properly belonging to them? If they thought the
   sacrament instituted for conversion, why do we never find them
   recommending it as a converting ordinance, and urging persons to come
   to it with that view, who know themselves to be in an unconverted
   state? If they thought that any such have a right before God, and may
   come to it with a good conscience, why do we find them so solemnly
   warning all that are truly convinced of their remaining yet in a
   natural state, to refrain coming to the Lord's table in their unbelief
   and impenitence; as if they judged it a sinful and dangerous thing for
   them to come under such circumstances? I know Mr. Stoddard, in his
   Appeal, disputes the fact. But it has occurred to me in abundance of
   instances, while reviewing my authors on this occasion.

   Among the foreign protestants in Germany, France, &c. I shall name but
   two out of many instances before me. The Heidelberg or Palatine
   Catechism, which had the solemn approbation of the synod of Dort, and
   was especially praised by the divines of Great Britain; which has been
   in a manner universally received and taught, formerly in Scotland, and
   still all over Holland, and by reason of its excellency has been
   translated into no less than thirteen several languages; this is most
   express in claiming the Lord's supper for a special privilege of such
   as have true faith and repentance; and forbidding it to hypocrites, as
   well as scandalous persons, declaring that none such ought to come. See
   the eighty-first and other questions and answers, with Ursin's Latin
   Explications, and De Witte's English Catechizings thereon. Here, Sir,
   indeed you have the judgment of a multitude in one. Another celebrated
   book is Claude's Historical Defence of the Reformation; in which I meet
   with repeated declarations of the same sentiments, perfectly on the
   negative side of the question in hand, but, I think, too many and too
   long to be here transcribed.--The language of some of them I have just
   now had occasion to make use of.

   As for the church of Scotland, I find they have adopted the Westminster
   Confession, Catechisms, and Directory, which debar all ignorant and
   ungodly persons from the Lord's table, and require every one to examine
   himself, not only as to his knowledge, but also his faith, repentance,
   love, new obedience, &c.--In their books of discipline, I observe
   sundry passages that appropriate the sacrament to the truly penitent
   and faithful, as the only proper subjects. Their national covenant,
   renewed from time to time, has this clause; to the which [true reformed
   kirk] we join ourselves willingly, in doctrine, faith, religion,
   discipline, and use of the holy sacraments, as lively members of the
   same in Christ our Head, &c. And among the divines of Scotland, I find
   many in their sermons, sacramental speeches, and other discourses,
   declaring themselves strongly on the negative part in the question
   before us, advising to strictness in admission to the Lord's supper,
   renouncing the opinion of its being a converting ordinance, inviting
   only the sincere friends of Christ to it, and frequently warning
   professors conscious of reigning sin and hypocrisy to forbear
   approaching the Lord's table. I might bring much to this purpose from
   Mr. Andrew Gray's book of sermons, published anno 1716; and his sermons
   printed anno 1746; with a preface by Mr. Willison.--So from Mr.
   Ebenezer Erskine's synodical sermon, anno 1732.--And from Mr. Ralph
   Erskine's sermon on Isa. xlii. 6. and his discourse on fencing the
   tables, annexed to his sermon on John xvi. 15..--So from Mr. Willison's
   synodical sermon, anno 1733; where he sets down a variety of searching
   questions (no less than twenty-seven) which he advises to be put to
   proponants, and their answers to be waited for, before they are
   admitted.--The anonymous author of a Defence of National Churches
   against the Independents, (who is reputed to be Mr. Willison,) asserts
   it as a presbyterian principle, that none have right before God to the
   complete communion of the church, but such as have grace; and that none
   are to be admitted but those who are saints, at least in profession;
   such as profess to accept of the offers of Christ's grace, &c. and
   confess themselves to be sincere. Mr. Aytone, in his Review, against
   Mr. Glas, owns that the Lord's supper is not a formal mean of
   conversion, but of further growth and nourishment to those already
   converted. In the same strain is Mr. Nasmith's Treatise of the Entail
   of the Covenant.--And Mr. Warden's Essay on Baptism. In a word, I find
   Mr. Currie (in his synodical sermon, anno 1732) testifying of the
   ministers in Scotland, that they are tender (i. e. circumspect and
   cautious) in admitting people to the holy table of the Lord; knowing
   the design of the ordinance is not conversion, but confirmation; and he
   observes, that all who approve themselves to God here, will a thousand
   times rather choose to have, was it but one table or half a table of
   honest communicants, true believers and real saints, than have a
   hundred tables, by admitting any that are unworthy, (or Christless
   souls, as he anon characterizes them,) of whom there are not moral
   evidences of their fitness for this holy ordinance. And for the
   commendable practice of the church of Scotland, in being pointed and
   particular in debarring the unworthy from this ordinance, (says he,)
   God forbid ever it turn into desuetude. I think I may here not unfitly
   subjoin those remarkable passages in Mr. Anderson's excellent Defence
   of the Presbyterians, against Mr. Rhind; where he informs us, they look
   upon this holy ordinance as the common privilege of the faithful; and
   therefore they usually fence the Lord's table, in the words of
   Scripture, 1 Cor. vi. 9. or some such-like. To exclude the impenitent
   from the privilege of gospel-mysteries; to debar those from the Lord's
   table, whom the Lord has, by the express sentence of his word, debarred
   out of the kingdom of heaven, is what every one, who is not quite lost
   in impiety, must own to be not only lawful, but a duty. Upon which I
   beg leave to observe, according to this principle I do not see but that
   a man who with apparent signs of credibility confesses himself
   habitually impenitent, ought to be debarred from the Lord's table: and
   surely, by parity of reason, he that knows himself to be unregenerate,
   ought to refrain coming, since there can be no true repentance without
   regeneration. I think we have no just grounds to suppose Mr. Stoddard's
   principle in this matter has hitherto any general prevalence in the
   church of Scotland.

   And now to pass over to England, neither do I find reason to think the
   dissenters there in general are for Mr. Stoddard's latitude. The
   Assembly of Divines pronounce all the ungodly, as well as ignorant,
   unworthy of the Lord's table; direct to preparation for it, by
   examining ourselves of our being in Christ, &c. And though they declare
   this sacrament appointed for the relief even of the weak and doubting
   Christian, who unfeignedly, desires to be found in Christ; and having
   directed such a one to bewail his unbelief and labour to have his
   doubts resolved, they assert that so doing he may and ought to come to
   the Lord's supper, to be further strengthened: yet I do not find any
   appearance of a hint, as if others who know themselves to be in a
   natural state, or are conscious of their being certainly graceless, may
   and ought to come to this ordinance, that they may be converted. Nay,
   they expressly declare of all ungodly persons, that while they remain
   such, they cannot without great sin against Christ partake of those
   holy mysteries.--As to particular divines, I find multitudes of them
   among the dissenters, in later as well as former times, expressing the
   same sentiments: distinguishing between natural and instituted duties,
   between initial and confirming means, between special ordinances and
   common: and declaring the Lord's supper a disciple-privilege, peculiar
   to such as have disciple-properties, and admonishing as well the close
   hypocrite, as the more gross, of the sin and danger of coming to it in
   his unregenerate state, impenitent and unbelieving. Thus Mr. Bolton, in
   his discourse on the Wedding Supper and the Wedding Garment, warns the
   graceless not to come to the Lord's supper; affirming, that an
   unsanctified presence will be found as bad as a profane absence.--Mr.
   Baxter, in his Five Disputations, has much that runs in the same
   strain; so in his Reformed Liturgy, and in his Christian Concord, where
   we have his brethren joining their testimony with his. Likewise Mr.
   Charnock, in his discourse of the Subjects of the Lord's Supper--Mr.
   Palmer, in his Scripture--Rail to the Lord's Table--Mr. Saunders, in
   his Anti--Diatribe--Mr. Langley, in his Suspension Reviewed--Mr.
   Doolittle, Mr. Henry, Dr. Earle, and others, in their books on the
   Lord's Supper--Mr. Shower, in his Sacramental Discourses--Mr. Flavel,
   in his sermon on Gospel--Unity, and other pieces--Mr. Philip Henry, and
   Mr. Trosse, in the accounts of their Lives--Dr. Calamy, in his
   discourse on Vows, and his Defence of Nonconformity--Mr. Simon Browne,
   in the Continuation of Henry's Exposition, on 1 Cor. xi. 28.--Dr.
   Harris, in his discourse on Self--Dedication--Dr. Jennings, in his
   sermons to Young People.--I could, from all these authors, cite
   passages much to the purpose: but it would be too tedious. Yet I will
   give you a few hints from some others.--Dr. Williams, in his
   Gospel--Truth Stated, says, Though a man had it revealed to him that he
   is one of the elect, yet so long as he remains unregenerate, he has no
   right to partake of the Lord's supper.--Dr. Guyse, in his late sermon
   at Mr. Gibbons's ordination, observes, that men being church-members
   supposes them already to have a good work begun in them, and to be
   partakers of christian love, even such as proceeds from faith, in a
   prevailing degree; and persons (says he) that have nothing of this,
   ought not to be church-members.--Mr. Hall, in his Exhortation on the
   same occasion, remarks, that the seals of the covenant are to be used
   as discriminating signs of the real separation of true believers from
   the world; and urges to have the fence kept up, which Christ has set
   about his church, that it may appear to be a body wholly distinct from
   the world: God's house being erected for the entertainment, not of
   hypocrites and dead sinners, but of the living in Jerusalem.--But says
   Dr. Watts, in his Humble Attempt, it is true, this cannot be practised
   universally and perfectly here on earth, so as to prevent some secret
   sinners making their way into our separate congregations, and joining
   with us in the most solemn ordinances; yet he declares such not really
   worthy of any room or place in the house of God.--And in his Holiness
   of Times, Places, and People, the Doctor observes, The visible
   christian church is founded on a supposition, that the members of it
   are, or should appear to be, members of the invisible: and none (says
   he) are to be admitted into the visible church, or esteemed complete
   members of it, but those who make such a declaration and profession of
   their faith in Christ and their avowed subjection to him, as may be
   supposed in a judgment of charity to manifest them to be real
   believers, true subjects of his spiritual kingdom, and members of the
   invisible church.--I find Dr. Doddridge in the same sentiments, by what
   he says in his Family Expositor. Thus, on the case of Ananias and
   Sapphira, he has this note, The church is never happier, than when the
   sons of falsehood are deterred from intruding into it: if its members
   are less numerous, it is a sufficient balance, that it is more pure.
   And on Simon's case, he pronounces it to be in vain for men to profess
   themselves Christians, in vain to submit to baptism, &c. if their heart
   be not right with God. And such persons being admitted to
   distinguishing ordinances, he calls an evil, in the present state of
   things unavoidable; wishing for the happy medium, between prostituting
   divine ordinances by a foolish credulity, and defrauding the children
   of the household of their bread, by a rigorous severity and mistaken
   caution. He every where represents the Lord's supper as the sacrament
   of nutrition, a reviving and nourishing ordinance; but never that I can
   find, as a regenerating or converting one. Upon the case of Judas, the
   Doctor observes, that if he had truly stated the order of the story,
   then Judas certainly went out before the Eucharist was instituted: and
   indeed one cannot reasonably suppose, Christ would have commanded him
   to drink of this cup as the blood shed for him for the remission of
   sins, when he had just before been declaring in effect, that his sins
   should never be forgiven.--By which observation, I think, Dr. Doddridge
   has quite demolished one of the most plausible pleas in favour of the
   secret and conscious hypocrite's claim to the Lord's supper.

   In fine, even those who appear advocates for a latitude in admissions
   to the communion, I observe, generally in the course of the argument
   offer such distinctions, or make such concessions, as seem by fair
   consequence a giving up of the point, at least as stated in the present
   question. For they usually distinguish between a right in foro Dei and
   in foro ecclesiae; accordingly treat these as two different questions,
   Who ought to come? and, Who ought to be admitted? considering the
   latter as an ecclesiastical case, and here they assert a latitude; but
   the former, as a case of conscience, of private reference only, and
   here they grant a limitation. How large soever their principles, while
   taking the case in its ecclesiastical view, yet I have met with very
   few divines, that taking it as a private case of conscience, have gone
   Mr. Stoddard's length, in asserting, that some unsanctified men have
   right before God to the Lord's supper, and may come with a good
   conscience, yea, ought to come, notwithstanding they know themselves at
   the same time to be in a natural condition. This he declares in his
   Doctrine of Instituted Churches, and confirms in his Sermon and Appeal.
   But then he has made some concessions, which seem to be subversive of
   his opinion. For he expressly allows, that the sacrament by institution
   supposes communicants to be visible saints; and this title of visible
   saints he assigns to "such as have a visible union to Christ, such as
   are in the judgment of rational charity believers, such as carry
   themselves so that there is reason to look upon them to be saints."
   Now, taking the case as a private case of conscience, (in which light
   only Mr. Stoddard professes to have designed to consider it in his
   sermon, and not at all as an ecclesiastical case,) I think, this
   visibility of saintship immediately respects the proponant for the
   Lord's table, and must be referred to his own private judgment of
   himself. But then, how can there be a visibility of saintship in the
   eve of the man's own conscience, when at the same time he knows himself
   to be in a natural condition? Or how can a man come to the Lord's table
   with a good conscience, as having right before God, while he cannot
   form so much as a judgment of rational charity for himself; seeing he
   carries so, in the view of his own conscience, that he has no reason to
   look on himself to be a saint, nay, even knows he is still in a natural
   state, and therefore in the eye of his own impartial judgment is not
   such a one as the sacrament by institution supposes the communicant to
   be? Moreover, Mr. Stoddard, in describing visible saints, inserts into
   their character a serious profession of the true religion, which he
   sometimes calls a profession of faith and repentance, morally sincere:
   and in his Doctrine of Instituted Churches, (p. 19.) he lays down a
   remarkable position, in these words, such a profession as being sincere
   makes a man a real saint, being morally sincere makes a man a visible
   saint. Now according to this, it seems to me, the profession itself,
   whether evangelically or morally sincere, is always of a uniform tenor;
   having one and the same thing for the matter of it; and not respecting,
   in the different cases, a religion specifically different, or a faith
   and repentance of a higher and a lower kind. But then it is quite
   beyond me to comprehend, how a man who knows himself to be in a natural
   condition, can be so much as morally sincere in his profession, while
   it is in its matter and tenor such a profession as being
   (evangelically) sincere makes a man a real saint. For if he knows
   himself to be in a natural condition, he then as certainly knows he
   hath not (in the principle or exercise) that faith and repentance,
   which is the just matter of such a profession: and how therefore can he
   be reasonably supposed, with any degree of moral sincerity, to make
   such a profession, when for the matter of it, it is the very same
   profession he would make, if he knew himself to be a real saint? Can a
   person in any sound gospel sense profess himself a saint or believing
   penitent, and herein speak the truth with a common moral honesty, while
   yet he knows himself to be destitute of all such characters in the
   sight of God and conscience, being still in a natural condition, and
   under the dominion of unbelief and impenitence? For my own part, I must
   confess this a difficulty in Mr. Stoddard's scheme, that I am not
   capable of solving. His favourite hypothesis, I think, must fall, if
   his position stands, and his concessions be abode by; which serve
   clearly to determine the present question in the negative, agreeable to
   the general sense of protestant churches and divines.

   Quest. III. Whether it be not the general opinion, that persons
   admitted to the Lord's table ought to profess saving faith and
   repentance; meaning that faith and repentance, which are the terms of
   the covenant of grace?

   Answ. I believe, after what has been already offered, we need be at no
   loss to know the mind of the generality respecting the subject of this
   inquiry. Were there occasion for it, I could easily produce a cloud of
   witnesses, to evidence that the general opinion is on the affirmative
   side, in this question. Repeated searches have been made by diligent
   and impartial inquirers, who though of varying judgment and practice in
   church-discipline, yet agree in their reports: and from them I will
   give you the following attestations.

   Mr. Lob (in his True Dissenter) tells us, It is the judgment of all the
   Nonconformists, that nothing less than the profession of saving faith,
   credibly significant of the thing professed, gives right to
   church-communion. And this he declares to be the rule of all
   protestants in general. He brings even Mr. Humphrey (though opposite in
   judgment) for his voucher: who acknowledges, that the visible church is
   defined by a profession of true regenerate faith, and of no less than
   that, according to the most general opinion of protestant divines. He
   speaks of it as the common opinion, that a profession of no less than
   true grace or justifying faith is the rule of admission to the
   church-sacraments. And though Mr. Humphrey went off from the received
   opinion, yet could he not come into Mr. Blake's notions in this matter,
   who also had gone off from it, nor hope for their vindication: hence he
   makes that challenge, What man is there, that dares revive Mr. Blake's
   cause, and defend it against Mr. Barter's right to sacraments?

   Mr. Baxter in this his book very copiously argues a profession of
   saving faith, as the rule of admission to the sacraments, and much
   insists on its being so by the unanimous consent of judicious divines.
   He tells us, Mr. Gataker in his books has largely proved this by a
   multitude of quotations from protestant writers. And he adds his own
   testimony, repeatedly saying, It is indeed their most common
   doctrine--It is the common protestant doctrine. And again, Certain I
   am, this is the common doctrine of reformed divines. He subjoins, I
   must profess, that I do not know of any one protestant divine, reputed
   orthodox, of the contrary judgment, before Dr. Ward and Mr. Blake,
   though some papists and Arminians I knew of that mind. And again,
   (beside Sir Henry Vane,) he says, All that I know of, since Dr. Ward,
   is Mr. Blake, Mr. Humphrey, and one John Timson; and John Timson, Mr.
   Humphrey, and Mr. Blake. He alleges Mr. Vines, as thus witnessing in
   the case on his side. To this purpose all our learned divines have
   given their suffrage: I need not authors or churches. It is so plain a
   case, that I wonder those [of the contrary opinion] have not taken
   notice of it, there is an army to a man against them.

   Mr. Langley, in his Suspension Reviewed, observes, The concurrent
   judgment of divines, English and foreign, episcopal and presbyterian,
   that a man of vast and digested reading, the learned Mr. Baxter, hath
   demonstrated at large in sixty testimonies; sundry of which have many
   in them, being the judgment of many churches and many learned men
   therein; and more might easily be brought. In short, he calls it the
   old protestant doctrine asserted against the papists; and wonders at
   the confidence of the men, who tell us, against our own eyes, that it
   is a novelism.

   To these attestations I subjoin that of our Mr. Mitchel, (in his
   introduction before the Defence of the Synod, 1662,) who while
   asserting a different latitude of the two sacraments, yet pleads for
   strictness in admissions to the Lord's table; and testifies, It is most
   evident, that godly reforming divines have in their doctrine
   unanimously taught, and in their practice (many of them) endeavoured, a
   strict selection of those who should be admitted to the Lord's supper.
   I think it may he not improperly observed here, that in a manuscript,
   drawn up by this eminent person for his own satisfaction, and inserted
   in the account of his life, he has left his solemn testimony against a
   lax mode of profession, (exclusive of all examinations and confessions,
   of a practical and experimental nature,) as having been found by
   plentiful experience a nurse of formality and irreligion. At the same
   time declaring his judgment, with a particular eye to the churches of
   New England, that the power of godliness will be lost, if only
   doctrinal knowledge and outward behaviour come to be accounted
   sufficient for a title to all church-privileges; and the use of
   practical confessions and examinations of men's spiritual estate be
   laid aside. For (says he) that which people see to be publicly required
   and held in reputation, that will they look after, and usually no more.
   In another place he observes, this will not only lose the power of
   godliness, but in a little time bring in profaneness and ruin the
   churches, these two ways. (1.) Election of ministers will soon be
   carried by a formal looser sort. (2.) The exercise of discipline will
   by this means be impossible.--And discipline failing, profaneness
   riseth like a flood. Agreeably he says elsewhere; Certain it is, that
   we stand for the purity of the churches, when we stand for such
   qualifications as we do, in those whom we would admit to full
   communion; and do withstand those notions and reasonings that would
   infer a laxness therein, which hath apparent peril in it. In sum, (says
   he,) we make account that we shall be near about the middle-way of
   church reformation, if we keep baptism within the compass of the
   non-excommunicable, and the Lord's supper within the compass of those
   that have (unto charity) somewhat of the power of godliness, or grace
   in exercise. For Mr. Mitchel, as he thought faith in the special and
   lively exercise thereof necessary to a safe and comfortable
   participation of the Lord's supper, so he judged an appearance of this
   unto rational charity, judging by positive sensible signs and
   evidences, justly required in order to admission into full communion.
   Whereas, he thought baptism annexed to initial faith, or faith in the
   being of it; the charitable judgment whereof (says he) runs upon a
   great latitude; and he conceived the same strictness, as to outward
   signs, not necessary unto a charitable probable judgment, or hope of
   the being of faith, which entitles to baptism, as of that growth and
   special exercise of faith, which is requisite to the Lord's supper.
   These are the main distinctions, on which he grounded his opinion of a
   different latitude of the two sacraments. For I must observe, as
   strenuously as he pleads for a various extent, as to the subjects of
   them, he never supposes any adult regularly admittable to either
   sacrament, but such as in ecclesiastical reputation sustain the
   character of believers; such as in the account of a rational charity
   (judging by probable signs) have the being of regeneration; or as he
   variously expresses it, have true faith, in the judgment of charity;
   and do in some measure perform the duties of faith and obedience, as to
   church-visibility and charitable hope; and therefore are such as the
   church ought to receive and hold as heirs of the grace of life,
   according to the rules of christian charity. Though it seems Mr.
   Shepard before him speaks of his church charity and experimental
   charity; so Mr. Mitchel had his positive charity and his negative, and
   conducted his judgment and administrations accordingly, in admitting
   persons to the one sacrament or the other. I should not have been so
   prolix and particular here, but that I thought it might serve to
   prepare the way for a more easy, short, and intelligible answer to your
   remaining queries.

   Quest. IV. Whether it be the general opinion of protestant churches and
   divines, in the case of adult persons, that the terms of admission to
   both sacraments are the same?

   ANSW. I presume, Sir, the question does not respect a sameness in the
   degree of qualifications, experiences, and evidences; but only a
   sameness in kind, or for the substance and general nature of things. I
   suppose, you had no view here to any such critical distinction as that
   before mentioned, between an initial faith and a grown faith; or
   between the simple being of faith, which entitleth to baptism, and the
   special exercise of faith, which fits for the Lord's supper; nor aim at
   a nice adjustment of the several characters of visibility, or motives
   of credibility, in the one case and the other, but only intend in
   general to inquire, whether persons admittable to one or other
   sacrament, ought to profess true justifying faith, and not be admitted
   on the profession of any faith of a kind inferior and specifically
   different. Now, taking this to be the scope of your question, I have
   good reason to apprehend, that the generality of protestant churches
   and divines, of the Calvinistic persuasion especially, have declared
   themselves for the affirmative.

   I think all that hold the visible christian church ought to consist of
   such as make a visible and credible profession of faith and holiness,
   and appear to rational charity real members of the church invisible,
   (which is the common language of protestants,) are to be understood as
   in principle exploding the conceit of a conscious unbeliever's right
   before God to special church-ordinances, and as denying the apparent
   unbeliever's right before the church to admission, whether to one
   sacrament or the other. I observe, Eadem est ratio utriusque
   sacramenti, is a maxim (in its general notion) espoused by the several
   contending parties in this controversy about a right to sacraments.

   That a credible profession of saving faith and repentance is necessary
   to baptism, in the case of the adult, I can show, by the authority of
   Claude's approved Defence of the Reformation, to be the general opinion
   of French protestants; and by the Palatine Catechism, by the Leyden
   Professors' Synopsis, &c. to be the prevailing judgment of the reformed
   in Germany, Holland, and foreign parts.

   And for the Dissenters in England, that they are in general of the same
   judgment, I might prove from the Assembly of Divines' Confession,
   Catechisms, and Directory; and from the Heads of Agreement assented to
   by the United Ministers, formerly distinguished by the names of
   Presbyterian and Congregational; as also by a large induction of
   particular instances among divines of every denomination, would it not
   carry me to too great a length. I find Mr. Lob (in his True Dissenter)
   assuring us in general, "It is held by the dissenters, that nothing
   less than the profession of a saving faith gives a right to baptism."
   Nor do I see, by their writings of a later date and most in vogue, any
   just grounds to suppose a general change of sentiments among them. I
   will mention two or three moderns of distinguished name. Dr. Harris (in
   his Self-Dedication) tells us, The nature of the Lord's supper plainly
   supposes faith; and that none but real Christians have right in the
   sight of God; though a credible profession entitles to it in the sight
   of the church, who cannot know the heart. And he declares it the same
   faith, which qualifies the adult, both for baptism and for the Lord's
   supper; there being the same common nature to both sacraments, and the
   latter only a recognising the former. The late Dr. Watts (in his
   Holiness of Times, Places, and People) says, The christian church
   receives none but upon profession of true faith in Christ, and sincere
   repentance; none but those who profess to be members of the invisible
   church, and in a judgment of charity are to be so esteemed. Our
   entrance into it is appointed to be by a visible profession of our
   being born of God, of real faith in Christ, of true repentance, and
   inward holiness. In fine, to name no more, Dr. Doddridge (in his Family
   Expositor, on Acts viii. 37..) supposes a credible profession of their
   faith in Christ required of the adult in apostolic times, in order to
   their being admitted to baptism; even such (says he) as implied their
   cordially subjecting their souls to the gospel, and their being come to
   a point, so as to give up themselves to Christ with all their heart.

   And for the church of Scotland, Mr. Anderson, who well understood their
   principles and practice, assures us, (in his Defence of them,) that
   presbyterians will not baptize without a previous profession or
   sponsor. To the adult (says he) it is not only necessary (as it is also
   in infants) that they be internally sanctified, but also that they make
   an outward profession, of which baptism is the badge and token. To
   justify this, he observes concerning the catechumens in primitive
   times, that during all that state they were probationers, not only as
   to their knowledge, but piety; and were obliged, before they could be
   admitted to baptism, to give moral evidences of the grace of God in
   their hearts. And he advances it as a presbyterian principle, that
   faith and repentance are prerequired to baptism, in adult persons at
   least. By this he points out the true matter of baptismal profession:
   and then in opposition to such as pretend baptism to be a converting
   ordinance, he observes, If they can have faith and repentance without
   the Spirit and spiritual regeneration, which they say is not obtained
   but in and by baptism, I do not see why they may not go to heaven
   without the Spirit and spiritual regeneration: for I am sure,
   repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, is the
   sum of the gospel.--Mr. Warden, another of their noted writers, (in his
   Essay on Baptism,) says in the name of presbyterians, We think that
   baptism supposeth men Christians; else they have no right to baptism,
   the seal of Christianity; all seals, in their nature, supposing the
   thing that is sealed. He that is of adult age, is to profess his faith
   in Christ, and his compliance with the whole device of salvation,
   before he can have the seal of the covenant administered to him. The
   author of the Defence of National Churches, (thought to be Mr.
   Willison,) says, I know nothing more requisite to admission to the
   Lord's supper, in foro ecclesiastico, than unto baptism in an adult
   person; they being both seals of the same covenant. And he thinks the
   objects of church-fellowship are "all who profess to accept the offers
   of Christ's grace, with subjection to his ordinances, and a suitable
   walk, and who confess themselves sincere."

   I have reserved Mr. Baxter for my last witness, because his attestation
   is comprehensive and of a general aspect. In his Disputations of Right
   to Sacraments, and other writings, he repeatedly declares, "It hath
   been the constant principle and practice of the universal church of
   Christ, to require a profession of saving faith and repentance, as
   necessary before they would baptize; and not to baptize any upon the
   profession of any lower kind of faith. He must shut his eyes against
   the fullest evidence of history and church-practice, who will deny
   this. I desire those otherwise--minded to help me to an instance of any
   one approved baptism, since Christ's time or his apostles, upon the
   account of a faith that was short of justifying, and not upon the
   profession of a justifying faith. Hitherto this is not done by them,
   but the contrary is fully done by others, and yet they confidently
   except against my opinion as a novelty. Mr. Gataker's books have
   multitudes of sentences recited out of our protestant divines, that
   affirm this which they call new. It is indeed the common protestant
   doctrine, that the sacraments do presuppose remission of sins, and our
   faith; that they are instituted to signify these as in being; and do
   solemnize and publicly own and confirm the mutual covenant already
   entered in heart. The Jesuits themselves do witness this to be the
   ordinary protestant doctrine.--It seems not necessary to mention the
   judgment of our reformed divines, as expressed in any of their
   particular sayings, when their public confessions and practices are so
   satisfactory herein." Mr. Baxter, however, recites a multitude of their
   testimonies; producing the judgment of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Pet.
   Martyr, Piscator, Melancthon, Altingius, Junius, Polanus, Zanchius,
   Ursinus, Paraeus, Bucanus, Musculus, Professores Leyd. et Salm.
   Wollebius, Vossius, Wendeline, Keckerman, Bullinger, Alsted, Deodate,
   Dr. Ames, Dr. Moulin; The Catechism of the Church of England, and
   English Divines; Bp. Usher, Dr. Willet, Dr. Fulk, Dr. Prideaux, Dr.
   Whitaker, Mr. Yates, Perkins, Cartwright, &c.; The Scottish Church in
   their Heads of Church-policy, and Divines of Scotland; Mr. Gillespie,
   Mr. Rutherford, and Mr. Wood; The Westminster Assembly of Divines,
   their Confession, Catechisms, and Directory; The Annot of some of those
   Divines, &c. And for the reformed churches in general (Mr. Baxter
   observes) it is past all question, by their constant practice, that
   they require the profession of a saving christian faith, and take not
   up with any lower. And respecting the then practice in England, he
   says, This is manifest by our daily administration of baptism. I never
   heard (says he) any man baptize an infant but upon the parent's, or
   susceptor's, or offerer's profession of a justifying faith.

   This leads to your last inquiry.

   Quest. V. Whether it be the general opinion, that the same
   qualifications are required in a parent bringing his child to baptism,
   as in an adult person for his own admission to this ordinance?

   ANSW. Here, Sir, I suppose you intend only the same qualifications in
   kind; or a profession and visibility, in some degree, of the same sort
   of faith and repentance; meaning that which is truly evangelical and
   saving. And understanding you in this sense, I am persuaded, by all I
   can observe, that the generality of protestants are in the affirmative;
   not assenting to a specific and essential difference, whatever
   circumstantial and gradual disparity they may allow, between the two
   cases you mention.

   Mr. Baxter, speaking of the judgment and practice of the christian
   fathers, tells us, that faith (justifying faith, and not another kind
   of faith) was supposed to be in the parent, for himself and his seed:
   because the condition or qualification of the infant is but this, that
   he be the seed of a believer. And he thinks the generality of the
   reformed are in these sentiments. He declares his own judgment in full
   concurrence herewith, and backs the same with a variety of arguments,
   in his Five Disputations, and other writings. He observes, it seems
   strange to him that any should imagine, a lower belief in the parent
   will help his child to a title to baptism, than that which is necessary
   to his own, if he were unbaptized; because mutual consent is necessary
   to mutual covenant, and the covenant must be mutual. No man hath right
   to God's part, that refuseth his own: they that have no right to
   remission of sins, have no right given them by God to baptism. If God
   be not at all actually obliged in covenant to any ungodly man, then he
   is not obliged to give him baptism: but God is not obliged so to him.
   Most of our divines make the contrary doctrine Pelagianism, that God
   should be obliged to man in a state of nature in such a covenant. If
   the parent's title be questionable, (says he,) the infant's is so too;
   because the ground is the same: and it is from the parent that the
   child must derive it; nor can any man give that which he hath not. We
   ought not (says he) to baptize those persons, or their children, as
   theirs, who are visible members of the kingdom of the devil, or that do
   not so much as profess their forsaking the devil's kingdom: but such
   are all that profess not a saving faith. If such are not visibly in the
   kingdom of the devil, at least they are not visibly out of it. All that
   are duly baptized, are baptized into Christ; therefore they are
   supposed to possess that faith by which men are united or ingrafted
   into Christ: but that is only justifying faith. Tell me (says he) where
   any man was ever said in Scripture to be united to Christ, without
   saving faith, or profession of it. In a word, Mr. Baxter takes occasion
   to declare himself in this manner: If Mr. Blake exacts not a profession
   of saving faith and repentance, I say he makes foul work in the church.
   And when such foul work shall be voluntarily maintained, and the word
   of God abused for the defilement of the church and ordinances of God,
   it is a greater scandal to the weak, and to the schismatics, and a
   greater reproach to the church, and a sadder case to considerate men,
   than the too common pollutions of others, which are merely through
   negligence, but not justified and defended.

   We are told by other impartial inquirers, that all the reformed do in
   their directories and practices require professions, as well as
   promises, of parents bringing their children to baptism; even
   professions of present faith and repentance, as well as promises of
   future obedience; and these not merely of the moral, but the
   evangelical kind. The judgment of the church of Scotland may be known
   by their adopting the Confession, Catechisms, and Directory of the
   Assembly of Divines; who, when they require a parental profession, (as
   in their Catechisms, &c.) intend it not of any lower kind, than a true
   gospel faith and obedience. The mind of the dissenters may be very much
   judged of by the reformed liturgy, presented in their name upon King
   Charles's restoration; where parents' credible profession of their
   faith, repentance, and obedience, is required in order to the baptism
   of their children. I might bring further evidence from the writings of
   particular divines among them, ancient and modern; but I must for
   brevity omit this. Only I will give you a specimen in two or three
   hints. Mr. Charnock, that great divine, observes, "Baptism supposes
   faith in the adult, and the profession of faith in the parent for his
   child." The late eminent Dr. Watts, in his Holiness of Times, Places,
   and People, thus declares himself, with respect to the infants of true
   believers: "In my opinion, so far as they are any way members of the
   visible christian church, it is upon supposition of their being (with
   their parents) members of the invisible church of God."

   On the whole, as to our fathers here in New England, it is true, they
   asserted a baptism-right in parents for themselves and children, whom
   yet they excluded from full communion; the ground of which difference
   was hinted before: and they denied a parity of reason between the two
   cases now in view, on some accounts. Their chief ground was, that adult
   baptism requires a measure of visible moral fitness or inherent
   holiness in the recipient; whereas, infant baptism requires nothing
   visible in its subject, but a relative fitness or federal holiness, the
   formalis ratio of infant membership, accruing from God's charter of
   grace to his church, taking in the infant seed with the believing
   parent. Baptism they supposed to run parallel with regular membership;
   and the child of such a parent entitled to this covenant-seal in its
   own right, on the foot of a distinct personal membership, derivative in
   point of being, but independent for its duration, and for the
   privileges annexed to it by divine institution. However, they certainly
   owned parental profession, as belonging to the due order and just
   manner of administration, both meet and needful. Accordingly they
   provided, that parents claiming covenant-privileges for their children,
   should own their covenant-state, have a measure of
   covenant-qualifications, and do covenant-duties, in some degree, to the
   satisfaction of a rational charity. And it ought to be remembered, they
   have left it as their solemn judgment, that even taking baptism-right
   for a right of fitness in foro ecclesiastico, still the parents whose
   children they claimed baptism for, were such as must be allowed to have
   a title to it for themselves, in case they had remained unbaptized:
   looking upon them, although not duly fitted for the sacrament of
   communion and confirmation, yet sufficiently so for the sacrament of
   union and initiation; professors in their infancy parentally, and now
   personally, in an initial way; appearing Abraham's children, in some
   measure of truth, to a judicious charity; justly therefore baptizable,
   in their persons and offspring, by all the rules of the gospel. I am
   not here to argue upon the justness of this scheme of thought on the
   case; but only to represent the fact in a genuine light.

   I have no room, Sir, for any further remarks. But must conclude, with
   christian salutes, and the tender of every brotherly office, from

   Your very affectionate Friend

   and humble Servant,

   THOMAS FOXCROFT.

   Boston,

   June 26, 1749.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    MISREPRESENTATIONS CORRECTED,

        AND

TRUTH VINDICATED,

        IN

  A REPLY

        TO THE

    REV. MR. SOLOMON WILLIAMS'S BOOK,

        ENTITLED,

    THE TRUE STATE OF THE QUESTION CONCERNING THE QUALIFICATIONS NECESSARY TO
    LAWFUL COMMUNION IN THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENTS.

   Prov. xii. 17.He that speaketh truth, showeth forth righteousness.

   Chap. xxii. 20, 21. Have I not written to thee excellent things in
   counsels and knowledge; that I might make thee know the certainty of
   the words of truth, that thou mightest answer the words of truth to
   them that send unto thee?
     __________________________________________________________________

      THE PREFACE.

   Since I have been so repeatedly charged by Mr. Williams with indecent
   and injurious treatment of Mr. Stoddard, (whom doubtless I ought to
   treat with much respect,) I may expect, from what appears of Mr.
   Williams's disposition this way, to be charged with ill treatment of
   him too. I desire therefore that it may be justly considered by the
   reader, what is, and what is not, injurious or unhandsome treatment of
   an author in a controversy. And here I would crave leave to say, that I
   humbly conceive, a distinction ought to be made between opposing and
   exposing a cause, or the arguments used to defend it, and reproaching
   persons. He is a weak writer indeed, who undertakes to confute an
   opinion, but dares not expose the nakedness and absurdity of it, nor
   the weakness or inconsistence of the methods taken and arguments used
   by any to maintain it, for fear he should be guilty of speaking evil of
   these things, and be charged with reproaching them. If an antagonist is
   angry at this, he thereby gives his readers too much occasion of
   suspicion towards himself, as chargeable with weakness, or bitterness.

   I therefore now give notice, that I have taken full liberty in this
   respect; only endeavouring to avoid pointed and exaggerating
   expressions. If to set forth what I suppose to be the true absurdity of
   Mr. Williams's scheme, or any part of it, that it may be viewed justly
   in all its nakedness; withal observing the weakness of the defence he
   has made, not fearing to show wherein it is weak, and how the badness
   of his cause obliges him to be inconsistent with himself, inconsistent
   with his own professed principles in religion, and with things conceded
   and asserted by him in the book especially under consideration; and
   declaring particularly wherein I think his arguments, fail whether it
   be in begging the question, or being impertinent and beside the
   question, or arguing in effect against himself; also observing wherein
   Mr. W. has made misrepresentations of words or things; I say, if to do
   these things be reproaching him, and injurious treatment of him, then I
   have injured him.--But I think I should be foolish, if I were afraid to
   do that (and to do it as thoroughly as I can) which must be the design
   of my writing, if I write at all in opposition to his tenets, and to
   the defence he makes of them.

   Indeed if I misrepresent what he says, in order to make it appear in
   the worst colours; altering his words to another sense, to make them
   appear more ridiculous; or adding other words, that carry the sense
   beyond the proper import of his words, to heighten the supposed
   absurdity, and give me greater advantage to exclaim; if I set myself to
   aggravate matters, and strain them beyond bounds, making mighty things
   of mere trifles: or if I use exclamations and invectives, instead of
   arguments; then Mr. W. might have just cause to complain, and the
   reader would have just reason for disgust. But whether I have done so,
   or not, must be judged by the reader; of whom I desire nothing more
   than the most impartial and exact consideration of the merits of the
   cause, and examination of the force and weight of every argument. I
   desire, that no bitter reproachful invectives, no vehement
   exclamations, no supercilious assuming words and phrases, may be taken
   for reasoning, on either side. If the reader thinks he finds any such
   in what I have written, I am willing he should set them aside as
   nothing worth; carefully distinguishing between them, and the strength
   of the argument. I desire not, that the cause should be judged of by
   the skill which either Mr. W. or I do manifest, in flinging one at
   another.

   If in places where the argument pinches most, and there is the greatest
   appearance of strong reason, in Mr. W's book, I do, (as some other
   disputants,) instead of entering thoroughly into the matter, begin to
   flounce and fling, and divert the reader's attention to the argument,
   by the noise of big words, or magisterial and disdainful expressions;
   let the reader take it (as justly he may) for a shrewd sign of a
   consciousness of the weakness of my cause in that particular, or at
   least of a distrust of my own ability to defend myself well in the
   reader's apprehension, and to come off with a good grace any other way.

   In this case, I shall not think it any injustice done me by the reader,
   though he suspects that I feel myself pressed, and begin to be in
   trouble, for fear I should not seem to come off like a champion, if I
   should trust to mere reasoning. I can uprightly say, I never have
   endeavoured by such means to evade a proper consideration of any part
   of Mr. W.s reasoning; nor have designedly contrived, in this or any
   other method, to free myself from the trouble of a just answer to any
   thing material in his book; and I have been especially careful to speak
   most particularly to the main parts of his scheme, and such of his
   reasonings as I could suppose those of his readers who are on his side,
   would be most likely to have their chief dependence on, and to think
   most difficult to be answered.

   With regard to my method in this reply, I judged it most convenient to
   reduce my remarks on Mr. W.s principles, and the parts of his scheme,
   and kinds of arguing, which repeatedly appear in various parts of his
   book, to their proper heads. I thought this tended to give the reader a
   clearer and more comprehensive view of the whole controversy, and the
   nature of the arguments; and that it also would make my work the
   shorter. For otherwise, I must have had the same things, or things of
   the same nature, to have observed often, as I found them repeated in
   different parts of this book, and the same remarks to make over and
   over again.--And that the reader may not be without any advantages
   which he might have had in the other method, of keeping, in my reply,
   to the order in which things lie in the book answered, following my
   author from one page and paragraph to another, I have therefore
   subjoined a table, by which the reader may readily turn to what is said
   on each particular, that is wont to be brought into this debate, on one
   side or the other. [563]

   With regard to my citations from Mr. W.s book, I have never designedly
   altered his words: and where I have for brevity's sake referred to any
   sentiment of his, without citing the words at large, I have used care
   not to change or heighten the sense, or in any respect to vary from the
   just import of what he delivers. And that the reader may himself more
   easily and readily judge of the fairness of my citations and
   references, I have mentioned the page, and the part of the page, where
   the thing referred to is to be found: supposing each page to be divided
   into five equal parts, I have noted the several parts of the page by
   the letters a. b. c. d. e. So that when I have referred to the top of
   the page, or the first fifth part of it, I have mentioned the number of
   the page, and added the letter a. to the number: and if the middle, or
   third fifth part, then I have added the letter c.--and so of the rest,
   as the reader will see. I have ever done thus, unless the thing
   referred to is to be found through the whole or great part of the page.
   I have also done the same very often, where I have occasion to cite
   other authors. Only when I have before quoted the same thing, I am not
   always so exact and particular in noting the place again, in my second
   quotation or reference.

    MISREPRESENTATIONS CORRECTED.

        AND

  TRUTH VINDICATED.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [563] This is now incorporated with the General Index.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   the general misrepresentations mr. williams makes concerning the book
   he writes against.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. 1.

   Concerning the design of my writing and publishing my book, and the
   question debated in it.

   Mr. Williams asserts it to be my professed and declared design, in
   writing the book which he has undertaken to answer, to oppose Mr.
   Stoddard. He has taken a great liberty in this matter. He charges me
   with a declared design of writing in opposition to Mr. Stoddard, no
   less than nine or ten times in his book. And he does not content
   himself merely with saying, there are passages in my Preface, or
   elsewhere, whence this may be inferred; but he says expressly, that I
   profess to be disputing against Mr. Stoddard's doctrine, (p. 14. d.)
   That I tell my readers, I am disputing against Mr. Stoddard's question,
   (p. 37. d.) That I tell them so in my Preface, (p. 107. d.) That I
   often declare that I am opposing Mr. Stoddard's opinion, (p. 132. d.)
   And on this foundation he charges me with blotting a great deal of
   paper, disserving the cause of truth by changing the question, and
   putting it in such terms as Mr. S. expressly disclaims, and then
   confuting it as Mr. S--d's principle; unfair treatment of Mr. S. (p. 2.
   d. e.)--surprisingly going off from Mr. S--d's argument to cast an
   odium upon it, treating Mr. S. and his doctrine in such a manner as to
   reproach him and his principles, tending to render them odious to the
   unthinking multitude, and telling a manifest untruth, (p. 14. d. and
   15. c. d.) Whereas, I never once signified it to be the thing I aimed
   at, to oppose Mr. Stoddard, or appear as his antagonist. But the very
   reverse was true; and meddling with him, or what he had said, I studied
   to avoid, as much as the circumstances of the debate with my people
   would allow, who had been taught by him, and who so greatly and
   continually alleged against me the things which he had said. Nor is
   there any appearance in those passages Mr. W. cites from my preface,
   that this was the thing I aimed at. Nay, one of those passages which he
   produces to prove it, shows the contrary: as it shows, that what I
   wrote being not consistent with, but opposite to, what Mr. S. had
   maintained, was an unsought for and unpleasing circumstance of that
   publication. My words are, "It is far from a pleasing circumstance of
   this publication, that it is against what my honoured grandfather
   strenuously maintained, both from the pulpit and the press." Certainly
   my regretting and excusing such an unavoidable circumstance was a thing
   exceeding diverse from giving notice to the world, that the thing I
   aimed at was to set myself up as Mr. Stoddard's antagonist, and to
   write an answer to, and confute, what he had written. It will, at first
   sight, be manifest to every impartial reader, that the design of my
   Preface was not to state the subject and intention of the book. This is
   done professedly, and very particularly afterwards, in the first part
   of the essay itself. And if I might have common justice, surely I might
   be allowed to tell my own opinion, and declare my own design, without
   being so confidently and frequently charged with misrepresenting my own
   thoughts and intentions.

   The very nature of the case is such as must lead every impartial person
   to a conviction, that the design of my writing must be to defend
   myself, in that controversy which I had with my people at Northampton;
   as it is notorious and publicly known, that that controversy was the
   occasion of my writing; and that therefore my business must be to
   defend that opinion or position of mine which I had declared to them,
   which had been the occasion of the controversy, and so the grand
   subject of debate between us; whether this were exactly agreeable to
   any words that might be found in Mr. Stoddard's writings on the
   subject, or not. Now this opinion or position was the same with that
   which I expressed in the first part of my book. In such terms I
   expressed myself to the committee of the church, when I first made that
   declaration of my opinion, which was the beginning of the controversy,
   and when writing in defence of my opinion was first proposed. And this
   was the point continually talked of in all conversation at Northampton,
   for more than two years, even till Mr. W.s book came out. The
   controversy was, Whether there was any need of making a credible
   profession of godliness, in order to persons being admitted to full
   communion; whether they must profess having faith, or whether a
   profession of common faith were not sufficient; whether persons must be
   esteemed truly godly, and must be taken in under that notion, or
   whether if they appeared morally sincere, that were not sufficient? And
   when my book came abroad, there was no objection made, that I had not
   truly expressed the subject of debate in stating the question: but the
   subject of debate afterwards, in parish meetings, church-meetings, and
   in all conversation, was the question laid down in my book. No
   suggestion existed among them, that the profession persons made in Mr.
   Stoddard's way, was taken as a profession of real godliness, or
   gospel-holiness; or that they were taken in under a notion of their
   being truly pious persons, as Mr. W. would have it. There was no
   suggestion, that the dispute was only about the degree of evidence; but
   what was the thing to be made evident; whether real godliness, or moral
   sincerity? It was constantly insisted on, with the greatest vehemence,
   that it was not saving religion, which needed to be professed, or
   pretended to; but another thing, religion of a lower kind. The public
   acts of the church and parish, from time to time, show, that the point
   in controversy was, Whether the professors of godliness, only, ought to
   be admitted? Public votes of which I made a record, were several times
   passed to know the church's mind concerning the admission of those who
   are able, and willing to make a profession of godliness; using these
   terms. And once it was passed, That such should not be admitted in the
   way of publicly making such a profession. And at another time the vote
   passed, That the admission of such persons in such a way (described in
   the same words) should not he referred to the judgment of certain
   neighbouring ministers. At another time, it was insisted on by the
   parish, in a parish-meeting, That I should put a vote in the church, in
   these words, Whether there be nut a dispute between Mr. Edwards pastor
   of the church, and the church, respecting the question he hath argued
   in his book last published. And accordingly the vote was put and
   affirmed, in a church-meeting, in the same terms. And this was the
   question I insisted on in my public lectures at Northampton, appointed
   for giving the reasons of my opinion. My doctrine was in these words,
   It is the mind and will of God, that none should be admitted to fall
   communion in the church of Christ, but such as in profession, and in
   the eye of a reasonable judgment, are truly saints, or godly persons.
   The town was full of objections against those sermons; but none, as
   ever I heard, objected, that my doctrine was beside the
   controversy.--And this was all along the point of difference between me
   and the neighbouring ministers. This was the grand subject of debate
   with them, at a meeting of ministers, appointed on purpose for
   conference on the subject. It was wholly concerning the matter of
   profession, or the thing to be exhibited and made evident or visible;
   and not about the manner of professing, and the degree of evidence. And
   this was the doctrine directly opposed by Mr. A--y, one of the
   neighbouring ministers, whom my people had got as their champion to
   defend their cause in the pulpit at Northampton. Thus one of the
   corollaries he drew from his doctrine (as it was taken from his mouth
   in writing) was, That "a man may be a visible saint, and yet there be
   no sufficient grounds for our charity, that he is regenerate." Quite
   contrary to what Mr. W. maintains. Another of his corollaries was in
   these words, " A minister or church may judge a man a saint, and upon
   good grounds, and not have grounds to judge him regenerate." He
   proposed this inquiry, "Do not such as join themselves to the church,
   covenant not only to be visible saints, but saints in heart?" The
   answer was in the negative; quite contrary to Mr. W. Another was, "Does
   not a visible saint imply a visibility of grace, or an appearance of
   it?" The answer was, "Not always."--Quite contrary to Mr. W. Another
   was, "Is not hypocrisy in any man, to make a profession of religion,
   and join himself to the church, and not have grace ?" The answer was in
   the negative; also quite contrary to Mr. W.--But these sermons of Mr.
   A--y were highly approved by the generality of the people of
   Northampton, as agreeable to their minds.

   And the controversy, as I have stated it in my book, was that in which
   the church and I appeared before the council, who determined our
   separation, when we each of us declared our sentiments before them. The
   point of difference was entirely the matter of profession, and the
   thing to be made visible: not the degree of evidence or visibility. No
   hint was given as though we both agreed, that true piety or
   gospel-holiness was the thing to be made visible, and that such only
   should be received as are truly godly persons in the eye of the
   church's judgment, (as Mr. W. holds,) and that we only differed about
   the proper grounds of such a judgment.

   And therefore it is apparent, this controversy and its consequences,
   were the ground of my separation from my people; and not any thing like
   the controversy which Mr. W. professes to manage in his answer. This
   controversy, when it came out in Mr. W--s book, was new in Northampton,
   and entirely alien from all the dispute which had filled that part of
   the country, and a great part of New England, with noise and uproar,
   for about two years and a half. The thing which Mr. W. over and over
   allows to be true, was the very same, both in effect and in terms,
   which the people had been most vehemently fighting against, from week
   to week, and from month to month, during all this time. And therefore
   the design of my writing led and obliged me to maintain that position
   or doctrine of mine, which was the occasion of this debate.

   And be it so, that I did suppose this position was contrary to Mr.
   Stoddard's opinion, and was opposed by him, [564] and therefore thought
   fit in my Preface to excuse myself to the world for differing from him;
   did this oblige me, in all that I wrote for maintaining my position, to
   keep myself strictly to the words which he had expressed his question
   in, and to regulate and limit myself in every argument I used, and
   objection I answered, by the terms which he made use of in proposing
   his opinion and arguments? And if I have not done it, do I therefore
   deserve to be charged before the world with changing the question, with
   unfair treatment of Mr. Stoddard, with surprisingly going off from his
   argument, with disserving the cause of truth, &c.

   It would have been no great condescension in Mr. W. if he had allowed
   that I knew what the question was, which was disputed between me and my
   people, as well as he, in a distant part of the country. Yea, if he had
   acknowledged, that I was as likely as he, to understand Mr. Stoddard's
   real sentiments and practice; since I was in the ministry two years
   with him, as co-pastor of the same church, and was united with him in
   ecclesiastical administrations, in admitting members, and in examining
   them as to their qualifications. I have stood for more than
   twenty-three years in a pastoral relation to his church, most
   intimately acquainted with the nature of its constitution, its
   sentiments and method of administration, and all its religious
   concerns. I have myself been immediately concerned in the admission of
   more than three quarters of its present members, and have had the
   greatest occasion to look into their way of admission, and have been
   acquainted with every living member that Mr. S. had admitted before my
   coming; and have been particularly informed, by many of them, of the
   manner of Mr. S--d's conduct in admitting them, their own apprehensions
   concerning the terms of their admission, and the profession they made
   in order to it; and also the sentiments of the whole of that large
   town, who were born and brought up under his ministry, concerning his
   constant doctrine and practice, relating to the admission of members,
   from their infancy.--Whereas, Mr. W. from his youth had lived in
   another part of the country, at seventy miles distance.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [564] Whether I was mistaken in this, will appear in the sequel.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Mr. Williams's misrepresentations of the principles and tenets,
   delivered in the book which he undertakes to answer.

   Mr. W. very greatly misrepresents my opinion, and the principles I
   maintain in my book, in many respects.

   I. He says, (p. 5. d.) "The whole argument, and indeed the whole
   controversy, turns upon this single point, viz. What is that evidence,
   which by divine appointment the church is to have, of the saintship of
   those who are admitted to the outward privileges of the covenant of
   grace? Mr. Edwards seems to suppose, this must be the highest evidence
   a man can give of sincerity; and I apprehend it to be the lowest
   evidence the nature of the thing will admit."--But this is very
   strange, since I had particularly declared in my stating of the
   question, (p. 5.) that the evidence I insisted on, was some outward
   manifestation, that ordinarily rendered the thing probable. Which
   shows, that all I insisted on, was only, that the evidence should
   amount to probability. And if the nature of the case will admit of some
   lower kind of evidence than this, or if there be any such thing as a
   sort of evidence that does not so much as amount to probability, then
   it is possible that I may have some controversy with him and others
   about the degree of evidence. Otherwise it is hard to conceive, how he
   should contrive to make out a controversy with me.

   But that the reader may better judge, whether Mr. W. truly represents
   me as supposing that the evidence which should be insisted on, is the
   highest evidence a man can give of sincerity, I would here insert an
   extract of a Letter which I wrote to the If Rev. Mr. Peter Clark of
   Salem-Village, a twelvemonth before Mr. W--s book was published. The
   original is doubtless in Mr. Clark's hands. In that letter, I declare
   my sentiments in the following words:

   "It does not belong to the controversy between me and my people, how
   particular or large the profession should be that is required. I should
   not choose to be confined to exact limits as to that matter. But rather
   than contend, I should content myself with a few words, briefly
   expressing the cardinal virtues, or acts implied in a hearty compliance
   with the covenant of grace; the profession being made (as should appear
   by inquiry into the person's doctrinal knowledge) understandingly; if
   there were an external conversation agreeable thereto. Yea, I should
   think that such a person, solemnly making such a profession, had a
   right to be received as the object of a public charity, however he
   himself might scruple his own conversion, on account of his not
   remembering the time, not knowing the method, of his conversion, or
   finding so much remaining sin, &c. And (if his own scruples did not
   hinder [565] ) I should think a minister or church had no right to
   debar such a professor, though he should say, he did not think himself
   converted. For I call that a profession of godliness, which is a
   profession of the great things wherein godliness consists, and not a
   profession of his own opinion of his good estate."(

   Northampton, May 7, 1750.

   In like manner, I explained my opinion, very particularly and
   expressly, before the council that determined my separation from my
   people, and before the church, in a very public manner in the
   meeting-house, many people being present, near a year before Mr. W--s
   book was published. And to make it the more sure, that what I
   maintained might be well observed, I afterwards sent in the foregoing
   extract of my letter to Mr. Clark of Salem--Village, into the council.
   And, as I was informed, it was particularly taken notice of in the
   council, and handed round among them, to be read by them.

   The same council, having heard that I had made certain draughts of the
   covenant, or forms of a public profession of religion, which I stood
   ready to accept of from the candidates for communion, they, for their
   further information, sent for them. Accordingly I sent them four
   distinct draughts or forms, which I had drawn up about a twelvemonth
   before, (near two years before the publishing of Mr. W--s book,) as
   what I stood ready to accept of (any one of them) rather than contend
   and break with my people.--The two shortest of those forms were as
   follows.

   One of them was;

   "I hope, I do truly find a heart to give up myself wholly to God,
   according to the tenor of that covenant of grace which was sealed in my
   baptism, and to walk in a way of that obedience to all the commandments
   of God, which the covenant of grace requires, as long as I live."

   The other,

   "I hope, I truly find in my heart a willingness to comply with all the
   commandments of God, which require me to give up myself wholly to him,
   and to serve him with my body and my spirit; and do accordingly now
   promise to walk in a way of obedience to all the commandments of God,
   as long as I live."

   Now the reader is left to judge, whether I insist, as Mr. W.
   represents, that persons must not be admitted without the highest
   evidence a man can give of sincerity.

   II. Mr. W. is abundant in suggesting and insinuating to his readers,
   that the opinion laid down in my book is, That persons ought not to be
   admitted to a communion without an absolute and peremptory
   determination in those who admit them, that they are truly godly;
   because I suppose it to be necessary, that there should be a positive
   judgment in their favour.

   Here I desire the reader to observe, that the word positive is used in
   two senses. (1.) Sometimes it is put in opposition to doubtful or
   uncertain: and then it signifies the same as certain, peremptory, or
   assured. But, (2.) The word positive is very often used in a very
   different sense; not in opposition to doubtful, but in opposition to
   negative: and so understood, it signifies very much the same as real or
   actual. Thus, we often speak of a negative good, and a positive good. A
   negative good is a mere negation or absence of evil; but a positive
   good is something more,--some real, actual good, instead of evil. So
   there is a negative charity, and a positive charity. A negative charity
   is a mere absence of an ill judgment of a man, or forbearing to condemn
   him. Such a charity a man may have towards any stranger he transiently
   sees in the street, that he never saw or heard any thing of before. A
   positive charity is something further than merely not condemning, or
   not judging ill, it implies a good thought of a man. The reader will
   easily see that the word positive, taken in this sense, is an exceeding
   different thing from certain or peremptory. A man may have something
   more than a mere negative charity towards another, or a mere forbearing
   to condemn him, he may actually entertain some good thought of him, and
   yet there may be no proper peremptoriness, no pretence of any certainty
   in the case.

   Now it is in this sense I use the phrase positive judgment, viz. In
   opposition to a mere negative charity; as I very plainly express the
   matter, and particularly and fully explain myself in stating the
   question. In my inquiry (p. 5.) I have the following words: "By
   christian judgment, I intend something further than a kind of mere
   negative charity, implying that we forbear to censure and condemn a
   man, because we do not know but that he may be godly, and therefore
   forbear to proceed on the foot of such a censure or judgment in our
   treatment of him; as we would kindly entertain a stranger, not knowing
   but, in so doing, we entertain an angel, or precious saint of God: but
   I mean a positive judgment, founded on some positive appearance or
   visibility, some outward manifestation that ordinarily renders the
   thing probable. There is a difference between suspending our judgment,
   or forbearing to condemn, or having some hope that possibly the thing
   may be so, and so hoping the best, and a positive judgment in favour of
   a person. For having some hope, only implies, that a man is not in
   utter despair of a thing; though his prevailing opinion may be
   otherwise, or he may suspend his opinion.

   Here, I think, my meaning is very plainly and carefully explained.
   However, inasmuch as the word positive is sometimes used for peremptory
   or certain, Mr. W. catches at the term, and lays fast hold of the
   advantage he thinks this gives him, and is abundant, all over his book,
   in representing as though I insisted on a positive judgment in this
   sense. So he applies the word, referring to my use of it, from time to
   time. Thus, (p. 69. b.) "If there be any thing in this argument, I
   think it must be what I have observed, viz. That a Christian must make
   a positive judgment and determination, that another man is a saint, and
   this judgment must have for its ground something which he supposes is,
   at least ordinarily, a certain evidence of his saintship, and by which
   gracious sincerity is certainly distinguished from every thing else."
   And, (p. 141. a.) "The notion of men's being able and fit to determine
   positively the condition of other men, or the certainty of their
   gracious state, has a direct tendency to deceive the souls of men." And
   thus Mr. W. makes mention of a positive judgment above forty times in
   his book, with reference to my use of it, and to my declared opinion of
   its necessity; and every where plainly uses the phrase in that sense,
   for absolute and peremptory, in opposition to doubtfulness; continually
   insinuating, that this is what I professedly insist on. Whereas every
   act of the judgment whatsoever, is a positive judgment in the sense in
   which I have fully declared I use it, viz. in opposition to negative;
   which is no act, but a mere withholding of the act of the judgment, or
   forbearing any actual judgment. [566] Mr. W. himself does abundantly
   suppose, that there must be a positive judgment in this sense. He
   grants the very thing, though he rejects the term. For he holds, there
   must be such a visibility as makes persons to appear to be real saints,
   (p. 5. b.)--He allows, that the moral image of God or Christ must
   appear, or be supposed to be in them, as the ground and reason of our
   charity; and that there must be some apprehension, some judgment of
   mind, of the saintship of persons, for its foundation, (p. 68. c. d. e.
   and 69. a. 71. d.)--That they must have such a character appearing in
   them. (p. 55. e.)--That there must be a judgment founded on moral
   evidence of gospel-holiness, (p. 139. d.)

   III. Mr. W. to make my scheme appear the more ridiculous, more than
   once represents it as my opinion, that in order to persons being
   admitted into the church, there must be a judgment of their being
   regenerate, founded on such a degree of evidence, as that it shall not
   be liable to be mistaken more than once in ten times. Thus, (p. 63. c.)
   "Mr. Edwards himself supposes, in his own scheme, when he has made a
   positive judgment that every one singly whom he admits into the church
   is regenerate; yet when taken collectively, it is probable one in ten
   will be an hypocrite." (So, p. 71. b.) "If any thing be intended to the
   purpose for which this argument is brought, I conceive, it must mean,
   that there must be such a positive judgment of the real holiness of
   persons, as is not mistaken more than once in ten times."--Now, I
   desire the reader to observe what is the whole ground, on which he
   makes such a representation. In explaining my opinion, in the beginning
   of my Inquiry, (p. 6.) I desired it might be observed, that I did not
   suppose we ought to expect any such degree of certainty of the
   godliness of those who are admitted into the church, as that when the
   whole number admitted are taken collectively, or considered in the
   gross, we should have any reason to suppose every one to be truly
   godly; though we might have charity for each one that was admitted,
   taken singly, and by himself. And to show, that such a thing was
   possible, I endeavoured to illustrate it by a comparison, or supposed
   case of probability of ten to one, in the example of certain stones,
   with such probable marks of a diamond, as by experience had been found
   not to fail more than once in ten times. In which case, if a particular
   stone were found with those marks, there would be a probability of ten
   to one, with respect to that stone, singly taken, that it was genuine:
   but if ten such were taken together, there would not be the same
   probability that every one of them was so; but in this case, it is as
   likely as not, that some one in the ten is spurious. Now it is so
   apparent, that this particular degree of probability of ten to one is
   mentioned only as a supposed case, for illustration, and because, in a
   particular example, some number or other must be mentioned, that it
   would have been an affront to the sense of my readers to have added any
   caution, that he should not understand me otherwise. However, Mr. W.
   has laid hold of this, as a good handle by which he might exhibit my
   scheme to the world in a ridiculous light; as though I had declared it
   my real opinion, that there must be the probability of just ten to one,
   of true godliness, in order to persons' admission into the church. He
   might with as much appearance of sense and justice, have asserted
   concerning all the supposed cases in books of arithmetic, that the
   authors intend these cases should be understood as real facts, and that
   they have written their books, with all the sums and numbers in them,
   as books of history; and if any cases mentioned there only as examples
   of the several rules, are unlikely to be true accounts of fact,
   therefore have charged the authors with writing a false and absurd
   history.

   IV. Another thing, yet further from what is honourable in Mr. W. is
   this; That, whereas I said as above, that there ought to be a
   prevailing opinion concerning those that are admitted, taken singly, or
   by themselves, that they are truly godly or gracious, though when we
   look on the whole number in the gross, we are far from determining that
   every one is a true saint, and that not one of the judgments we have
   passed, has been mistaken; Mr. W. because I used the phrase singly
   taken, has laid hold on the expression, and from thence has taken
   occasion to insinuate to his readers, as if my scheme were so very
   extravagant, that according to this, when a great multitude are
   admitted, their admitters must be confident of every one's being
   regenerated. Hence he observes, (p. 98. c.) "There is no appearance,
   that John made a positive judgment that every one of these people were
   regenerated. Plainly using the expression as a very strong one; leading
   the reader to suppose, that I insist the evidence shall be so clear,
   that when such a vast multitude as John baptized are viewed, the
   admitter should be peremptory in it, that his judgment has not failed
   so much as in a single instance; the very reverse of what I had
   expressed. In like manner, Mr. W. treats the matter from time to time.
   As in p. 55. a. "The thing to be proved from hence is, that the
   apostles and primitive Christians, not only thought that these persons
   were Christians, by reason of their external calling, and professed
   compliance with the call; but had formed a positive judgment concerning
   every one of them singly, that they were real saints." Here the
   expression is plainly used as a very strong one; as implying much more
   than esteeming so great a multitude, when taken in the gross, to be
   generally true saints, and with a manifest design to carry the same
   idea in the mind of the reader as was before mentioned. See another
   like instance, p. 62. c.

   V. However, my opinion is not represented bad enough yet; but to make
   it appear still worse, Mr. W. is bold to strain his representation of
   it to that height, as to suggest that what I insist on, is a certainty
   of others' regeneration; though this be so diverse from what I had
   largely explained in stating the question, and plainly expressed in
   other parts of my book, [567] and also inconsistent with his own
   representations in other places. For if what I insist on be a
   probability that may fail once in ten times, as he says it is, p. 63.
   a. then it is not a certainty that I insist on; as he suggests, p. 141.
   a.--Speaking of the evil consequences of my opinion, he says, "The
   notion of men's being able and fit to determine positively the
   condition of other men, or the certainty of their gracious estate, has
   a direct tendency to deceive the souls of men." So again in p 69. And
   he suggests, that I require more than moral evidence, in p. 6. c. and
   p. 139. d.

   VI. Mr. W. represents me as insisting on some way of judging the state
   of such as are admitted to communion, by their inward and spiritual
   experiences, diverse from judging by their profession and behaviour.
   So, p. 7. b. "If their outward profession and behaviour be the ground
   of this judgment, then it is not the inward experience of the heart."
   P. 55. b. "Which judgment must be founded on something beyond and
   beside their external calling, and visible profession to comply with
   it, and to be separated for God: and therefore this judgment must be
   founded, either upon revelation, or a personal acquaintance with their
   experiences," &c. In like manner he is abundant, from one end of his
   book to the other, in representing as though I insisted on judging men
   by their inward and spiritual experiences, in some peculiar manner.
   Which is something surprising, since there is not so much as a word
   said about relating, or giving an account of, experiences, or what is
   commonly so called, as a term of communion. Mr. W. (p 6.a.) pretends to
   quote two passages of mine, as an evidence, that this is what I insist
   on. One is from the 5th page of my book. It is true, I there say thus,
   "It is a visibility to the eye of the public charity, and not a private
   judgment, that gives a person a right to be received as a visible saint
   by the public." And I there say, "A public and serious profession of
   the great and main things wherein the essence of true religion or
   godliness consists, together with an honest character, an agreeable
   conversation, and good understanding of the doctrines of Christianity,
   and particularly those doctrines that teach the grand condition of
   salvation, and the nature of true saving religion; this justly
   recommends persons to the good opinion of the public; whatever
   suspicions and fears any particular person, either the minister, or
   some other, may entertain, from what he in particular has observed;
   perhaps the manner of his expressing himself in giving an account of
   his experiences, or an obscurity in the order and method of his
   experiences," &c.--But the words do not imply, it may be demanded of
   the candidate, that he should give an account of his experiences to the
   minister, or any body else, as the term of his admission into the
   church: nor had I respect to any such thing. But I knew it was the
   manner in many places for those who hoped they were godly persons, to
   converse with their neighbours, and especially with their minister,
   about their experiences; whether it was required of them in order to
   their coming into the church, or no; and particularly, I was sensible,
   that this was the manner at Northampton, for whose sake especially I
   wrote; and I supposed it the way of many ministers, and people, to
   judge of others' state, openly and publicly, by the order and method of
   their experiences, or the manner of their relating them. But this I
   condemn in the very passage that Mr. W. quotes; and very much condemn
   in other writings of mine which have been published; and have ever
   loudly condemned, and borne my testimony against.

   There is one passage more, which Mr. W. adds to the preceding, and
   fathers on me, to prove that I require an account of experiences in
   order to admission; pretending to rehearse my words, with marks of
   quotation, saying as follows, (p. 6. a.) and as he further explains
   himself elsewhere; "The proper visibility which the public is to have
   of a man's being a saint, must be on some account of his experience of
   those doctrines which teach the nature of true saving religion."--I
   have made long and diligent search for such a passage in my writings,
   but cannot find it. Mr. W. says, I thus explain myself elsewhere; but I
   wish he had mentioned in what place.

   If there be such a sentence in some of my writings, (as I suppose there
   is not,) it will serve little to Mr. W--s purpose. If we take the word
   experience according to the common acceptation of it in the English
   language, viz. a person's perceiving or knowing any thing by trial or
   experiment, or by immediate sensation or consciousness within himself;
   in this sense, I own, it may from what I say in my book be inferred,
   that a man's profession of his experience should be required as a term
   of communion. And so it may be as justly and as plainly inferred, that
   Mr. W. himself insists on a profession of experience as a term of
   communion; experience of a deep conviction of a man's undone state
   without Christ; experience of a persuasion of his judgment and
   conscience, that there is no other way of salvation; experience of
   unfeigned desires to be brought to the terms of the covenant. For such
   things as these, he says, must be professed. So, p. 75. d. e. and in
   innumerable other places. There is no such thing possible as a man's
   professing any thing within himself or belonging to his own mind,
   either good or bad, either common or saving, unless it be something
   that he finds, or (which is the same thing) experiences, within
   himself.

   I know the word experience is used by many in a sort of peculiar sense,
   for the particular order and method of what passes within the mind and
   heart in conversion. And in this sense, Mr. W. knows, I disclaim the
   notion of making experiences a term of communion. I say, he knows it,
   because (in p. 6. a.) he quotes and rehearses the very words wherein I
   do expressly disclaim it. And I am very large and particular in
   testifying against it in my book on Religious Affections: (a book I
   have good reason to think Mr. W. has seen and read, having been thus
   informed by a man of his own principles, that had it from his mouth.)
   There, in p. 300. e. and 301.a. I say as follows: "In order to persons
   making a proper profession of Christianity, such as the Scripture
   directs to, and such as the followers of Christ should require in order
   to the acceptance of the professors with full charity, as of their
   society, it is not necessary they should give an account of the
   particular steps and method, by which the Holy Spirit, sensibly to
   them, wrought, and brought about those great essential things of
   Christianity in their hearts. There is no footstep in the Scripture of
   any such way of the apostles, or primitive ministers and Christians,
   requiring any such relation in order to their receiving and treating
   others as their christian brethren, to all intents and purposes; or of
   their first examining them concerning the particular method and order
   of their experiences.--They required of them a profession of the things
   wrought; but no account of the manner of working was required of them.
   Nor is there the least shadow in the Scripture of any such custom in
   the church of God, from Adam to the death of the apostle John." To the
   same purpose again I express myself in p. 302 .d. And in the Preface,
   to the book that Mr. W. writes against, I make particular mention of
   this book on Religious Affections, wherein these things are said; and
   there declare expressly, that when I wrote that book, I was of the same
   mind concerning the qualifications of communicants that I am of
   now.--But,

   VII. To make my scheme still more obnoxious and odious, Mr. W. once and
   again insinuates, that I insist on an account of such inward feelings,
   as are by men supposed to be the certain discriminating marks of grace,
   (so p. 7.b. and 141.e.) though I never once used the phrase any where
   in my book.--I said not a word about inward feelings, from one end of
   it to the other. Nor is any inward feeling at all more implied in my
   scheme, than in his. But however Mr. W. knew that these phrases,
   experiences, and inward feelings, were become odious of late to a great
   part of the country; and especially the latter of them, since Mr.
   Whitfield used it so much. And he well knew, that to tack these phrases
   to my scheme, and to suggest to his readers that these were the things
   I professed to insist on, would tend to render me and my scheme
   contemptible. If he says, Though I use not that phrase, yet the things
   I insist on, are such as are inwardly felt; such as saving repentance,
   faith, &c. I answer, these things are no more inward feelings, than the
   things he himself insists on; such as a deep conviction of a man's
   undone state, unfeigned fervent desires after Christ, a fixed
   resolution for Christ, engagedness for heaven, &c.

   VIII. Mr. W. abundantly, in almost all parts of his book, represents my
   principles to be such as suppose men to be the SEARCHERS of others'
   hearts. For which I have given no other ground, than only supposing
   that some such qualifications are necessary in order to communion,
   which have their seat in the heart, and so not to be intuitively seen
   by others; and that such qualifications must, by profession and
   practice, be made so visible or credible to others, that others may
   rationally judge they are there. And Mr. W. supposes the same thing as
   much as I. In p. 111. c. he expressly speaks of the qualifications
   necessary to communion, as being in the heart, and not possible to be
   known any other way than by their being seen there; and also often
   allows, that these qualifications must be exhibited, and made visible,
   by a credible profession, and answerable practice. Yea, he goes
   further, he even supposes that those who admit them to sacraments,
   ought to be satisfied by their profession, that they really have these
   qualifications. Thus he says, p. 54. c. "The baptizer ought to be
   satisfied by a person's profession, that he really believes the gospel,
   and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Saviour."

   IX. Mr. W. is not contented with all these representations of my
   scheme, but will have it appear more absurd and monstrous still; and
   therefore represents me as maintaining that it is not the visible
   profession of experiences, that I suppose the ground of the church's
   judgment; but these experiences and inward feelings themselves, by
   having the heart turned inside out, and viewing them immediately in the
   heart itself, and judging upon the next and immediate actings of the
   heart.--Here, I only desire the reader to read down Mr. W. s 7th page,
   and make his own reflections.

   X. Whereas, in p. 16. of my book, I observed it to be the opinion of
   some, that "Although the members of the visible church are saints in
   profession and visibility, and in the acceptance of others, yet this is
   not with reference to saving holiness, but quite another sort of
   saintship, viz. moral sincerity; and that this is the real saintship,
   discipleship, and godliness, that is professed and visible in them,"
   &c. Mr. W. (p. 4, 5.) says, He does not remember that he ever heard of
   this, or that anybody thought of it, before he saw it in my book; and
   represents it as a poor man of straw, of my own framing; and he insists
   upon it, that it is allowed on all hands, that the visibility must be
   with reference to saving holiness.

   I will not say, that Mr. W. knew it to be a false representation which
   he here makes; but this I will say, that he ought to have been better
   informed, before he had thus publicly ridiculed this as a fiction of
   mine; especially considering the opportunities and advantages he has
   had to know otherwise: this being the notion that had been (as was
   before observed) so loudly and publicly insisted on, for more than two
   years, by the people of Northampton, and by the neighbouring ministers,
   and those of them that were Mr. W.s near relatives; as he has abundant
   opportunities to be fully informed, having withal had great inducements
   to inquire. Besides, that this has been the universal opinion of all
   that part of the country (who thought themselves Mr. Stoddard's
   followers) for more than twenty years, is a fact as notorious, as that
   the people there generally believe Mr. Stoddard's doctrine of the
   necessity of a work of conversion in order to get to heaven.--And this
   is the opinion professedly maintained in a pamphlet published in
   Boston, (anno 1741,) entitled, A Right to the Lord's Supper considered:
   a piece which has long been well known among Mr. W.'s nearest
   relatives, and in good repute with them; as I have had occasion to
   observe. This pamphlet insists expressly and abundantly, that moral
   sincerity is the REAL discipleship and holiness, with respect to which
   visible Christians are called disciples and saints in Scripture.
   Particularly see pages 9, 10, 13, and 14. And which is more strange
   yet, Mr. Blake, the great author Mr. W. makes so much use of, and in a
   book which I know he has long been the possessor of, speaks much of a
   profession of religion that has respect only to a dogmatical,
   historical faith, a common faith, a faith true indeed (as he says) in
   its kind, but short of that which is justifying and saving, and a
   profession which goes no further, as that which entitles to sealing
   ordinances. See Blake on the Covenant, p. 241, 244, 245. The same
   author again and again distinguishes between justifying faith and faith
   of profession; as in p. 284, 285, 286. And which is more than all this,
   Mr. W. (as will appear in the sequel) abundantly contends for the same
   thing himself, though against himself, and although he charges me (p.
   35.d.) with a great misrepresentation, in supposing that according to
   the scheme of my opposers, the profession required in those that are
   admitted, does not imply a pretence to any thing more than moral
   sincerity and common grace.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [565] I added this, because I supposed that such persons as judge
   themselves unconverted, if of my principles respecting qualifications
   for communion, would scruple coming, and could not come with a good
   conscience: but if they were of Mr. S--d's principles, viz. That
   unconverted men might lawfully come, neither a man's being of that
   opinion, nor his judging himself unconverted, would hinder my receiving
   him who exhibited proper evidence to the church of his being a convert.

   [566] Mr. John Glass. in his Observes upon the original Constitution of
   the Christian Church, (p. 55, 5b.) says as follows. "You seem to have a
   great prejudice of what you call positive evidences, and judging upon
   them in the admission of church-members. And I am at some loss to
   understand what you mean by them, though I have heard the expression
   frequently, among people of your opinion, used to express some very ill
   thing. If you mean by positive evidences, infallible evidences of a
   thing that none but God infallibly knows, and can assure a man's own
   conscience of, with respect to a man himself: I think it would be a
   very great evil for a man to require such evidence to found his
   judgment of charity, concerning another man's faith and holiness, or
   concerning his being an object of brotherly love. And I think, he is
   bound by the law of Christ to form his judgment in this matter upon
   less evidence. But if you mean positive evidence in opposition to
   negative, which is no evidence, I must own, I know not how to form a
   judgment of charity without some positive evidence. And is not a
   credible profession something positive?--Is not a credible profession
   of the faith, love, and hope that is in Christ, or of Christianity, a
   positive evidence of a man's being an object of brotherly love, which
   evidence ought to be the ground of my judgment of charity concerning
   him, that he is a Christian, a believer in Christ, a brother for whom
   Christ died? If it be otherwise, and if there be no evidence upon which
   I can charitably judge, that a man is a brother for whom Christ died?
   If it be otherwise, and if there be no evidence upon which I can
   charitably judge, that a man is a brother for whom Christ died. Then
   tell me, how I can evidence my love to Jesus Christ, in the labour of
   love towards my brother, whom I have seen; and my love to God, in my
   love to them that are begotten of him."

   [567] In stating the question, p. 5. b. I explained the requisite
   visibility, to be some outward manifestation, that ordinarily renders
   the thing probable. To the like purpose, is what I lay in p 10. c. and
   p. 11 a. b c. and p 12. a. b. c. And in p 106. c. I say expressly, "Not
   a certainty, but a profession and visibility of these things, must be
   the rule of the church's proceeding.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   AN EXAMINATION OF MR. WILLIAMS'S SCHEME, IN THE VARIOUS PARTS OF IT.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I

   Mr. W--s Concessions.

   Mr. W. allows, that, in order to a man's coming to sacraments, he ought
   solemnly to profess and declare, that he is really and heartily
   convinced of the divine truth of the gospel, (p. 30.e. p.36. a. p. 32.
   c. p. 84. a.) That he does sincerely, and with all his heart, believe
   the gospel, [568] (p. 49. e.) And that they which admit him, ought to
   be satisfied he really believes the gospel, that Jesus is the Son of
   God, the Saviour, (p. 54. c.) That he should profess and declare he
   believes in Christ, and that the gospel is indeed the revelation of
   God. (p. 5. c.) He allows, that none ought to be admitted, but such as
   openly profess and declare a hearty consent to the covenant of grace,
   and compliance with the call of the gospel, and submission to the
   proposals of it, and satisfaction with that device for our salvation
   that is revealed in the gospel, and with the offer which God makes of
   himself to be our God in Christ Jesus, [569] and that they fall in with
   the terms of salvation proposed in the gospel, and renounce all other
   ways. (p. 5. c. p. 8. a. p. 9. b. c. p. 11. a. p. 18. e. p. 55. a. p.
   32. c.) He plainly supposes it not to be lawful for them that are
   lukewarm in religion, or those that serve two masters, to come to
   sacraments. (p. 32. b. p. 35. d. e. p. 36. c.) He supposes, that there
   must be a real determination of a man's judgment and affection for the
   word of God. (p. 55. c.) That there ought to be a profession of
   subjection to Christ with all the heart, (p. 10. d.) and of a
   devotedness to the service of God. (p. 49. d.) And a professed giving
   up themselves to Christ, to be taught, ruled, and led by him in the
   gospel-way to salvation; (p. 31. e. and 32. a.) And that communicants
   ought to declare, that they do, with all their hearts, cast themselves
   upon the mercy of God, to help them to keep covenant; (p. 125. b.) That
   they ought to profess a proper respect to Christ in their hearts, as
   well as a true notion of him in their heads; (p. 31. d.) That they must
   make a profession that imparts a pretence of real friendship to Christ,
   and love to God above the world. (p. 36. c.) That none ought to be
   admitted but visible saints, and that this visibility must be such as
   to a judgment of rational charity makes them appear as real saints,
   wise virgins, and endowed with gospel holiness: (p. 5. a. b. p. 41. e.
   p. 42. b. p. 139. a. d. p. 14. a.) That there should be a charitable
   presumption, that the Spirit of God has taken hold of them, and turned
   their hearts to God. (p. 52. c.) That they should be such persons as
   are in the eye of a christian judgment truly gracious persons, supposed
   and believed in charity to be those to whom God has given saving
   repentance, and a heart-purifying faith; (p. 65. e. and p. 47. b. c.)
   Such as have the moral image of Christ appearing in them, or supposed
   to be in them, and are to be loved on that account, (p. 68. c.) He
   allows, that there ought to be some apprehension, some judgment of the
   mind, that they are Christians and saints, and have the moral image of
   God in them. [570] (p. 68. c. d. e. p. 69. a. and 71. d.) He allows,
   that they must be taken into the church under a notion of their being
   godly, and with respect to such a character appearing on them: and very
   often insists, that they themselves must make such a pretence. (p. 55.
   c. d. e. [571] p. 132. a. c. d. e. p. 136. d. p. 143. c.) So he allows,
   that they must not only be endowed with christian piety in appearance;
   but that they must be so in profession. (p. 3. a. p. 41. e. p. 44. d.)
   That they make a show of being wise virgins by the nature and purport
   of their profession. (p. 42. b.) And he insists with great
   strenuousness, over and over, upon its being their scheme, that they
   ought to make a profession of real saintship. (p. 132. a. c. d.) Yea,
   he holds, that there must be not only some visibility and profession of
   real piety, but moral evidence of it. (p. 139. d.) He often uses notes
   of distinction, distinguishing between moral sincerity and real piety;
   and insists much upon it as belonging to their scheme, that there must
   be a visibility of the latter, as thus distinguished from the former.
   So, he rejects with great contempt any suggestion of its being the
   scheme of my opposers, that moral sincerity is that saintship, which is
   to be professed and made visible; and in distinction from this, he
   asserts, that it is real holiness. (p. 4. d. e. and p. 5. a. b.) And
   again (p. 35. c.) he uses a note of distinction, and insists that the
   opposers of my opinion hold, that communicants must make a profession
   of something more than common grace and moral sincerity. And again (p.
   139. a. d.) he uses notes of discrimination, and says, that they must
   exhibit a credible profession of gospel-holiness, and not merely of
   moral sincerity; and says, it is not the visibility of moral sincerity,
   but the moral evidence of gospel-sincerity, which God's word makes the
   rule of judging.--And as he holds, that communicants must profess
   gospel-holiness, so he seems to suppose that these professors must
   judge this of themselves; several things he says, seem plainly to imply
   it. This appears evidently implied in that interrogation put by Mr. W.
   (p. 35. e.) "Mr. S. rightly supposes all visible saints who are not
   truly pious, to be hypocrites; and the Scripture supposes and calls
   them so too: but will it therefore follow, that all hypocrites know
   they are so?" And he in effect asserts, that men should look at such a
   qualification, as sanctifying grace, in themselves, and inquire whether
   they have it, or no, in order to determine whether they should present
   themselves to gospel-ordinances: for he greatly finds fault with me for
   suggesting, as if those of a different opinion from me supposed, that
   persons have no manner of need to look at any such qualification in
   themselves, or at all inquire, whether they have it, in order to
   present themselves to sacraments. He refers to that passage in my book,
   (p. 55. d.) " I cannot conceive what should move Philip to utter those
   words, or what he should aim at in them, if he at the same time
   supposed that the eunuch had no manner of need to look at any such
   qualification in himself, or at all to inquire whether he had such a
   faith, or no, in order to determine whether he might present himself as
   the subject of baptism." It is plain, the qualification I have respect
   to, is grace, or saving faith. And so Mr. W, himself understands me; as
   appears by his reflections, (p. 49. c. d. e.) where, after quoting this
   passage, he consigns me over to another judgment, for suggesting that
   my opposers hold what I had there expressed, and for "representing the
   matter, as if they looked on it as no matter whether a person coming to
   gospel ordinances had any GRACE or no, and that he had no manner of
   need to inquire any thing about his sincerity ." [572]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [568] When I first proposed to a certain candidate for communion at
   Northampton, the publicly making this profession, viz. That he believed
   the truth of the gospel with all his heart, many of the people cried
   out, that I insisted on what no saint on earth could profess, and that
   this amounted to a profession of absolute perfection. Hence many
   reports spread about the country, that I insisted on perfection as a
   term of communion.

   [569] Mr. W. cites Mr. Guthrie (pref. p. 4. c. e.) as on his side, when
   he speaks of such a profession, as that which is to be made.

   [570] By this it appears, when Mr. W. speaks of the church's rational
   judgment that persons have real holiness, and the like, he does not
   mean merely treating them as such, in public administrations, and
   external conduct: for here he speaks not of the external conduct, but
   of the apprehension of the understanding, and judgment of the mind; and
   this as the foundation of the affection of the heart.

   [571] Mr. W--s words (p. 55. d. e) are pretty remarkable: "The reader
   (says he) will judge, whether the manner of Mr. Edwards's treating the
   question, and representing the opinion of Mr. Stoddard and others, in
   the words I have quoted above, be not unaccountable; though this is
   neither the first nor the last time of his treating the matter in such
   a manner: as if Mr. Stoddard and his adherents supposed persons were to
   be admitted without any notion of their being godly, or any respect to
   such a character appearing on them, and that they themselves are
   without such a pretence." -- Whereas, Mr. Stoddard expressly maintains,
   that men may be duly qualified, and fit matter for church-membership,
   without saving grace. (Appeal, p. 15, 16.) And that they may and ought
   to come, though they know themselves to be in a natural condition.
   (Doct. of Instituted Churches. p. 21. See also his Sermon on the
   subject, p. 13.) And according to Mr. Stoddard, communicants are not so
   much as supposed godly persons. This (Appeal, p. 43.) he says
   expressly, that by the institution communicants at the Lord's supper
   are not supposed to be real saints. And also asserts (Appeal, p. 76 )
   that we are not obliged to believe visible saints to be real saints.
   And it seems by what he says in his Appeal, (p. 17.) the church may
   admit persons to communion, when at the same time they are aware that
   they are hypocrites. For there, in answer to Dr. Mather, who had cited
   certain texts to prove, that when hypocrites do come into the church,
   they come in unawares; he says, but neither of the places he cites
   proves that all hypocrites come in unawares. And in the next page he
   says, The discovery of men's hypocrisy is not the reason of their being
   cast out. Still evidently on the same foundation, that some known
   hypocrites are fit to be admitted: for he says, (p. 15. d.) Such as
   being admitted may not be cast out, are fit to be admitted. And these
   things are agreeable to what I know Mr. Stoddard's church and
   congregation have universally supposed to be his constant doctrine and
   practice among them. Thus it was, without one dissenting voice among
   them, during the twenty-four years that I lived with them. And now the
   reader is desired to judge, as Mr. W. would have him, whether my
   representing it to be the opinion of Mr. S and his adherents, that
   persons might be admitted into the church without any notion of their
   being godly, or any respect to such a character appearing on them, be
   unaccountable.--By these things it is evident. Mr. S--d's scheme was
   far from being what Mr. W. represents it to be, and pretends to
   maintain as his. And if the question he had to controvert with me, were
   Mr. S--d's question, as he asserts: yet he greatly mistakes the true
   state of the question, though that be given as the title of his book.

   [572] Now let all that have been acquainted with the controversy
   between me and my people at Northampton, consider these things, which
   Mr. W. earnestly insists do belong to his scheme: and judge whether
   they be agreeable to the scheme which my opposers there have so
   vehemently and long contended for; yea, whether they are not very
   opposite to it; or whether in these things Mr. W. has not entirely
   yielded up, yea, vehemently asserted, the chief things concerning which
   they contested with me; and so, whether he has at all helped their
   cause by writing his book, or rather, on the contrary, has fought
   against them.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II

   Some plain consequences of the foregoing concessions.

   If it be as Mr. W. says, that the church ought to admit none to their
   holy communion, in special ordinances, but visible saints, and that
   this visibility must be such as to a judgment of rational charity,
   makes them appear as real saints, and those that are admitted must be
   such as profess real saintship, gospel-holiness, in distinction from
   moral sincerity; then the whole of my first argument, from the nature
   of a visibility and profession of Christianity, is allowed by him, in
   both premises and consequences. And indeed Mr. W. does not only do thus
   consequentially, but he is express in it. In (p. 4. c.) taking notice
   of this argument, he says, 'The sense and force of it wholly lies in
   this compass; a visible saint is one that to the view, appearance, and
   judgment of the church, is a real saint; and since none but visible
   saints are to be admitted by the church, therefore none are to be
   admitted but such as appear to the view and judgment of the church to
   be real saints." But these things, which Mr. W. himself allows as the
   sum of the argument, both premises and consequence, are expressly
   allowed by him in what there follows.

   2. If there must be a visibility and profession of real piety, in
   distinction from moral sincerity, so that it can be truly said, as Mr.
   W. says with discretive terms, and notes of discrimination, that not
   merely the one must be professed, but the other; and that more than
   moral sincerity must be professed, &c.--Then it follows (or rather it
   is the same thing) that men must profess religion with some
   discrimination, or marks of difference in their words, distinguishing
   what is professed from moral sincerity; contrary to what Mr. W.
   strenuously and frequently asserts, (p. 6. c. d. and p. 9. c. and many
   other places.) For if the profession is made in words that signify no
   difference, then nothing different is signified or professed by those
   words; and so nothing MORE; contrary to what Mr. W. also asserts

   3. If it be as Mr. W. says, that the Scripture has determined none
   ought to be admitted, but such as make an open profession and
   declaration of a hearty consent to the terms of the covenant of grace,
   such as covenant with God with their whole hearts, and profess
   gospel-holiness: then the whole of my second argument, concerning
   explicit covenanting with God, is expressly allowed, in both premises
   and consequence; though Mr. W. seems at the same time, with much labour
   and earnestness, to militate against it. For the premises are, that all
   outfit openly and explicitly to own God's covenant, or consent to the
   terms of it. This is the same thing that he asserts, as above. And the
   consequence, or thing which I inferred from it, was, that all that are
   admitted ought to make a profession of real godliness: and this also he
   expressly and often allows.

   4. Since it is supposed, that in order to admission, men ought to
   profess real friendship to Christ, and love to him above the world, and
   to profess a proper respect to Christ in their hearts, as well as true
   notion of him in their heads; and that they ought to profess
   gospel-holiness, and not merely moral sincerity: therefore the whole of
   what belongs to my third argument, is allowed, both premises and
   consequence. The premises were, that the nature of things affords us
   much reason for profaning a proper respect to Christ in the heart, as a
   true notion of him in the head. This he allows. What I endeavoured to
   infer from hence, was, that therefore men ought to profess true piety,
   and not only moral sincerity: and this is also allowed by him.

   5. It appears, that the whole of my fourth argument, both premises and
   consequence, is allowed. The premises were, that the Scripture reckons
   all visible saints who are not truly pious, to be hypocrites. This Mr.
   W. expressly allows, (p. 25. e.) The consequence I inferred, was, that
   visible saints are such as make a profession of true godliness, and not
   only moral sincerity. This also is very fully allowed by him, (p. 139.
   a.)

   6. Since it is supposed, that when Christ's rules are attended, they
   that come to sacraments, do not know themselves to be hypocrites, but
   most look at such a qualification in themselves, as grace, and make
   such a pretence, and profess gospel holiness: therefore all is in
   effect allowed, that I endeavoured from the latter part of the 7th
   chapter of Matthew, which was to show, that professing Christians in
   general, all those that said, Lord, Lord, both those that built on the
   sand, and those that built on a rock, were such as imagined themselves
   to have a saving interest in Christ, and pretended to be his real
   disciples, and made such a profession. The same was what I endeavoured
   to show from the parable of the ten virgins. And therefore all that I
   argued from thence is in like manner allowed.

   7. Hence, in vain is all the opposition Mr. W. makes to what I allege
   from the Acts of the Apostles, from the story of the eunuch and other
   parts of that book, concerning the manner and circumstances of the
   admission of members into the primitive christian church, and the
   profession they made; seeing he grants the main point I endeavoured to
   prove by it, viz. That they did make, and all adult persons that are
   admitted into the church must make, a profession of something more than
   moral sincerity, even gospel-holiness.

   8. Hence, in vain is all he says in opposition to my eighth argument,
   taken from the manner of the apostles' treating and addressing the
   primitive churches in their epistles; since he does either expressly or
   virtually grant each of those three things, which he himself reckons up
   as the sum of what I intend under that argument, viz. (1.) That the
   apostles speak to the churches, and of them, as supposing and judging
   them to be gracious persons. (2.) That the members of these churches
   had such an opinion of themselves. (3.) That they had this judgment one
   of another. Mr. W. allows all these. He abundantly allows and asserts,
   that the members of churches are such as are supposed, and rationally
   judged, to be gracious persons, by those that admit them; that they are
   taken in under that notion, and from respect to such a character
   appearing on them; and that they are rationally judged to be so by
   their fellow-Christians; and that they must look at such a character in
   themselves, and must make such a pretence.

   9. Since Mr. W. abundantly allows, that visible Christians must be
   believed in charity to be truly pious; and that they are such as have
   the moral image of Christ appearing in them, and supposed to be in
   them, and that they are to be loved on that account: therefore very
   impertinent and inconsistent is the opposition he makes to my ninth
   argument, from the nature of that brotherly love required towards all
   visible Christians; which was to show, that visible Christians by the
   rule of Christ were to be apprehended to be true Christians.

   10. In like manner, vain and to no purpose is the opposition he makes
   to my tenth argument, from the nature of sacramental actions, supposed
   in their intent and signification to be a solemn profession of those
   things wherein real piety consists, viz. a cordial acceptance of Christ
   and his benefits; from thence arguing, that a profession of these
   things is necessary, and so inferring, that those who perform these
   actions, should suppose themselves truly to accept of Christ: since
   both these things are in effect granted, that communicants must judge
   that they have sanctifying grace, and also that they must profess
   gospel-holiness, a compliance with the call of the gospel, and falling
   in with the terms of salvation proposed, &c.

   11. In vain also is the opposition he makes to my eleventh argument,
   from 1 Cor. xi. 28. " Let a man examine himself; and so let him
   eat."--Inferring from thence, that a man ought to inquire concerning
   such a qualification in himself, as grace, in order to know whether he
   may come to the sacrament of the Lord's supper. Since Mr. W. himself
   plainly supposes this very thing. That men ought to look at such a
   qualification in themselves, as grace, and to inquire whether they have
   it, in order to determine whether they may present themselves to
   christian sacraments.

   12. If it be true, according to Mr. W.s representation of his own
   scheme, That persons may not be admitted to sacraments, but under a
   notion of their being truly godly, and with respect to such a character
   appearing on them; and that persons themselves had need to look at such
   a qualification in themselves, and inquire whether they have it, in
   order to determine whether they may come to sacraments; it must be
   because if they find they have it not, they may not come, or (which is
   the same thing) it is not lawful for them to come. For it would be
   ridiculous to say that others must look at such a qualification in
   them, and must not admit them but from respect to such a character on
   them; and that they themselves also must look at such a qualification
   in themselves, and inquire whether they have it in order to determine
   whether they may come; when yet they may come whether they have it or
   no, and have as much of a lawful right without it as with it. So that
   Mr. W. has in effect determined against himself the grand point, which
   he himself insists on, as the point in dispute, according to the true
   state of the question. And therefore,

   13. It follows from the foregoing concessions, that Mr. W. is
   inconsistent with himself in all his arguings that men may come to
   sacraments without such a qualification or character as that of true
   piety. Because God has given no certain rule by which sacraments may be
   restrained to such; [573] or because that otherwise none might come but
   those that know they have such a character; [574] or because the
   contrary doctrine tends to bring saints into great perplexities in
   their attendance on sacraments; [575] or from the lawfulness of
   unregenerate men's attending other duties. [576] If there be any force
   in this arguing from other duties to an attendance on sacraments, then
   the argument will infer, that men must not be admitted to other duties,
   but under the notion of their being truly godly, and from respect to
   such a character appearing on them, &c.--as Mr. W. insists with regard
   to christian sacraments. And so if these things which Mr. W. concedes
   and asserts, are true, in vain is all arguing from the like tendency in
   sacraments to convert men, as in other duties; [577] and in vain is it
   to argue the lawfulness of men's coming without this character, from
   their obligation to perform external covenant-duties, [578] and to
   carry themselves like saints; [579] and in vain is all arguing from the
   pretended bad consequences of the contrary doctrine. [580]

   14. The opposition Mr. W. makes to my argument from Isaiah lvi. 6, 7
   especially those words, "The sons of the stranger that join themselves
   to the Lord, to love the Lord, and be his servants--will I bring into
   my holy mountain"--to prove that none have a right in the sight of God
   to the privileges of the christian church, but those that love God, and
   are truly pious; I say, the opposition Mr. W. makes to this argument is
   frivolous, since he in effect grants the same thing, (as above,) yea,
   expressly allows, that they must make pretences of being God's real
   friends, and loving God more than the world, p. 36. c.

   15. If it be true, as Mr. W. allows and abundantly asserts, that in
   order to persons being admitted to holy communion in special
   ordinances, the Scripture has determined, that there must be an open
   profession and declaration of a person's believing, or of a personal
   believing, in Christ, (which is the same thing,) and of a hearty
   consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, [581] and that therein
   must be a profession of gospel-holiness: then nothing to the contrary
   avails that great argument of his, taken from the state of baptized
   infants, that they are already in the church, and in covenant, and are
   members in complete standing, &c. and that therefore no owning the
   covenant or professing godliness can be demanded of them: [582] and in
   vain is all that he has said to prove this in his discourse on the
   wheat and tares. [583]

   16. To what purpose is it, to object from the parable now mentioned,
   that the church ought not to make a distinction between wheat and
   tares, in their admission of members, by pretending to discern the
   difference? When it is so apparent, that there is no pretence to any
   proper discerning in the case, nor any other distinction pleaded, than
   what is made by a judgment of charity. According to Mr. W--s own
   scheme, churches are obliged to make a distinction, in the rational
   judgment they pass, and to admit none, but what they judge to be true
   saints; so that those who are wheat, in the eye of their judgment, only
   are to be admitted, and such as are tares, in the eye of their
   judgment, are to be excluded.

   17. What is said by Mr. W. of the visible church being the school of
   Christ, and men being admitted into it as disciples or scholars, some
   of them in order to attain grace, (p. 81, and 83.) is nothing to the
   purpose, if it be as Mr. W. allows and asserts, that in order to be
   admitted into this school, they must be supposed, in a reasonable
   judgment, to have this attainment already, and make a pretence to it,
   and a solemn profession of it, and must give moral evidence that they
   have it, and must be admitted into the school under no other notion
   than that of their being already possessed of it.

   18. If it be as Mr. W. expressly says, That persons are not visible
   saints without a credible profession, visibility, and moral evidence,
   not only of moral sincerity, but true holiness, (p. 139.) then all is
   wholly insignificant and vain, that is said to prove, that the children
   of Israel were visible saints without any evidence of such holiness, by
   reason of the idolatry and gross and open wickedness of vast multitudes
   of them, who are yet called God's people. And so likewise, all that is
   said to prove, that the members of the primitive christian church had
   no other visibility of saintship than they, because they are grafted
   into the same olive; and also all that Mr. W. has said to prove, that
   many of the members of the primitive churches were as grossly wicked as
   they.

   19. Since according to Mr. W. the terms of admission to the Jewish
   ordinances, were the same as to christian ordinances, the like
   profession and the same visibility of saintship required, and no other;
   as he strenuously asserts, (p. 57. e. p. 61. e. and p. 65. c.) it will
   therefore follow from his foregoing concessions and assertions, that
   none were, by God's appointment, to come to the passover, and to have
   their children circumcised, but such as openly professed and declared
   that they were convinced of the truth of God's word, and believed it
   with all their hearts; and professed a hearty consent to the terms of
   the covenant of grace: such as covenanted with God with their whole
   hearts, and gave up all their hearts and lives to Christ; such as
   subjected themselves to Christ with their whole hearts, and gave up
   themselves to him, to be ruled, taught, and led by him; such as with
   all their hearts cast themselves on the mercy of God to enable them to
   keep covenant; such as professed to love God above the world, and
   professed more than common faith and moral sincerity, even true
   holiness, real piety; and who gave moral evidence, that they had such a
   qualification; and were received to the passover, &c. under that
   notion, and with respect to such a character appearing in them, and
   apprehended to be in them. And if these things are so, what is become
   of the argument from the passover and circumcision, against the
   necessity of the qualifications I have insisted on?

   20. To what purpose does Mr. W. insist, (p. 98. a.) That we read not a
   word in Scripture about John the Baptist's making any inquiry, whether
   the people he baptized made a credible profession of true piety? when
   he himself insists, that in order to admission to christian sacraments,
   men must make a credible profession of true piety. And why does he
   urge, (p. 96. e. and p. 97.) That the profession the people made which
   John baptized did not imply that they had saving repentance, but only
   an engagement to repent, hereafter? when he himself holds, that in
   order to admission to sacraments, men must profess something more than
   common grace, and not only promise it hereafter.

   21. It makes nothing to any point in controversy between Mr. W. and me,
   whether Judas partook of the Lord's supper or no, since according to
   the fore-mentioned principles, as well as mine, he could not be
   admitted there under any other notion than that of being truly pious,
   and from respect to such a character appearing on him, and a credible
   profession of gospel-holiness; and since he might not lawfully come
   without some qualifications he had not, viz. such a friendship for
   Christ, as is above lukewarmness, and above serving two masters, Christ
   and Mammon, and a giving up all his heart and life to Christ, and a
   real determination of his judgment and affections for Christ's word,
   &c.

   22. If it be true, as Mr. W. allows, that ministers and churches ought
   not to admit adult persons to sacraments, without a pious character
   appearing on them, and their professing and exhibiting moral evidence
   of gospel-holiness, then no good argument can be brought against such a
   way of admission, from the success of ministers in another way, or in
   any way whatsoever.

   Besides these plain and obvious consequences of Mr. W.s concessions,
   some other consequences will hereafter be observed under particular
   heads.

   Thus Mr. W. has in effect given up every point belonging to the whole
   controversy, every thing material insisted on through that whole book
   which he undertakes to answer. He has established every part of my
   scheme, and every particular argument I have used to confirm it; and
   answered, or overthrown every argument which he brings, or pretends to
   support, against it. And I should have no further occasion to say any
   thing in reply to him, if he had not really, through great part of his
   performance, argued for other things, opposite to those that have been
   rehearsed, which he so strenuously insists belong to his scheme. That
   arguing may seem to support another scheme, though nothing akin to his,
   any otherwise than as it is indeed a mixture of many schemes, one
   clashing with and destroying another; as will appear in the ensuing
   part of this reply.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [573] See. Mr. W's book, p. 106, &c.

   [574] Ibid. p. 108, &c.

   [575] P. 120, &c.

   [576] P. 123, &c.

   [577] P. 126, &c.

   [578] P. 128, &c.

   [579] P 131.

   [580] P. 131, &c.

   [581] See how Mr. W. expresses himself, p. 5. b. c.

   [582] See especially, p. 3.

   [583] P. 99, 100.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   The inconsistence of the fore-mentioned concessions with the lawfulness
   of unsanctified persons coming to the Lord's supper, and their right to
   sacraments in the sight of God.

   Mr. W. in the book under consideration, which he entitles the true
   state of the question, insists upon it that the question to be debated
   is the question Mr. Stoddard debated in his dispute with Dr. Mather; in
   whose scheme Mr. W. declares himself to be. Mr. S. in his dispute with
   Dr. Mather asserted, that it was lawful for some unsanctified men to
   come to the Lord's supper, and that they had a right so to do in the
   sight of God. And he declares that this was the point in dispute
   between him and Dr. Mather; as in Appeal, p. 20. "That which I am to
   show is, that some unsanctified men have a right before God to the
   Lord's supper." So Mr. Blake (who is so great an author with Mr. W.)
   says in his treatise on the covenant, p. 244. "That faith which is the
   condition of the promise, is not the condition in foro Dei [before God]
   of a title to the seal." And there (in the next p.) he insists, that it
   is a common faith, that is believed by men not justified, which gives
   this title. Agreeable to these things Mr. W. says, (p. 132. d.) Some
   men have a lawful right to the sacrament without sanctification. Which
   is the same thing as to say, They have a right in the sight of God. For
   if they have no right in the sight of God to come to the Lord's supper,
   then it is not lawful in the sight of God that they should come.

   Here I would lay down this as a maxim;

   There is some inward religion and virtue or other, some sincerity of
   heart, either moral or saving, that is necessary to a right to
   sacraments in the sight of God, and in order to a lawful coming to
   them. No man, I trust, will say, that a man has a right in God's sight,
   who has no sort of seriousness of mind; and that merely outward sounds
   and motions give him this right in God's sight, without regard to any
   property or quality of mind, and though this outward show is joined
   with the most horrid and resolved secret irreligion and wickedness. Mr.
   W. in particular utterly disclaims such doctrine as this, and always
   maintains that in order to men's lawful coming, they must be morally
   sincere; as in his Preface, and also in p. 25. d. e. p. 27. c. p. 30.
   d. p. 35. e. p. 111.--In p. 115, he supposes, that if a man makes a
   doubt of his moral sincerity, no divine will advise him to come till he
   knows.

   Having observed this, I now desire it may be considered, whether it be
   reasonable to suppose, as Mr. W. does, that God would give men that are
   without grace, a lawful right to sacraments, so that this qualification
   itself should be nothing necessary to a proper and rightful claim to
   these ordinances; and yet that he would wholly forbid them to come, and
   others to admit them, without their making some pretence to it, and
   exhibiting moral evidence that they have it: that moral sincerity is
   the qualification which by God's own appointment invests persons with a
   lawful right to sacraments, and that by his institution nothing more is
   requisite to a lawful right; and yet that he has commanded them not to
   come, nor others to allow them to come, without making a profession of
   something more than moral sincerity, as Mr. W. says. Mr. W. supposes
   that God requires us, before we admit persons, to seek credible
   evidence of true piety, and to see to it that we have reasonable ground
   to believe they have it; otherwise, not to allow them to come; and yet
   that God does not look on such a qualification requisite in itself,
   when all is done, and that he has given them as true and lawful a right
   to come without it, as with it. If God insists upon it, as Mr. W.
   supposes, that members should be admitted under no other notion than of
   their being truly godly, and from respect to such a character appearing
   on them, is it not plain, that God looks on such a character in itself
   requisite, in order to a person's being a rightful subject of such a
   privilege. If the want of this qualification do not in the least hinder
   a person's lawful right to a thing, on what account can the want of an
   appearance of it and pretence to it, warrant and oblige others to
   hinder his taking possession of that thing?

   That we should be obliged to require a credible pretence and evidence
   of the being of a thing, in order to a certain purpose, the being of
   which is not requisite to that purpose; or that some evidence of a
   thing should be necessary, and yet withal no necessity there should be
   any foundation of such evidence, in the being of the thing to be made
   evident; that it should be necessary for us to seek evidence that
   something is true, and yet there be no need in order to the intended
   purpose, that there be any such truth to be made evident;--if these
   things are the dictates of common sense, I am willing all that are
   possessed of any degree of common sense should be judges.

   If God has plainly revealed, that gospel-holiness is not necessary in
   itself in order to men's lawful right to sacraments, as Mr. W. greatly
   insists, then his churches need not believe it to be necessary; yea, it
   is their duty to believe that it is not necessary, as it is their duty
   to believe what God says to be true. But yet Mr. W. holds, that God
   forbids his churches to admit any to sacraments, unless they first have
   some rational evidence obliging them to believe that they have
   gospel-holiness. Now how palpable is the inconsistence, that we must be
   obliged to believe men have a qualification in order to our suffering
   them to come, which yet at the same time we need not believe to be
   necessary for them to have in order to their coming, but which God
   requires us to believe to be unnecessary! Or in other words, that God
   has made it necessary for us to believe or suppose men are truly pious,
   in order to our lawfully allowing them to take the sacraments, and yet
   at the same time requires us to believe no such thing as their being
   pious is necessary in order to their lawfully taking the sacraments!

   Mr. Stoddard (whose principles Mr. W. in Preface, p. 3. a. declares
   himself to be fully established in) not only says, that some
   unsanctified men have a right before God to the Lord's supper, but
   strongly asserts, over and over, that they are fit to be admitted to
   the Lord's supper, that they are duly qualified, fit matter for
   church-membership--(Appeal, p. 15, 16.) And Mr. W. argues that such
   qualifications as some unsanctified men have, are suffient to bring
   them into the church. Now if it be so, what business have we to demand
   evidence or pretence of any thing further. What case in the world can
   be mentioned parallel to it, in any nation or age? Are there any such
   kind of laws or regulations to be found in any nation, city, or family;
   in any society, civil, military or academic, stated or occasional, that
   the society should be required to insist on some credible pretence and
   evidence of a certain qualification, in order to persons being admitted
   to the privileges of the society; prohibiting their being admitted
   under any other notion than as persons possessed of that qualification,
   or without a respect in their admission to such a character appearing
   on them: and yet at the same time, by the laws of that very society,
   that qualification is not necessary; but persons are declared, without
   any such qualification, to have a lawful right, to be fit matter, to be
   duly qualified, and to have sufficient qualifications to be admitted to
   these privileges, without that qualification?

   If some men have a right in the sight of God to sacraments without true
   piety, and are fit and duly qualified without it, in his sight and by
   his institution, and yet the church must not admit them unless they are
   truly pious in their sight; then the eye of man must require higher
   terms, than the infinitely holy eye of God himself; they must look for
   something that the eye of God looks not for, and which he judges them
   duly qualified without.

   Mr. W. when speaking of the evidence, on which he supposes the church
   ought to judge persons to be real saints, from time to time adds, that
   on such evidence "The church is obliged, in their external carriage, to
   treat them as saints, and admit them to the external privileges of the
   church."--So, p. 9. d. p. 12. a. &c. p. 13. a. b. and p. 14. c. and in
   other places. But what does he mean by treating them as saints, in
   admitting them to the external privileges of the church? If sinners
   have as much of a lawful right to these privileges, as saints, then why
   is giving them these privileges, a treating them as saints, any more
   than as sinners? If it belongs to an ignorant child, to be admitted
   into school, as much as one that is learned, then how is it treating
   him as one that is learned, to admit him? Mr. W. (p. 11. d. e.) giving
   a reason why he that professes conviction of the truth of the gospel,
   &c. ought to be admitted to sacraments, says, "Though this conviction
   may be only by moral evidence and common illumination, yet--the church
   knows not but it is done on a divine and gracious discovery." But how
   can this be a reason? What if the church did know that it was not on a
   gracious discovery, if the man has a right in the sight of God without,
   and God has made it his duty to come to sacraments without it? Surely
   the church have no right to forbid him to do that which God has given
   him a right to do, and made it his duty to do; as Mr. S. says, (Doct.
   of Inst. Churches, p. 20. b.) The church may not hinder any man from
   doing his duty.

   Therefore if this be Mr. S--d's question, Whether some unsanctified men
   may lawfully come to the Lord's supper, and if this be the grand point
   in dispute, the thing which Mr. W. undertakes to maintain, as he often
   declares, then it is most plainly evident, that in conceding and
   asserting those things forementioned, he does in effect abundantly give
   up that which he himself insists on as the grand point in controversy;
   and so makes void and vain all his own labour, and for himself
   effectually confutes all that he has written.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   Concerning Mr. W.s notion of a public profession of godliness in terms
   of an indeterminate and double signification.

   According to Mr. W. the profession of godliness must be in words not of
   a determinate meaning, or without any discrimination in the meaning of
   the words, obliging us to understand them of saving religion, (p. 6. c.
   d.) They must make an open declaration of their sincere consent to the
   terms of the covenant, without any discrimination, by which it can be
   determined, that the consent signified by the words is a gracious
   consent. (p. 9. c.) And without any marks of difference, or any
   distinction in the words, whereby we can be enabled to judge when they
   mean a saving faith, and when a different one. (p. 10. c. e. p. 50. e.
   and p. 53. c.) That nothing should be expressed in the words of the
   profession, but what some unsanctified men may say, and speak true. (p.
   47. e.) He supposes, that the primitive Christians in the profession
   they made of faith, did not speak only in that sense, viz. so as to
   signify justifying faith; and that the persons admitted did not
   understand that their profession was understood by those that admitted
   them, only in that sense, (p. 58. c.)

   Agreeable to this notion of making a profession in words of
   indiscriminate meaning, and professing godliness without godliness, and
   yet speaking true, Mr. W. (in p. 44. d. e.) allows, that men must be by
   profession godly persons, in order to come to the sacrament; and yet in
   the next sentence he denies, that christian grace itself is requisite
   in the person who is to come to the sacrament, or that the dictate of
   his conscience that he has it, is the thing that gives him a right to
   offer himself. And agreeable to this last clause, Mr. Stoddard (of
   whose opinion Mr. W. professes himself fully to be) expressly
   maintains, that a man may and ought to come to the Lord's supper,
   though he knows himself to be in a natural condition. (Doct. of Inst.
   Churches, p. 21. See also his sermon on this controversy, p. 13.) So
   that putting these things together, it must be agreeable to Mr. W.s
   scheme, that a man has a right to make a profession of godliness,
   without having godliness, and without any dictate of his conscience
   that he has the thing he professes, yea, though he knows he has not!
   And all this is made out by the doctrine of professing godliness in
   words that are ambiguous, and of two meanings.

   This notion of a solemn profession of godliness, in words of a double
   meaning, without any marks of difference in their signification, is the
   great peculiarity of Mr. W.s scheme; and in all his controversy with
   me, this appears to be the main hinge, the crisis of the whole affair.
   Therefore I would particularly consider it. And for the greater
   distinctness and clearness, I will lay down certain positions, as of
   most evident truth; observing some of their no less plain and evident
   consequences.

   I. Words declare or profess nothing any otherwise than by their
   signification: for to declare or profess something by words, is to
   signify something by words. And therefore, if nothing is signified by
   words of a pretended profession, nothing is really professed; and if
   something be professed, no more is professed than the words of the
   profession signify or import.

   II. If a man declare or profess any particular thing by words which
   have no distinguishing signification, or without any signs or
   discriminating marks by which men may be enabled to distinguish what he
   means, his words are vain to the pretended purpose, and wholly fail of
   answering the end of words, which is to convey the thing meant to
   others' understanding, or to give notice to others of the thing
   supposed or understood. [584]

   Therefore to use words thus in common conversation, is to act in a vain
   trifling manner, more like children than men: but to use words thus in
   the sacred services of God's house, and solemn duties of his worship,
   is something much worse than children's play. But thus Mr. W. expressly
   declares, words are to be used in a public profession of religion, (p.
   10. c.) "And these words are so used in such cases, without any marks
   of difference, whereby we are enabled to judge when they mean a saving
   faith, and when a different one."

   III. A profession made in words that are either equivocal, or general,
   equally signifying several distinct things, without any marks of
   difference or distinction, by which we are enabled to judge what is
   meant, is not a profession or signification of any one of those several
   things; nor can they afford any rational ground of understanding or
   apprehending any particular thing. Thus for instance, if a man using an
   equivocal term, should say, that such an evening a king was in that
   room, without any marks of difference or discrimination whatsoever, by
   which others could discern whether, by a king, he meant the ruler of a
   kingdom, or a king used in a game of chess; the words thus used would
   be no declaration, that the head of a kingdom was there at such a time;
   nor would they give any notice of any such thing to those to whom he
   spoke, or give them any rational ground to understand or judge any such
   thing.

   Or if a man should use a general term, comprehending various particular
   sorts, without at all distinguishing or pointing forth any one
   particular sort, he thereby professes no one particular sort. Thus if a
   man professes that he has metal in his pocket, not saying what sort of
   metal, whether gold, silver, brass, iron, lead, or tin; his words are
   no profession that he has gold.

   So it a man professes sincerity or religion, designedly using terms of
   double signification, or (which comes to the same thing) of general
   signification, equally signifying two entirely distinct things, either
   moral sincerity, or real piety, his words are no profession of real
   piety; he makes no credible profession, and indeed no profession at all
   of gospel holiness.

   IV. If a man who knows himself to be destitute of any certain
   qualification, yet makes a profession or pretence, in words of double
   meaning, equally signifying that qualification, and something else very
   different, with a design to recommend himself to others' judgment and
   apprehension, as possessed of that qualification, he is guilty of
   deceitful equivocation, viz. using words of double meaning, or capable
   of double application, with a design to induce others to judge
   something to be true, which is not true. But he that would recommend
   himself by such terms to others' opinion or judgment, as being what he
   at the same time knows he is not, endeavours to induce them to believe
   what he knows is not true, which is to deceive them. [585]

   But if the scheme which Mr. W. undertakes to defend were true, it would
   follow that such a kind of equivocation as this, (be it far from us to
   suppose it,) is what the infinitely wise and holy God has instituted to
   be publicly used in the solemn services of his house, as the very
   condition of persons' admission to the external privileges of his
   people! For Mr. W. abundantly asserts, that persons must be esteemed in
   the judgment and apprehension of others to have true piety; and that
   one thing that must be done in order to it, one thing pertaining to the
   moral evidence that recommends them to this judgment, is the profession
   they make of religion, (p. 5. p. 139. p. 47. b, c. p. 132. p. 44. d.)
   In p. 42. speaking of the profession of visible Christians, he has
   these words, "And it is from the nature and purport of this profession,
   we say, the church is to judge the members to be wise virgins, of what
   they make a show of." And Mr. W. insists upon it, that according to
   Christ's institution, this must be in words equally signifying true
   godliness, and something else, without any discrimination or marks of
   difference.--This is the scheme! And certainly such a doctrine of
   deceitful equivocation in the public exercises of religion, is more
   agreeable to the principles and practices of a religion I am loth to
   name, than the true religion of Jesus Christ.

   Mr. W. says, (p. 35. d.) "I am at a loss to conceive how it will help
   the cause of truth to represent those who are of Mr. S--s opinion, as
   teaching men that they may enter into covenant with God with known and
   allowed guile." Supposing I had made such a representation, I can tell
   him how it would have helped the cause of truth, (as it would be
   speaking nothing but the truth,) if he be one of Mr. Stoddard's
   opinion, (as he says he is,) and represents his own opinion truly.

   But let the unreasonableness of this notion of professing
   gospel-holiness in words of two meanings, without any discrimination or
   mark of difference, be a little further considered. Since it is
   allowed, that gospel-holiness is the thing which is to be exhibited in
   the profession, and there are words which signify this by a determinate
   meaning, why must they needs be avoided, and words of doubtful and
   double signification only be made use of? [586] Since the design of the
   profession is to exhibit to others' understanding that very thing; if
   the proper and distinguishing names of that must nevertheless be
   avoided in the profession, and for this very reason, that they point
   forth to others' understanding that very thing by a determinate
   meaning; then we are brought to this gross absurdity, viz. That the end
   of a profession is to exhibit to others' understanding and reasonable
   judgment a particular qualification; but at the same time such words
   only must be used as do not distinctly point forth to others'
   understanding and judgment that particular qualification. The church
   are to seek and demand a profession, that shall determine their
   rational judgment; but yet are designedly to avoid such a profession as
   shall determine their understandings.--Be it far from us to attribute
   to the all wise God any such an absurd and inconsistent constitution.

   Mr. W. says, charity obliges the church to understand the words of the
   professors in the most favourable sense. But charity does not oblige us
   to understand their words in any other sense than that in which they
   professedly use them. But in churches which professedly act on Mr. W.s
   scheme, (if any such there be,) the professors who are admitted,
   professedly use ambiguous words, or words equally signifying two
   entirely distinct things, without discrimination or marks of
   difference; and therefore charity obliges us to understand their words
   no otherwise, than as signifying that they have one or other of those
   two things; and not that they have one in particular: for their words
   do not signify this, in the sense they professedly use them. If a man
   that is indebted to me, professes that he has either gold or brass,
   which he promises to pay me; or if he uses an equivocal or general
   term, that equally, and without marks of difference, signifies either
   one or the other; charity may oblige me to believe what he says, which
   is, that he has either gold or brass: but no charity obliges me to
   believe that he has gold, which he does not say.

   Mr. W. in his description of such a profession as Christ has
   instituted, in order to admission to sacraments, often mentions two
   things, viz. A profession of something present, a present believing in
   Christ, and cordial consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, &c.
   And a promise of something future. And with regard to the latter, he is
   very full in it, that what is promised for time to come is saving
   faith, repentance, and obedience. [587] Now what reason can be given
   why we should use words of double meaning in the former part of the
   profession more than in the latter? Seeing Mr. W. allows that we must
   profess gospel-holiness as well as promise it, and seeing we may and
   must make use of words of indiscriminate and double meaning in
   professing present gospel-holiness, why should not we do so too in
   promising what is future; and so equivocate in our solemn vows and
   oaths as the papists do? if Mr. W. says it is very hard for men to
   discern the discrimination between moral sincerity and gospel-holiness;
   I answer, there is as much need to discern the difference in order
   understandingly to promise gospel-holiness with discrimination, as to
   profess it with discrimination.

   Mr. W. says, (p. 8. b. c.) "It is a received rule among mankind, in all
   public judgments, to interpret words in the most extensive and
   favourable sense that the nature of the words or expressions will
   bear." I know not what he means: but if he means, (as he must, if he
   means any thing to the purpose,) that it is a received rule amongst
   mankind, to trust, or accept, or at all regard any professions or
   declarations that men make, with professed design, in words of double
   and indiscriminate meaning, without any marks of difference by which
   their meaning can be known, for that very end that they may be used
   with a safe conscience, though they have no dictates of their own
   consciences, that they have what others are to believe they have; I
   say, if this be a received rule among mankind, it is a rule that
   mankind has lately received from Mr. W. Heretofore mankind, societies
   or particular persons, would have been counted very foolish for
   regarding such professions. Is this the way in earthly kingdoms, in
   professions of allegiance to temporal princes, in order to their
   admission to the privileges of good subjects? Do they choose equivocal
   terms to put into their oaths of allegiance, to that end that men may
   use them and speak true, though they are secret enemies?--There are two
   competitors for the kingdom of this world, Christ and Satan; the design
   of a public profession of religion is, to declare on which side men
   are. And is it agreeable to the custom of mankind in such cases, to
   make laws that no other than ambiguous words shall be used, or to
   accept of such in declarations of this kind? There are two competitors
   for the kingdom of Great Britain, King George, and the Pretender: is it
   the constitution of King George and the British parliament, that men
   should take paths of allegiance, contrived in words of indeterminate
   signification, to the end that men who are in their hearts enemies to
   King George, and friends to the Pretender, may use them and speak true?
   And certainly mankind, those of them that have common sense, never in
   any affairs of life look on such professions as worth a rush. Would Mr.
   W. himself, if tried, in any affair wherein his temporal interest is
   concerned, trust such professions as these? If any man with whom he has
   dealings, should profess to him that he had pawned for him, in a
   certain place, a hundred pounds, evidently, yea professedly, using the
   expression as an ambiguous one, so that there is no understanding by
   it, what is pawned there, whether a hundred pound in money, or a
   hundred weight of stones: if he should inquire of the man what he
   meant, and he should reply, You have no business to search my heart, or
   to turn my heart inside out; you are obliged in charity to understand
   my words in the most favourable sense; would Mr. W. in this case stick
   to his own received rule? would he regard such a profession, or run the
   venture of one sixpence upon it? Would he not rather look on such a man
   as affronting him, and treating him as though he would make a fool of
   him? And would not he know, that every body else would think him a
   fool, if he should suffer himself to be gulled by such professions, in
   things which concern his own private interest? And yet it seems, this
   is the way in which he thinks he ought to conduct himself as a minister
   of Christ, and one intrusted by him in affairs wherein his honour and
   the interests of his kingdom are concerned.

   And now I desire it may be judged by such as are possessed of human
   understanding, and are not disabled by prejudice from exercising it,
   whether this notion of Mr. W.s, of making a solemn profession of
   gospel-holiness in words of indiscriminate meaning, be not too absurd
   to be received by the reason God has given mankind.--This peculiar
   notion of his is apparently the life and soul of his scheme; the main
   pillar of his temple, on which the whole weight of the building rests;
   which if it be broken, the whole falls to the ground, and buries the
   builder, or at least his work, in its ruins. For if this notion of his
   be disproved, then inasmuch as it is agreed, that true godliness must
   be professed, it will follow, that it must be professed in words
   properly signifying the thing by a determinate meaning, which therefore
   no ungodly men can use, and speak true; and that therefore men must
   have true godliness in order to a right in the sight of God to make
   such profession, and to receive the privileges depending thereon: which
   implies and infers all those principles of mine which Mr. W. opposes in
   his book, and confutes all that he says in opposition to them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [584] The Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. xiv. 7. "Even things without life,
   giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in
   the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?" --Mr. Locke
   says. Hum. Und. Vol. 2. Edit 7. p. 103. "He that uses words of any
   language without distinct ideas in his mind, to which he applies them,
   does so far as he uses them in discourse, only make a noise without any
   sense or signification."

   [585] "To advance a dubious proposition, knowing it will be understood
   in a sense different from what you give it in your mind, is an
   equivocation, in breach of good faith and sincerity." Chamber's
   Dictionary, under the word Equivocation. ? Pref. (p. 3. d. e. and 5. d.
   p. 24 b. 25. b. 22. d. 27. a. 58. d. 69. d

   [586] Mr. W. (p. 6. d. e.) speaks of a profession in terms of
   indiscriminate signification, when not contradicted in life, as The
   sole, entire evidence, which the church, as a church, is to have, by
   divine appointment, in order to that public judgment it is to make of
   the saintship of men.

   [587] Pref. (p. 3. d. e. and 5. d. p. 24 b. 25. b. 22. d. 27. a. 58. d.
   69. d.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Showing that Mr. Williams, in supposing that unsanctified men may
   profess such things, as he allows must be professed, and yet speak
   true, is inconsistent with Mr. Stoddard, and with himself.

   Mr. W. denies, that in order to men being admitted to sacraments, they
   need make any peculiar profession, distinguished from what an
   unregenerate man may make, (p. 44. c. p. 50. e. 6. c. d. e. 9. c. 10.
   c. e. 45. e. 46. a. and 53. e.) or that they need to profess any thing
   but what an unregenerate man may say, and speak true. (p. 47. c.) And
   that they need make no profession but what is compatible with an
   unregenerate state, (p. 8. d. e.) And yet the reader has seen what
   things he says all must profess in order to come to sacraments. One
   thing he says they must profess, is a real conviction of the heart, of
   the divine truth of God's word; that they do sincerely and with all
   their hearts believe the gospel. And these things, he says, are
   agreeable to the opinion of Mr. Stoddard, and the doctrine he taught.
   (p. 32. b. c. and p. 36. a.) Let us compare these things with the
   doctrine Mr. S. taught. Mr. S. taught, that natural men do not believe
   the gospel, (Benef. of the Gosp. p. 89. b.) that they do not properly
   believe the word of God. (Guide to Christ, p. 26. d.) That they do not
   believe the testimony of God, do not lay weight on the word of God;
   that they do not believe the report of the gospel. (Safety of Ap. Edit.
   2. p. 229. c. e.) that they do not receive God's testimony, nor lay
   weight on it. (Ibid. p. 99.) That there is no man, how great soever his
   profession, how large soever his knowledge, that continues in a natural
   condition, who thoroughly believes that truth; i.e. that men may be
   saved by Christ's righteousness. (Ibid. p. 4. d. and p. 5. d. e.) That
   common illumination does not convince men of the truth of the gospel.
   (Benef. of the Gosp. p. 148, 149.) How then could it be the doctrine
   Mr. S. taught, that natural men may really and with all their hearts
   believe and be convinced of the truth of the gospel?

   And Mr. W. himself, in his sermons on Christ a King and Witness, (p.
   114, 115.) says, "man since the fall is naturally ignorant of divine
   truth, and an enemy to it, and full or prejudices against the truth:"
   and further, (ibid. p. 114.) "The renewing of the Holy Ghost makes an
   universal change of the heart and life.--He knows the doctrine
   contained in the Bible in a new manner.--Before, he had a view of the
   truth as a doubtful uncertain thing; he received it as a thing which
   was probably true;--and perhaps for the most part it appeared something
   likely to answer the end proposed.--But now the gospel appears to him
   divinely true and real," &c. But how do these things consist with men
   being, before conversion, sincerely and with all their hearts convinced
   of the divine truth of the gospel? Can that be, and yet men view it as
   a doubtful uncertain thing, as not yet appearing to them divinely true
   and real?

   Again, Mr. W. supposes, that some unsanctified men may speak true, and
   profess a hearty consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, a
   compliance with the call of the gospel, submission to the proposals of
   it, satisfaction with that device for our salvation that is revealed in
   the gospel, and with the offer which God makes of himself to be our God
   in Christ Jesus, a fervent desire of Christ and the benefits of the
   covenant of grace, and an earnest purpose and resolution to seek
   salvation on the terms of it, (p. 11. c.) and a falling in with the
   terms of salvation proposed in the gospel, with a renouncing of all
   other ways, (which he speaks of as agreeable to Mr. Stoddard's opinion,
   p. 32. b. c.) Quite contrary to the current doctrine of Calvinistic
   divines; contrary to the opinion of Mr. Guthrie, whom he cites as a
   witness in his favour, (pref. p. 4.) who insists on satisfaction with
   that device for our salvation which is revealed in the gospel, and with
   the offer which God makes of himself to be our God in Christ, as the
   peculiar nature of saving faith. And contrary to the principles of Mr.
   Perkins (another author he quotes as his voucher) delivered in these
   very words, which Mr. W. cites in the present point, (p. 11.) "That a
   desire of the favour and mercy of God in Christ, and the means to
   attain that favour, is a special grace of God, and hath the promise of
   blessedness:--That wicked men cannot sincerely desire these means of
   eternal life, faith, repentance, mortification, reconciliation," &c.
   And it is exceedingly contrary to the constant doctrine of Mr.
   Stoddard, (though he says it was his opinion,) who ever insisted, that
   all unconverted sinners under the gospel are so far from heartily
   consenting to the covenant of grace--and complying with the call of the
   gospel, and falling in with the terms of salvation proposed in it,
   renouncing all other ways, as Mr. W. supposes--that they are wilful
   rejecters of Christ, despisers of the gospel, and obstinate refusers of
   offered mercy. So he says, "The man that has but common grace--sets
   himself against the way of salvation which God prescribes." (Nat. of
   Sav. Conv.) "In awakened sinners, it is not merely from weakness, but
   from pride and sturdiness of spirit, that they do not come to Christ."
   (Safety of Ap. p. 229. c. d.) And in other places he says, that it is
   from the hardness and stubbornness of natural men's hearts, that they
   do not comply with the gospel; That there is a mighty opposition in
   their hearts to believe in Christ, because it is cross to their haughty
   spirits; That they are enemies to this way of salvation; That they are
   dreadfully averse to come to Christ. (See Book of three Sermons, p. 84.
   Guide to Christ, p. 55. c. Safety of Ap. p. 106. and 194. e.)

   And this scheme of our author is in a glaring manner contrary to the
   doctrine of Mr. Williams himself, in his sermon on Isa. xlv. 11. (p.
   25, 26, 27.) Speaking to those whose natures remain unrenewed and
   unsanctified (see his words p. 25. d.) he says, p. 27. b. c. "You are
   opposing all the means of your own deliverance and salvation. The
   offers of grace, the allurements and invitations of the great Saviour
   of the world, have all been ineffectual to persuade you to accept of
   deliverance from a slavery you are willingly held in. Nay, you strive
   against the liberty of the sons of God, and labour to find out all
   manner of difficulties and hinderances in the way of it. If you pray
   for it, you do not desire it should yet come, but would stay a while
   longer." And are these the persons who can truly profess, that they
   comply with the call of the gospel, and submit to the proposals of it,
   and are satisfied with the device for our salvation, and with the
   offers of the gospel, and consent to the terms of the covenant of grace
   with all their hearts, renouncing all other ways? It is not much more
   easy to make these things consist with what he says in his answer to
   Mr. Croswell, (p. 26. b. c.) He there says, "There is not a son nor
   daughter of Adam excluded from salvation, who will accept Christ upon
   God's offer, and take him in his person and offices, and whole work of
   redemption, to be their Saviour, and they find themselves willing to
   accept of Christ as so offered to them, and pleased with that device
   for their salvation, and heartily choosing him to be to them, and in
   them, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption." (See also
   to the same purpose, Ibid. p. 32. e. and p. 33. a. b. and p. 94. c.)

   Mr. W. though he holds, that it is lawful for some unsanctified men to
   come to sacraments, yet supposes it not to be lawful for those that are
   lukewarm in religion to come, (p. 35. d. e.) So that according to his
   scheme some unsanctified professors are above lukewarmness: that is to
   say, their hearts within them are truly hot or fervent with christian
   zeal, and they such as Christ will never spue out of his mouth; in a
   great inconsistence with the Scripture. He suggests, that it is an
   injury done to the cause of truth, in me, to represent Mr. Stoddard as
   being of another opinion, (p. 35. c. d. e.) But let us see whether such
   a representation be an injury to truth or no. Mr. S. taught, that
   natural men have no sincerity in them. (Guide to Christ, p. 60, 61.)
   That their hearts are dead as a stone, that there is no disposition or
   inclination to any thing that is good, but a total emptiness of all
   goodness. (Ibid. p. 63. b.) That some of them have considerable shows
   of goodness, there is an appearance of good desires, &c. but there is
   nothing of goodness in all this; that all they do is in hypocrisy.
   (Benef. of the Gos. p. 73. d. c.) That they are acted by a lust of
   self-love in all their religion;--If they are swept and garnished, they
   are empty: there may be some similitude of faith and love, but no
   reality, not a spark of goodness in their hearts; though corruption may
   be restrained, yet it reigns. He speaks abundantly to the same purpose
   in his sermon, entitled, Natural men are under the government of
   self-love.

   And Mr. W. himself, in his sermon on Psal. xci. 1. describing carnal
   men, by which he means the same with unconverted men, (as is evident
   through the book, particularly p. 36. c.) says, p. 27, 28. that to such
   "Religion looks like a dull unpleasant kind of exercises, and so
   different from the sensual joys and pleasures which they choose, that
   they hate to set about it, as long as they dare let it alone; and would
   do as little as ever they can at it:--That when they durst not let it
   alone any longer, they set about it, but would fain despatch it as soon
   and as easily as they can; because it seems to them a miserable
   uncomfortable sort of life. Ask your own conscience, (says he,) see if
   this be not the truth of the case."--Now let the reader judge, whether
   this be a description of persons whom it would be injurious to
   represent as having nothing above lukewarmness.

   Another thing, which Mr. W. supposes must be professed in order to come
   to sacraments, and therefore according to him is what an unsanctified
   man can profess, and speak true, is, "That they with all their hearts
   cast themselves upon the mercy of God, to help them to keep covenant."
   (p. 31. e. and p. 32. a.) And yet elsewhere he mentions a depending on
   Christ for things of this nature, as a discriminating mark of a true
   Christian. (Ser. on Christ a King and Witness, p. 19. c.) Under a use
   of examination, he there says, "Do you depend on Christ to protect you
   from all your spiritual enemies, to restore you to holiness, to subdue
   all your heart to the will of God, to make you partakers of his image
   and moral perfections, and in that way to preserve and lead you to your
   true perfection and eternal happiness."

   Mr. W. supposes (p. 36. a. b. c.) that the profession men must make in
   order to come to sacraments, implies real friendship to God, loving God
   more than his enemies, loving him above the world; and therefore
   according to Mr. W. unsanctified men may make this profession also, and
   speak true: contrary to the whole current of Scripture, which
   represents unsanctified men as the enemies of God, those that have not
   the love of God in them, under the power of a carnal mind, &c.--And
   contrary to the unanimous voice of all sound divines, yea, of the whole
   christian world. Mr. W. in the forementioned place blames me, that I
   had intimated (as he supposes) that the profession which Mr. Stoddard
   taught to be necessary, did not imply real friendship, and loving God
   above his enemies, and above the world. Let us then compare this with
   Mr. S--d's doctrine, as extant in his writings. He speaks of it as a
   property of saving grace, wherein it specifically differs from common
   grace, that a true love to God prizes God above all the world. (Nat. of
   Sav. Conv. p. 7. b. c.) That every natural man prefers vain and base
   things before God. (Ibid. p. 96. b.) That they are all enemies to God,
   and the very being of God. (Ibid. p. 5. c. d. and p. 97.) That their
   hearts are full of enmity to God. (Ibid. p. 55. e.) That they have an
   aversion to those gracious actions of loving God, and trusting in
   Christ, and are under the dominion of a contrary inclination. (Ibid. p.
   67.) That those of them whose consciences are enlightened, and are
   reforming their lives, have no love; and that it is a burden to them
   that they suspect there is such a God, that they wish there was not
   such an one. And that they are haters of God, and are so addicted to
   their own interest, that they have a bitter spirit towards God, have an
   ill affection to him, and are adversaries to his felicity. (Ibid. p.
   97. Three Serm. p. 38, 39.) That they are governed by a spirit of
   self-love, and are wholly destitute of love to God; that some of them
   confess that they have but little love to God; but indeed they have not
   one spark of love to God in their hearts. (Three Serm. p. 48.) That
   they set their interest at the right hand of God's glory,--as if God's
   honour were not to be regarded, compared with their interest, &c. &c.
   (Ibid. p. 63, 64.)

   So Mr. W. himself (Christ a King and Witness, p. 145. e.) plainly
   supposes, that before conversion men love the world more than God. For,
   speaking of the nature of the change wrought in conversion, he says,
   things are quite turned about, God and Christ are got into the place
   the world had before. Again (Ibid. p. 18. b.) he says, "You must know
   that there is no man who is not either a true subject to Christ, or his
   enemy. That man who does not submit to Christ as his King and Lord, by
   bearing true faith and allegiance to him, is the enemy of Christ and
   his kingdom. Such are all they who will not depend on him, believe in
   him, give up themselves and all to him." And again, (p. 106. e. 107. a)
   "Man since the fall has a natural unlikeness to God, and hates the
   holiness and purity of the divine nature." And in his sermon on Isa.
   xlv. 11. he says to his hearers, If your nature remain unrenewed and
   unsanctified,--you are the enemies of God and Christ by wicked works,
   and an impure heart.--But yet now it seems, some of these may profess
   real friendship to Christ, and loving him above the world, and speak
   true.

   And these things are no less inconsistent with what Mr. W. says in the
   very book under consideration. He here says, (p. 36.) "Why should any
   divine now tell us, that these same professions do not imply that there
   are any pretences of any real friendship, that they import no pretence
   of loving God more, yea, not so much, as his enemies, no pretence to
   love God above the world?" When he himself is the divine that tells us
   so, or plainly supposes so in this very book of his. For, in p. 8, 9.
   having mentioned the profession communicants may be required to make,
   he then says, that such a profession contains all that is essential to
   true religion in it; and if this is the fruit of the love of God, it is
   true godliness: plainly supposing, that persons may have these things
   without the love of God; as the reader will see more evidently if he
   views the place. So that the profession must imply real friendship, and
   love to God, even above the world; and yet must contain only such
   things as may be with or without the love of God indiscriminately.

   Mr. W. allows, that in order to come to sacraments men ought to profess
   a subjection to Christ with all their hearts, (p. 10. d.) and to be
   devoted to the service of God, (p. 49. d.) and to give up themselves to
   Christ, to be taught, ruled, and led by him in a gospel-way to
   salvation, (p. 31. e. and p. 32. a.) And though he and Mr. Stoddard
   taught, that it is lawful for some unsanctified men to come to
   sacraments, yet Mr. W. supposes it to be unlawful for any to come to
   sacraments serving two masters; and says Mr. S. taught that they ought
   to covenant with God with their whole hearts, and give up all their
   hearts and lives to Christ. We are therefore to understand Mr. W. that
   some unsanctified men can profess all these things, and speak true.
   Strange doctrine for a christian divine! Let us see whether Mr. S.
   taught such doctrine. He taught that faith in Christ is the first act
   of obedience that any sinner does perform; that it is by faith that a
   man first gives himself to be God's servant. (Safety of App. p. 228. e.
   p. 229. a.) That all those who are not converted, are under the
   dominion of sin, enemies to God. (Ibid. p. 5. c. d.) That there is no
   obedience to God in what they do, who have only common grace; that they
   do not attend the will of God. (Ibid. p. 7. d.) That all ungodly men
   are servants of Satan, and live in a way of rebellion against God. (
   Ibid. p. 94. b.) That they are enemies to the authority of God; to the
   wisdom, power, and justice of God, yea to the very being of God; they
   have a preparedness of heart to all wickedness that is committed in the
   world, if God did not restrain them; that if they were in the
   circumstances that the fallen angels are in they would be as the very
   devils. (Ibid. p. 95.) That their hearts are like the hearts of devils,
   as full of sin as a toad is full of poison, having no inclination to
   any thing that is good. (Guide to Christ; p. 68. see also Benef. of the
   Gos. p. 130. a. b.) That they utterly neglect the end they were made
   for, and make it their business to serve themselves; they care not
   whether God's glory sinks or swims. (Three Sermons, p. 62.) That they
   hate God, because God crosses them in his laws. (Ibid. p. 38. c.) These
   are the men, which Mr. W. supposes must, and may (some of them) truly
   profess a subjection to Christ with all their hearts, and to be devoted
   to Christ; and the men that Mr. S. taught, might covenant with God with
   their whole hearts, and give up all their hearts and lives to Christ.
   Mr. Stoddard taught, that men that have but common grace, go quite in
   another path than that which God directs to--That they set themselves
   against the way of salvation God prescribes. (Safety, p. 10.) That man
   in his natural state is an enemy to the way of salvation ; that he is
   an enemy to the law of God, and the gospel of Jesus Christ. (Ibid. p.
   106. b. c.) But yet these, if we believe Mr. W. may truly profess a
   subjection to Christ with all their hearts, and give up themselves to
   him, to be taught, ruled, and led by him in a gospel-way of salvation.
   Yet if we believe him, we must have the trouble of disbelieving him
   again; for in these things he is as inconsistent with himself, as he is
   with Mr. S. For in his sermon on Isa. xlv. 11. (p. 26, 27.) he says to
   those whose natures are unrenewed and unsanctified, "If you are without
   Christ, you are in a state of slavery to sin, led about of divers
   lusts, and under the reigning power and dominion of your corruptions,
   which debase your souls, and bring them down from the dignity of their
   nature, to the vilest, most shameful, and accursed bondage. And by
   means of sin, ye are in bondage to the devil, the most hateful and
   accursed enemy of God and your own souls; [588] --and are opposing all
   the means of your own deliverance. The offers of grace, the calls and
   invitations of the gospel, have all been ineffectual to persuade you to
   accept of deliverance from a slavery you are willingly held in. Nay,
   you strive against the liberty of the sons of God." And yet some of
   these are (if we believe what Mr. W. now says) subject to Christ with
   all their hearts, give up all their hearts and lives to Christ, and
   give up themselves to be taught, ruled, and led by him in a gospel-way
   to salvation.--Mr. W. in his sermons on Christ a King and Witness, (p.
   81.) under a use of examination, giving marks of trial, says, "Have you
   unreservedly given up your souls and bodies to him? [viz. Christ.] You
   must be all Christ's, and have no other master. You must be given to
   him without reserve, both in body and spirit, which are his." But now
   it seems, these are no discriminating evidences of true piety: he says,
   (Ibid. p. 118) "A man naturally hates God should reign. And (p. 119.
   c.) speaking of the natural man, he says, "He hates to be controlled,
   and in all things subjected to God;--he really owns no God but
   himself." But if so, then certainly he is not subject to God with all
   his heart.

   Our author in the book more especially attended to, says, (p. 31. d.
   e.) He knows of nobody who has any controversy with me in what he calls
   my loose way of arguing, in my saying, "The nature of things seems to
   afford no good reason why the people of Christ should not openly
   profess a proper respect to him in their hearts, as well as a true
   notion of him in their heads." And then, in that and the following
   page, proceeds to show what respect Mr. S. and those that think with
   him, suppose men must profess in order to come to the Lord's supper;
   and (in p. 33. a.) speaks of such a profession as is equally honourable
   to Christ with a profession of saving grace. And, as according to Mr.
   W. no profession discriminating what is professed from common grace,
   can be required, so common grace must be supposed to be a proper
   respect to Christ in the heart. Now let us see what Mr. S. says. "There
   is (says he) an opposition between saving and common grace;--they have
   a contrariety one to another, and are at war one with the other, and
   would destroy one the other.--Common graces are lusts, and do oppose
   saving grace." (Nat. of Sav. Conv. p. 9. d. e.) "Men that are in a
   natural condition, such of them as are addicted to morality and
   religion, are serving their lusts therein. The most orderly natural men
   do live an ungodly life;--yea, their very religion is iniquity." (Ibid.
   p. 96, 97.)--"Their best works are not only sinful, but properly sins;
   they are acted by a spirit of lust in all that they do." (Saf. of App.
   p. 168. d.)--"Moral virtues do not render men acceptable to God ; for
   though they look like virtues, yet they are lusts." (Ibid. p. 81.)--Now
   the question plainly is, Whether lust can be a proper respect to Christ
   in the heart? And, Whether a profession which implies no more in it, be
   equally honourable to Christ, as a credible profession of a gracious
   respect to him ?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [588] And yet now it seems, some such do serve but one master, and give
   up themselves to Christ to be led by him.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Concerning visibility without apparent probability.

   Mr. Stoddard (Appeal, p. 16.) says thus: "Such persons as the apostles
   did admit into gospel churches, are fit to be admitted into them; but
   they admitted many that had not a thorough work of regeneration. Indeed
   by the rule that God has given for admissions, if carefully attended,
   more unconverted persons will be admitted, than converted."

   This passage I took notice of in my book, where I say, "I would humbly
   inquire, How those visible qualifications can be the ground of a
   rational judgment, that a person is circumcised in heart, which
   nevertheless at the same time, we are sensible, are so far from being
   probable signs of it, that they are more frequently without it than
   with it," &c. This seems to be a terrible thing in Mr. W.s way, which
   he strikes at from time to time; and is an impediment he boggles at
   exceedingly. One while he pretends, he can give a sufficient answer.
   (p. 7, 8.) At another time he pretends, that I remove the difficulty
   myself. (p. 12.) Then again, in the same page, he pretends to solve the
   difficulty; and then in the next page pretends, that if the case be as
   I say, That we cannot form a rational judgment that a thing is, which,
   at the same time, and under that degree of light we then stand in, it
   more probably is a mistaken one than not, yet it can argue nothing to
   the case; seeing the judgment we do form, is directed by a rule which
   is appointed for us. But still as if not satisfied with these answers
   and remarks, he seems afterwards to suggest, that Mr. S. did not
   express this as his own sentiment, but as Mr. Cotton's, as a gentleman
   of the same principles with Mr. Mather, using it as argumentum ad
   hominem. See p. 33.

   In p. 34. a. he expressly says, "Mr. S. does not say, That when the
   rule which God has given for admissions is carefully attended, it
   leaves reason to believe, that the greater part of those who are
   admitted, are enemies to God" &c.--True, he does not say this in terms;
   but he says, "more unconverted persons will be admitted, than
   converted:"--which is equivalent. And (p. 133. a.) Mr. W. presumes
   confidently to affirm, that Mr. S. says this [the thing forementioned]
   not with peculiar relation to his own scheme, but only as an
   application of a saying of Mr. Cotton's, who was of a different
   opinion, and said upon a different scheme; to show, that upon their own
   principles, the matter will not be mended. But this is contrary to the
   most plain fact. For Mr. S. having said, The apostles admitted many
   unconverted, he immediately adds the passage in dispute, indeed by the
   rule, &c. plainly expressing his own sentiment; though he backs it with
   a saying of Mr. Cotton's. So, Mr. Cotton's words come in as a
   confirmation of Mr. S--d's; and not Mr. S--d's as an application of Mr.
   Cotton's. However, Mr. W. delivers the same sentiment as his own, once
   and again, in his book: he delivers it as his own sentiment, (p. 34.)
   that probably many more hypocrites, than real saints, do make such a
   profession, as that which must be accepted. He delivers it as his own
   sentiment, (p. 61. c.) That the apostles judged it likely, that of the
   Christians taken into the church under their direction, as many were
   hypocrites in proportion to their number, as to those that were taken
   into the Jewish church. And as to the latter, he delivers it as his
   sentiment, (p. 24. a.) that the body of the people were not regenerate.
   So that, according to his own sentiments, when the apostolical rule of
   taking in is observed, the body of those who are admitted will be
   hypocrites.

   Now therefore, I desire that this matter may be examined to the very
   bottom.--And here let it be considered, whether the truth of the
   following things be not incontestable.

   1. If indeed by the rule God has given for admissions, when it is
   carefully attended, more unconverted persons will he admitted, than
   converted; then it will follow, That just such a visibility or visible
   appearance of saintship as the rule requires, is more frequently
   without real saintship, than with it.

   2. If Mr. S. and Mr. W. had just reason from the Holy Scripture, and
   Divine Providence, to think thus, and to publish such a sentiment, and
   the christian church has good reason to believe them; then God has
   given the christian church in its present state (dark and imperfect as
   it is) good reason to think so too.

   3. If Christ by the rule he has given for admissions, requires his
   churches to receive such a visibility or appearance, which he has given
   the same churches at the same time reason to judge to be an appearance
   that for the most part is without godliness, or more frequently
   connected with ungodliness; then he requires them to receive such an
   appearance, as he at the same time has given them reason to think does
   not imply a probability of godliness, but is attended rather with a
   probability of ungodliness. For that is the notion of probability; an
   appearance, which so far as we have, means to judge, is for the most
   part connected with the thing. [589] Therefore the sign or appearance,
   let it be what it will, implies a probability of that which we have
   reason to think it is for the most part connected or attended with.
   Where there is only probability without certainty, there is a
   peradventure in the case on both sides; or in vulgar language, the
   supposition on both sides stands a chance to be true. But that side
   which most commonly proves true in such a case, stands the best chance;
   and therefore properly on that side lies the probability.

   4. That cannot be a credible visibility or appearance, which is not a
   probable appearance. To say, a thing is credible and not probable, is a
   contradiction. And it is impossible rationally to judge a thing true,
   and at the same time rationally to judge a thing most probably not
   true. Therefore it is absurd (not to say worse) to talk of any divine
   institution, leading us thus to judge. It would be to suppose, that God
   by his institution has made that judgment rational, which he at the
   same time makes improbable, and therefore irrational.

   This notion of admitting members into the church of Christ without and
   against probability of true piety, is not only very inconsistent with
   itself, but very inconsistent with what the common light of mankind
   teaches in their dealings one with another. Common sense teaches all
   mankind, in admission of members into societies, at least societies
   formed for very great and important purposes, to admit none but those
   concerning whom there is an apparent probability, that they are the
   hearty friends of the society, and of the main designs and interests of
   it; and especially not to admit such concerning whom there is a greater
   probability of their being habitual fixed enemies. But thus it is,
   according to Mr. S.s and Mr. W.s doctrine, as well as the doctrine of
   the Scripture, with all unsanctified men, in regard to the church of
   Christ. They are enemies to the head of the society, enemies to his
   honour and authority, and the work of salvation in the way of the
   gospel; the upholding and promoting of which is the main design of the
   society. The church is represented in Scripture as the household of
   God, in a peculiar manner intrusted with the care of his name and
   honour in the world, the interests of his kingdom, the care of his
   jewels, and most precious things. And would not common sense teach an
   earthly prince not to admit into his household, such as he had no
   reason to look upon so much as probable friends and loyal subjects in
   their hearts; but rather friends and slaves in their hearts to his
   enemies and competitors for his crown and dignity? The visible church
   of Christ is often represented as his city and his army. Now would not
   common sense teach the inhabitants of a besieged city to open the gates
   to none, but those concerning whom there is at least an apparent
   probability of their not being enemies? And would any imagine, that in
   a militant state of things it is a likely way to promote the interest
   of the war, to fill up the army with such as are more likely to be on
   the enemies' side in their hearts, than on the side of their lawful and
   rightful prince, and his faithful soldiers and subjects.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [589] Mr. Locke thus defines probability. (Hum. Und. 7th Edit 8vo. Vol.
   II. p. 273.) "Probability is nothing but the appearance of such an
   agreement or disagreement, by the intervention of proofs, whose
   connexion is not constant and immutable, or at least is not perceived
   to be so: but is. or appears for the most part to be so; and is enough
   to induce the mind to judge the proposition to be true, or false,
   rather than the contrary. And Mr. W. himself (p. 139.) says, "It is
   moral evidence of gospel sincerity, which God's word makes the church's
   rule," &c. Now does such an appearance, as we have reason at the same
   time to think is more frequently without gospel-holiness than with it,
   amount to moral evidence of gospel-sincerity."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   Concerning the Lord's supper being a converting ordinance.

   Though Mr. W. holds, that none are to be admitted to the Lord's supper,
   but such as make a credible profession of real godliness, and are to be
   admitted under that notion, and with respect to such a character
   appearing on them; yet he holds at the same time, that the Lord's
   supper is a converting ordinance, an ordinance designed for the
   bringing of some men that have no such a character, to be of such a
   character, (p. 14. c. d. p. 15. p. 35. a. b. p. 83. b. p. 100. e. 101.
   a. 126, 127.) It is evident, that the meaning of those divines who
   speak of the Lord's supper as a converting ordinance, is not merely
   that God in his sovereign providence will use it as an occasion of the
   conversion of some; but that it is a converting means by his
   institution given to men, appointing them to use it for this purpose.
   Thus Mr. Stoddard expressly declares, That the Lord's supper is
   instituted to be a means of regeneration, (Doct. of Inst. Churches, p.
   22. a.) instituted for the conversion of sinners, as well as the
   confirmation of saints; (Appeal, p. 70. c. p. 71. a.) that the direct
   end of it is conversion, when the subject that it is administered unto
   stands in need of conversion. (Ibid. p. 73, 74.) And thus Mr. W. after
   Mr. S. speaks of the Lord's supper as by Christ's appointment a proper
   means of conversion of some that are unconverted. (p. 100. e. 101. a.)
   so he speaks of it as instituted for the conversion of sinners. (p.
   126, and 127.)

   Now if so, what need of men being, to rational charity, converted
   already, in order to their coming to the Lord's supper? Is it
   reasonable to suppose God would institute this ordinance directly for
   that end, that sinners might be converted by it; and then charge his
   ministers and churches not to admit any that they had not reasonable
   ground to think were converted already?--Mr. W. (in p. 83. b.) supposes
   two ends of Christ's appointing the communion of the christian church;
   that such as have grace already should be under proper advantages to
   gain more, and that those who have none, should be under proper
   advantages to attain grace. But this ill consists with other parts of
   his scheme.--If a king should erect an hospital for the help of the
   poor, and therein has two ends; one, the nourishing of such as are in
   health, and the other, the healing of the sick; and furnishes the
   hospital accordingly, with proper food for the healthy, and proper
   remedies for the sick: but at the same time charges the officers, to
   whom he commits the care of the hospital, by no means to admit any,
   unless it be under a notion of their being in health, and from respect
   to such a qualification in them, and unless they have reasonable ground
   and moral evidence to induce them to believe that they are well: and if
   this pretence should be made to justify such a conduct, that the
   hospital was indeed designed for the healing of the sick, yet it was
   designed to confer this benefit only on such diseased people as were
   hypocrites, and made a profession and pretence of being in health; will
   any man presume to say, that such a conduct is agreeable to the
   dictates of the understanding of rational beings? And to suppose, that
   such should be the conduct of the infinitely wise God, is as
   unscriptural, as it is unreasonable. We often read in God's word, of
   men's being convinced of their wickedness, and confessing their sins,
   as a way to be healed and cleansed from sin: but where do we read of
   men's pretending to more goodness than they have, and making a
   hypocritical profession and show of goodness, in order to their
   becoming good men? [590] Where have we a divine institution, that any
   who are wolves should put on sheep's clothing, and so come to his
   people, that they may believe them to be sheep, and under this notion
   receive them into the flock, to the end that they may truly become of
   his sheep?

   But to examine this matter, of the Lord's supper being a converting
   ordinance to ungodly men professing godliness, a little more exactly.
   If Christ has appointed the Lord's supper to be a converting ordinance
   to some such as these, then he has appointed it either only for such of
   them as are mistaken, and think themselves godly when they are not; or
   he has appointed it not only for such, but also for such as are
   sensible they are ungodly.

   If it be appointed as a converting ordinance only for such as are
   mistaken, and think themselves converted; then here is an institution
   of Christ, which never can, in any one instance, be made use of to the
   end for which he has appointed men to use it. It cannot be used for
   this end by those who admit members, and administer the ordinance: for
   they, as Mr. W. says, must admit none but such as they are bound by the
   rule of Christ to look upon as godly men already, and to administer the
   sacrament to them under that notion, and with respect to such a
   character. Neither can it be used to such a purpose by any of the
   communicants: for by the supposition, they must be all such as think
   they are converted already, and also come under that notion. So that by
   this scheme of things, here is an institution appointed to be upheld
   and used in the church, which the institution itself makes void and
   impossible. For, as was observed before, the notion of a converting
   ordinance has not reference to any secret decree of God, how he in his
   sovereign pleasure will sometimes use it; but to his institution given
   to men, appointing the end for which they should use it. Therefore, on
   the present supposition, the institution appoints the Lord's supper to
   be used in some cases for the conversion of sinners, but at the same
   time forbids its being either given or received under any other notion
   than that of the communicant's being converted already: which is in
   effect to forbid its being either given or received for the conversion
   of the communicant, in any one instance. So that the institution
   effectually destroys and disannuls itself.--But God forbid, that we
   should ascribe any such inconsistent institutions to the Divine Head of
   the church!

   Or if the other part of the disjunction be taken, and it be said, the
   Lord's supper is appointed for the conversion of some that are sensible
   they are ungodly or unconverted, the consequence is no less absurd, on
   Mr. W.s principles. For then the scheme is this. The institution
   requires some men to make a pretence of real piety, and to make a
   public solemn profession of gospel-holiness, which at the same time
   they are sensible they have not; and this, to the end that others may
   look upon them to be real saints, and receive them to the Lord's supper
   under that notion: not putting on a disguise, and making a show of what
   they have not, through mistake, but doing it consciously and wilfully,
   to the honour and glory of God: and all this strictly required of them,
   as the instituted means of their becoming real saints, and the children
   of God!

   Mr. W. says, (p. 14. d.) "Since it is God's will, that his church
   should admit all such visible saints, [viz. such as he had been
   speaking of,] it follows, that the Lord's supper is a converting
   ordinance to such of them as are unconverted." But Mr. W. is mistaken
   as to his consequence. The Lord's supper is not instituted to be a
   converting ordinance to all unconverted men, whom it is God's will the
   church should admit. For it may be the church's duty, and so God's
   will, to admit those that live secretly in the grossest wickedness, as
   adultery, uncleanness, deism, &c. Such men as these may make a fair
   profession, and the church may be ignorant of their secret wickedness,
   and therefore may have no warrant to reject them: but yet it will not
   follow, that God by his institution has given such a lawful right to
   the Lord's supper, having appointed it to be a converting ordinance to
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [590] Mr. Williams (p. 42.) owns that persons must make a profession
   wherein they make a show of being wise virgins, in order to come into
   the visible church. And (p. 35. e.) he owns, that all visible saints
   who are not truly pious, are hypocrites. Again, it may be observed, he
   abundantly insists, that men who have no more than common grace and
   moral sincerity, may lawfully come to sacraments; and yet by what he
   says, (p. 35. e.) they must profess more. So that men who have no more
   must profess more; and this, it seems, according to divine
   institution!--Again he says, (p. 35. a. b. c.) That one end God
   designed by appointing men to be brought into the church, is, that
   through divine grace they might effectually be brought to Christ, to
   give him the whole possession of their hearts; and yet in the very next
   paragraph (p. 35. e. and 36. a.) he speaks of it as unlawful for men to
   come to sacraments till they give up all their hearts to Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   The notion of moral sincerity's being the qualification, which gives a
   lawful right to christian sacraments, examined.

   Though our author disdains the imputation of any such notion, as that
   of men's being called visible and professed saints from respect to a
   visibility and profession of moral sincerity: yet it is manifest, that
   in his scheme (whether consistently or no, others must judge) moral
   sincerity is the qualification which entitles, and gives a lawful
   right, to sacraments. For he holds, that it is lawful for unsanctified
   men, who have this qualification, to come to sacraments; and that it is
   not lawful for them to come without it. Therefore I desire this notion
   may be thoroughly examined.

   And for the greater clearness, let it be observed what sincerity in
   general is. Now sincerity, in the general notion of it, is an honest
   conformity of some profession or outward show of some inward property
   or act of mind, to the truth and reality of it. If there be a show or
   pretence of what is not, and has no real existence, then the pretence
   is altogether vain; it is only a pretence, and nothing else: and
   therefore is a pretence or show without any sincerity, of any kind,
   either moral or gracious.

   I now proceed to offer the following arguments against the notion of
   moral sincerity being the qualification, which gives a lawful right to
   sacraments.

   I. There is no such thing as moral sincerity, in the covenant of grace,
   distinct from gracious sincerity. If any sincerity at all be requisite
   in order to a title to the seals of the covenant of grace, doubtless it
   is the sincerity which belongs to that covenant. But there is only one
   sort of sincerity which belongs to that covenant; and that is a
   gracious sincerity. There is but one sort of faith belonging to that
   covenant; and that is saving faith in Jesus Christ, called in Scripture
   unfeigned faith. As for the faith of devils, it is not the faith of the
   covenant of grace.

   Here the distinction of an internal and external covenant, will not
   help at all; as long as the covenant, of which the sacraments are
   seals, is a covenant of salvation, or a covenant proposing terms of
   eternal salvation. The sacraments are seals of such a covenant. They
   are seals of the New Testament in Christ's blood, (Matt. xxvi. 28. Luke
   xxii. 28.) a Testament which has better promises than the Old, (Heb.
   viii. 6.) and which the apostle tells us, makes us heirs of the eternal
   inheritance. (Heb. ix. 15.)--Mr. W. himself speaks of the covenant
   sealed in baptism, as the covenant proposing terms of salvation. (p.
   23. b. c.) So he speaks of the covenant entered into by a visible
   people, as the covenant in which God offers everlasting happiness. (p
   24, 25.) But there is no other religion, no other sincerity, belonging
   to this covenant of salvation, but that which accompanies salvation, or
   is saving religion and sincerity. As it is written, () "Behold, thou
   desirest truth in the inward parts."

   There is what may be called a moral sincerity, in distinction from
   saving, in many moral things; as in loving our friends and neighbours,
   in loving our country, in choosing the protestant religion before the
   popish, in a conscientious care to do many duties, in being willing to
   take a great deal of pains in religion, in being sorry for the
   commission of such and such acts of wickedness, &c. But there are some
   duties, which, unless they are done with a gracious sincerity, they
   cannot be done at all. As Mr. Stoddard observes, (Safety of Ap. p.
   216.) "There are some duties which cannot be done but from a gracious
   respect to God." Thus, there is but one sort of sincerity in loving God
   as God, and setting our hearts on him as our highest happiness, loving
   him above the world, and loving holiness above all the objects of our
   lusts. He that does not these things with a gracious sincerity, never
   really doth them at all. He that truly does them, is certainly a godly
   man; as we are abundantly assured by the word of God. So, there is but
   one sort of sincere and cordial consent to the covenant of grace, but
   one sort of giving all our hearts to Jesus Christ; which things Mr. W.
   allows to be necessary, to come to sacraments. That to which a man's
   heart is full of reigning enmity, he cannot with any reality at all
   cordially consent to and comply with: but the hearts of unsanctified
   men are full of reigning enmity to the covenant of grace, according to
   the doctrine of Scripture, and according to the doctrine of Mr. S. and
   Mr. W. too, as we have seen before.

   However, if there were any such thing, as being heartily willing to
   accept of Christ, and a giving all our hearts to Christ, without a
   saving sincerity, this would not be a complying with the terms of a
   covenant of salvation. For it is self-evident, that only something
   which is saving, is a compliance with the terms of salvation. Now Mr.
   W. himself often allows (as has been observed) that persons must comply
   with the terms of the covenant of grace, in order to come to
   sacraments.--Yet because he also in effect denies it, I shall say
   something further in confirmation of it.

   1. The sacraments are covenant privileges. Mr. W. himself calls them
   so. (p. 5. a. b.) Covenant privileges are covenant benefits, or
   benefits to which persons have a right by the covenant. "But persons
   can have no right to any of the benefits of a covenant, without
   compliance with its terms. For that is the very notion of the terms of
   a covenant, viz. Terms of an interest in the benefits of that covenant.
   It is so in all covenants whatsoever; if a man refuses to comply with
   its conditions, he can claim nothing by that covenant.

   2. If we consider the sacraments as seals of the covenant, the same
   thing is evident, viz. That a man can have no right to them without a
   compliance with the terms. The sacraments are not only seals of the
   offer on God's part, or ordinances God has appointed as confirmations
   of the truth of his covenant, as Mr. W. seems to insist. (p. 74, 75.)
   For considered merely as seals and confirmations of the truth of the
   gospel, they are (as miracles and other evidences of the christian
   religion) seals equally given to Christians, Jews, Deists, moral and
   vicious, and the whole world that knows of them. Whereas, it is
   manifest, in the nature of the thing, sacraments are seals of the
   covenant to be applied to the communicant, and of which he is the
   immediate subject, in a peculiar manner, as a party in covenant.
   Otherwise, what need would there be of his being one of God's covenant
   people, in any sense whatsoever?

   But now it is not reasonable to suppose, that the seal of the covenant
   belongs to any man, as a party in the covenant, who will not accept of
   and comply with the covenant. He that rejects the covenant, and will
   not comply with it, has no interest in it. And he that has no interest
   in the covenant, has no right to the seals; for the covenant and seals
   go together. It is so in all covenants among mankind; after a man has
   come into a bargain proposed and offered by another, yielding to the
   terms of it, he has a right to have the bargain sealed, and confirmed
   to him, as a party in the covenant; but not before.

   And if what the communicant does be a seal on his part also, as the
   nature of the thing demonstrates, seeing he is active in the matter,
   and as Mr. W. seems willing to allow, (p. 75.) it will follow, with
   equal evidence, that a man cannot lawfully partake, unless he yields to
   and complies with the covenant. To what purpose is a man's sealing an
   instrument or contract, but to confirm it as his own act and deed, and
   to declare his compliance with his part of the contract. As when a
   servant seals his indenture, it is a testimony and ratification of his
   compliance as to the proposed contract with his master. And if a
   covenant of friendship be proposed between two parties, and they both
   put their seal to it, hereby they both testify and declare their mutual
   friendship.

   It has been already observed, that unsanctified men, while such, cannot
   with any sincerity at all testify a present cordial compliance with the
   covenant of grace: and as they cannot do this, so neither can they with
   any sincerity promise a future compliance with that covenant. Mr. W.
   often allows, that in order to christian communion men must promise a
   compliance with the covenant, in its spiritual and saving duties; that
   they will believe and repent in the sense of the covenant, willingly
   accept of Christ and his salvation, love him and live to him, and will
   do it immediately, henceforward, from this moment, (p. 25. c. e. p. 26.
   a. p. 28. a. c. and p. 76. a. b.) But how absurd is this! when at the
   same instant, while they are making and uttering these promises, they
   are entirely averse to any such thing; being then enemies to Christ,
   willingly rejecting him, opposing his salvation, striving against it,
   labouring to find out all manner of difficulties and hinderances in the
   way of it, not desiring it should come yet, &c. which our author, in a
   place forecited, says is the case with all unsanctified men.

   And when unsanctified men promise, that they will spend the rest of
   their lives in universal obedience to Christ, there is no sincerity in
   such promises; because there is not such a heart in them. There is no
   man but a true disciple of Christ, that is willing thoroughly to deny
   himself for him, and follow him in a way of obedience to all his
   commands, unto the end, through all difficulties which Christ has given
   his followers reason to expect, or commanded them to prepare for; as is
   evident by Christ's frequent declarations. (Luke xiv. 25-33. Matt. x.
   37, 38, 39. chap. xiii. 44, 45, 46. and many parallel places.) If an
   unsanctified man thinks he is willing, he does not know his own heart.
   If he professes to be willing, he does not know what he says. The
   difficulty and cost of it is not in his view: and therefore he has no
   proper willingness to comply with the cost and difficulty. That which
   he is willing for, with a moral sincerity, is something else, which is
   a great deal easier, and less cross to flesh and blood. Suppose a king
   should propose to a subject his building him such a tower, promising
   him a certain reward. If the subject should undertake it, not counting
   the cost, thinking with himself that the king meant another sort of
   tower, much cheaper; and should be willing only to build that cheap
   one, which he imagined in his own mind; when he would by no means have
   consented to build so costly a tower as the king proposed, if he had
   understood him right: such a man could not be said properly to be
   willing to comply with his prince's proposal, with any sincerity at
   all. For what he consents to with a moral sincerity, is not the thing
   which the king proposed.

   The promises of unsanctified men are like the promises of the man we
   read of, (Luke ix. 57, 58.) who said, "Lord, I will follow thee
   whithersoever thou goest." To whom Christ replied, "The foxes have
   holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not
   where to lay his head." When he made his promise, he probably quite
   mistook the thing, and did not imagine, that to follow Christ wherever
   he went, would be to follow him in such poverty and hardship. I
   suppose, the rich young man we read of (Mark x. 17, &c.) might have
   what is called moral sincerity. But he had no sincerity in the covenant
   of grace. When he came to Christ to know what he should do to have
   eternal life, it is probable he ignorantly thought himself willing to
   yield himself to Christ's direction. Yet when it came to a trial, and
   Christ told him he must go and sell all that he had and give to the
   poor, it proved that he had no sincerity of willingness at all for any
   such thing.--So that it is evident, however unsanctified men may be
   morally sincere in some things, yet they have no sincerity of any sort
   in that covenant, of which the sacraments are seals; and that moral
   sincerity, distinct from gracious, in this covenant, is a mere
   imagination, there being indeed no such thing.

   II. Another argument against this notion of moral sincerity, giving a
   right to church communion, is this: a quality that is transient and
   vanishing, can be no qualification of fitness for a standing privilege.
   Unsanctified men may be very serious, greatly affected, and much
   engaged in religion; but the Scripture compares their religion to a
   lamp not supplied with oil, which will go out, and to a plant that has
   no root nor deepness of earth, which will soon wither ; and compares
   such unsanctified men to the dog that will return to his vomit, and to
   the sow which, though washed ever so clean, yet her nature not being
   changed, will return to her wallowing in the mire.

   Mr. W. allows, that persons in order to come to sacraments, must have
   deep convictions, an earnest concern to obtain salvation, &c. Now every
   one who is in any degree acquainted with religious matters, knows that
   such convictions are not wont to last a great while, if they have no
   saving issue. Mr. S. in his sermon on the danger of speedy degeneracy,
   (p. 11.) says, "Unconverted men will grow weary of religious duties."
   And our author himself, (p. 78. c.) speaking of those professors in the
   primitive churches that fell away to heresy and other wickedness, takes
   notice that the apostle observes, it will be so, that they which are
   approved, might be made manifest: and says Mr. W. upon it, evil and
   unsanctified men, by such sins, will discover their hypocrisy.

   Now seeing this is the case with moral sincerity and common religion,
   how can it be a qualification for a standing privilege ? Nothing can be
   a fitness for a durable privilege, but a durable qualification. For no
   qualification has any fitness or adaptedness for more than it extends
   to; as a short scabbard cannot be fit for a long sword. If a man going
   a journey in the night, needs a lamp to light him in his way, who will
   pretend that a flaming wick without oil, which will last but a few
   rods, is fit for his purpose ? Or if a man were building a house for
   himself and family, should he put into the frame pieces of timber known
   to be of such a nature as that they would probably be rotten in a few
   months; or should he take blocks of ice, instead of hewn stone, because
   during a present cold season they seemed to be hard and firm; and
   withal should for a covering put only leaves that will soon fade away,
   instead of tiles or shingles, that are solid and lasting; would not
   every spectator ridicule his folly?

   If it should be said, that unsanctified men, when they lose their moral
   sincerity, may be cast out again: this is far from helping the case, or
   showing that such men were ever fit to be admitted. To say, a piece of
   timber, though not of a durable nature, is fit to be put into the frame
   of a building, because when it begins to rot, it may be pulled out
   again, is so far from proving that it was ever fit to be put in, that
   the speedy necessity of pulling it out rather proves the contrary. If
   we had the power of constituting a human body, or it were left to us to
   add members to our own bodies, as there might be occasion; we should
   not think such a member was fit to be added to the frame, that had
   already radically seated in it a cancer or gangrene, by which it could
   last but a little while itself, and would endanger the other members;
   though it were true, that when the disease should prevail, there were
   surgeons which might be procured to cut that member off.

   But to consider a little further this point of moral sincerity
   qualifying persons for the privileges of the church. I would lay down
   this proposition as a thing of clear evidence: those persons have no
   fitness in themselves to come to the privileges of the church, who, if
   they were known, would not be fit to be admitted by others. For to say,
   they are fit to be members, and yet not fit to be allowed to be
   members, is apparently absurd. But they who have no better fitness than
   moral sincerity, if that were known, would not be fit to be admitted by
   others; as is allowed by Mr. W. For he holds, that in order to be fit
   to be admitted by others, they must credibly appear to them to have
   something more than moral sincerity, even gospel-holiness. And it is
   evident in itself, as well as allowed by Mr. W. that if such were
   known, they would not be fit to be admitted, only on their moral
   sincerity, and the profession and promises they make from such a
   principle; and that for this reason, because such a principle alone
   would not be fit to be trusted. God himself has taught his church, that
   the religion of unsanctified men is not fit to be trusted; as a lamp
   without oil, and a plant without root, are things not to be
   trusted.--God has directly taught his church to expect, that such
   religion will fail; and that such men, having no higher principle, will
   return to their wickedness. Job xxvii. 8, 9, 10. "The hypocrite--will
   he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon
   God?"--Dan. xii. 10. "The wicked will do wickedly." And therefore God
   does not require his church to accept their profession and promises. If
   he has taught us not to credit their profession and promises, then
   certainly he has taught us not to accept them.

   III. Another argument against this supposed rule of allowing and
   requiring unsanctified men with moral sincerity, to come to sacraments,
   is this. That rule, which if fully attended, would naturally bring it
   to pass, that the greater part of communicants would be unfit, even
   according to that very rule, cannot be a divine rule. But this supposed
   rule of moral sincerity is such a rule. For if this rule be universally
   attended, then all unsanctified men, who have present convictions of
   conscience sufficient to make them morally sincere, must come into the
   communion of the church. But this conviction and common religion, if it
   do not issue in conversion, (as has been observed,) commonly vanishes
   away in a short time. And yet still these persons, if not convicted of
   open scandal, are left in the communion of the church, and remain
   there, without even moral sincerity.--Experience gives us abundant
   reason to think, that of those who some time or other have considerable
   convictions of conscience, so as to make them for the present to be
   what is called morally sincere, but few are savingly converted. [591]
   And if all these must be admitted, (as they must, if this rule be fully
   attended,) then their convictions going away, and their sincerity
   vanishing with it, it will hereby be brought about, that the Lord's
   table is chiefly surrounded with the worst sort of morally insincere
   persons, viz. stupid backsliders, that are in themselves far worse than
   they were before, according to the scripture account, Matt. xii. 45.
   and 2 Pet. ii. 20.--And this as the natural consequence of the
   forementioned rule, appointing moral sincerity to be the qualification
   for communion. Thus this supposed rule supplants its own design.

   IV. Another argument, that moral sincerity is not the qualification to
   which God has annexed a lawful right to sacraments, is, that this
   qualification is not at all inconsistent with a man's living at the
   same time in the most heinous wickedness, in a superlative degree
   contrary to the christian religion.

   It was before observed to be a thing evident in itself, and allowed by
   Mr. W. that there are some sins, which, while wilfully continued and
   lived in, though secretly, do wholly disqualify persons for christian
   sacraments, and make it unlawful for men to partake of them. Now if it
   be thus with some sins, doubtless it is because of the heinousness of
   those sins, the high degree of wickedness which is in them. And hence
   it will follow, that those sins which are in themselves most heinous,
   and most contrary to the christian religion, do especially disqualify
   persons for christian sacraments, when wilfully lived in.

   Let it therefore now be considered, whether it will not follow from
   these premises, that for men to live in enmity against God and Christ,
   and in wilful unbelief and rejection of Christ, (as the Scriptures
   teach, and as Mr. S. and Mr. W. too assert, is the case with all
   unsanctified men under the gospel,) wholly disqualifies them for
   christian sacraments. For it is very manifest, by Scripture and reason,
   that to live in these things, is to live in some of the most heinous
   kinds of wickedness; as is allowed by Calvinistic divines in general,
   and by Mr. S. in particular, who says, (Safety of Ap. p. 224. d.) "You
   cannot anger God more by any thing, than by continuing in the neglect
   of Christ. This is the great controversy God has with sinners; not that
   they have been guilty of these and those particular transgressions, but
   that they abide in the rejection of the gospel." Again, he says, (ibid.
   p. 249. e.) "The great sin, that God is angry with you for, is your
   unbelief. Despising the gospel is the great provoking sin."

   A man's continuing in hatred of his brother, especially a
   fellow-communicant, is generally allowed to disqualify for communion.
   The apostle compares it to leaven in the passover, 1 Cor. v. 6, 7, 8.
   But now certainly it is as bad, and as contrary to the nature and
   design of christian sacraments, for a man to live in hatred of christ,
   and to remain a hateful and accursed enemy (if I may use Mr. W.s own
   language) to the glorious Redeemer and Head of the christian church.

   None will deny, that lying and perjury are very gross and heinous sins,
   and (if known) very scandalous: and therefore it follows from what was
   observed before, that such sins, if lived in, though secretly, do
   disqualify persons for christian sacraments in God's sight. But by our
   author's own account, all unsanctified men that partake of the Lord's
   supper, live in lying and perjury, and go on to renew these crimes
   continually; since while they continue ungodly men, they live in a
   constant violation of their promise and oath." For Mr. W. often lays it
   down, that all who enter into covenant with God, promise spiritual
   duties, such as repentance, faith, love, &c. And that they promise to
   perform these henceforward, even from the present moment, unto the end
   of life; (see p. 25. c. e. 26. a. 28. a. c. 76. a. b.) and that they
   not only promise, but swear to do this. (p. 18. d. 100. c. 101. a. 129.
   a. 130. c. 140. b.) But for a man to violate the promises he makes in
   covenanting with God, Mr. W. once and again speaks of it as lying, (p.
   24. d. e. p. 130. r.) And if so, doubtless their breaking the oath they
   swear to God is perjury.--Now lying to men is bad; but lying to God is
   worse. (Acts v. 4.) And without doubt, perjury towards God is the worst
   sort of perjury. But if unsanctified men, when they entered into
   covenant with God, promised and swore, that they would immediately and
   thenceforward accept of Christ as their Saviour, and love him, and live
   to him; then while they continue in a wilful rejection of him (which
   according to Mr. W. all unregenerate men do) they live continually in
   the violation of their promise and oath. [592]

   I would observe one thing further under this head, viz. That ungodly
   men which live under the gospel, notwithstanding any moral sincerity
   they may have, are worse, and more provoking enemies to God, than the
   very heathen, who never sinned against gospel-light and mercy. This is
   very manifest by the Scriptures, particularly Matt. x. 13, 14. Amos
   iii. 2. Rom. ii. 9. 2 Pet. ii. 21. Rev. iii. 15, 16.

   I had suggested, concerning Mr. Stoddard's doctrine of admitting more
   unconverted than converted by attending Christ's rule, that this
   supposes it to be the case of the members of the visible church, that
   the greater part of them are more provoking enemies to God than most of
   the heathen. Mr. W. represents himself as greatly alarmed at this: he
   calls it an extraordinary passage, and puts five questions about it to
   my serious consideration. (p. 72, 73.) The first and chief question is
   this; "Did Mr. S. ever say in the Appeal, or any where else, of most of
   our fellow-worshippers at the sacrament, that we have no reason to
   think concerning them, but that they are more provoking enemies to the
   Lord, whom Christians love and adore, than most of the very heathen?"
   His three next questions are to represent the heinousness of such
   supposed ill treatment of Mr. S.--And I think will be sufficiently
   answered, by what I shall offer in reply to the first.

   I will tell him what Mr. S. said. Speaking to such as do not come to
   Christ, living under the gospel, he said, (Safety of Ap. p. 234, 235.)
   "You may not think to escape as the heathen do: your load will be
   heavier, and your fire will be hotter, and your judgment sorer, than
   the judgment of other men. God will proportion every man's misery to
   his iniquity. And as you have enjoyed greater light and love, so you
   must expect more amazing and exquisite wrath, than other men.
   Conscience has more to accuse you of and condemn you for; and so has
   God: and you will sink down deeper into hell than other men. You are
   treasuring up a greater measure of wrath, than others, against the day
   of wrath. You will wish you had lived in the darkest corners of the
   earth among Scythians and barbarians."--

   And Mr. W. must allow me to remind him of what another divine has said,
   and that is himself. In his sermon on Isa. xlv. 11. (p. 25, 26), he
   says, "It is to be feared, there are great numbers here present, that
   are in an unconverted, unrenewed, unpardoned state; strangers from God,
   and enemies to him. Yet you now look with great pity and compassion on
   that poor captive, for whom we have now been offering up our earnest
   prayers, [593] who has been so long in a pitiable and sorrowful
   condition, and who is now in the thickness of popish darkness and
   superstition.--If you are out of Christ, and destitute of true faith in
   him, if your natures remain unrenewed and unsanctified, what is your
   state better than hers, which looks so sorrowful and distressing?
   Rather, is it not worse? When you consider, that in the fulness of the
   means of grace which you have enjoyed all your days, you are as far
   from any saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, as those who have lived in
   the dregs and abyss of popish ignorance, and know not what to believe,
   but what the church, that is, antichrist, tells them. If you die thus,
   your misery will be aggravated inconceivably beyond theirs: which
   Christ has plainly enough shown us, when he upbraided the cities
   wherein most of his mighty works were done, and tells them how much in
   the comparison they fall below Tyre and Sidon," (heathen cities,
   notorious for luxury, debauchery, and the grossest idolatry,) "and
   Sodom; for whom it should be more tolerable than for them."

   The same author says also, even in the book under consideration, (p.
   86.) "That the unbelief and impieties of visible saints, is what they
   will be punished for above all men in the world."

   And now, I think it may be proper for Mr. W. himself to answer his 5th
   question, which he puts to my serious consideration, viz. "What honour
   is it to our Lord Jesus Christ, to treat visible saints in such a
   manner, when at the same time it is his revealed will they should be
   outwardly treated as visible saints?"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [591] How small a proportion are there of the vast multitudes, that in
   the time of the late religious commotion through the land had their
   consciences awakened who give hopeful abiding evidences of a saving
   conversion to God!

   [592] Here I would observe, that not only in the general do
   unsanctified men, notwithstanding their moral sincerity, thus live in
   the most heinous wickedness; but particularly, according to Mr. W.s own
   doctrine, their very attendance on the outward ordinances and duties of
   worship, is the vilest, most flagrant, and abominable impiety. In his
   sermons on Christ a King and Witness, (p. 77, 78.) he says, "If a man
   could perform all the outward acts of worship and obedience, which the
   Bible requires, from the beginning to the end of it. and not do them
   from faith in Christ, and love to God, and not express by them the
   thoughts, desires, and actings of his soul; they would be so far from
   being that obedience which Christ requires, that they would be a
   mocking of God, and hateful to him. These outward acts ought to be no
   other, and in religion are designed to stand for nothing else, but to
   be representations of a man's soul, and the acts of that. And when they
   are not so. they are in their own nature a lie, and false pretence of
   something within, which is not there: Therefore the Lord abhors them,
   and reckons these false pretences the vilest wickedness.--Now when a
   man performs all outward obedience and worship, but it does not come
   from his heart, he practically denies the omniscience of Christ, while
   he puts before him a show and pretence of something for the reality;
   and so he belies his own profession. And all this, be it more or less,
   whatever it pretends to be of religion, instead of being that which
   Christ requires, is entirely different from it, yea. infinitely
   contrary to it. And those same actions, which when they are the
   language of the heart, and flow from it, are pleasing and acceptable to
   God and Jesus Christ, are true obedience to him; when they do not, are
   reckoned the most flagrant and abominable impiety, and threatened with
   the severest damnation of hell."--Now, who can believe, that God has,
   by his own holy institution, made that sort of sincerity, which is
   nothing better than what is consistent with such a lying, vile,
   abominable, flagrantly wicked pretence and show of religion as this,
   the very thing that gives a right, even in his sight, to christian
   sacraments. I might here also observe, that if moral sincerity or
   common grace gives a right to sacraments in the sight of God, then that
   which (according to Mr. S - d's doctrine before observed) is a spirit
   of lust, that which is contrary to, and at war with, and would destroy
   saving grace, is the thing which gives a right in the sight of God to
   christian sacraments.

   [593] Mrs. Eunice Williams, brought up in Canada, among the Caghnawaga
   Indians, sister to the then pastor of the church in Mansfield, where
   this sermon was preached, upon a day of prayer kept on her account; she
   being, then in that place on a visit.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   A view of what Mr. W. says concerning the public covenanting of
   professors.

   I. Mr. W. often speaks with contempt, of my supposing it to be a duty
   required of such as come to sacraments, that they should explicitly own
   the covenant, and disputes largely against it. (p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
   20, 21, 22. and many other places.) He says concerning me, (p. 22. a.
   b.) "It is very unhappy, that this good gentleman should use the
   Scripture in such a manner, to prove a divine institution which never
   had an existence; and after all that is said, is but a mere imagination
   and chimera; it being evident, there never was any such divine
   institution for the church under the Old Testament, binding particular
   persons publicly and explicitly to own the covenant, in order to their
   enjoying the outward ordinances of it." However, it falls out something
   happily for me, that I am not quite alone in the chimera, but have Mr.
   W. himself to join me in it; who abundantly asserts the same thing, (p.
   5. c. p. 8. a. p. 9. b. c. and many other places,) who uses the
   Scripture in the same manner, and supposes the same divine institution;
   and who, (in p. 5. b. c. of the treatise in hand,) having stated the
   following inquiry, "What is that evidence, which by divine appointment
   the church is to have, of the saintship of those who are admitted to
   the outward privileges of the covenant of grace?" makes this answer to
   it: "The scripture has determined the matter thus, that the open
   profession and declaration of a person's believing in Christ,--and a
   hearty consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, and engagement on
   his part to fulfil it," &c. " is the sole and entire ground of that
   public judgment, which the church is to make of the real saintship of
   professors." It is manifest, he cannot intend merely that they should
   be the posterity of such as thus owned the covenant, or declared their
   consent to it, and so are looked upon as those that owned the covenant
   in their ancestors, at the beginning of the covenant line; (though
   sometimes he seems to suppose, this is all that is necessary, as I
   shall take particular notice by and by;) for here he expressly speaks
   of a personal owning the covenant, or the open profession and
   declaration of a person's consent to the covenant. And thus he often
   speaks of the same matter, in like manner, as a personal thing, or what
   is done by the person judged of, and received. (See p. 10. c. d. 31. e.
   32. e. 33. a. 34. b. c. 73. b 84. a. 139. a.) And in the second page of
   his preface, he declares himself fully established in Mr. S---d's
   doctrine concerning this affair of qualifications for the Lord's
   supper; who expressly declare it to be his judgment, that " It is
   requisite, that persons be not admitted unto communion in the Lord's
   supper, without making a personal and public profession of their faith
   and repentance." (Appeal, p. 93, 94.)

   And as Mr. W. holds, that there must be a public personal owning of the
   covenant; so he also maintains, that this profession must be explicit,
   or express. He says, (p. 20. d. e.) "Since we have no direction in the
   Bible, at what time nor in what manner any personal explicit
   covenanting should be performed,--it appears plain to a demonstration,
   that the people knew nothing of any such institution; as I suppose, the
   christian church never did, till Mr. Edwards discovered it." But if I
   was the first discoverer, he should have owned, that since I have
   discovered it, he himself, and all my opposers, have seen cause to
   follow me, and receive my discovery. For so the case seems to be, if he
   gives us a true account (in p. 132. b.) where he rejects, with
   indignation, the imputation of any other opinion. "How often (says he)
   has Mr. Edwards said, none but visible saints are to be admitted? Do
   not all Mr. Edwards's opposers say, that no man is to be admitted, who
   does not profess his hearty belief of the gospel, and the earnest and
   sincere purpose of his heart, so far as he knows it, to obey all God's
   commands, and keep his covenant? None, who do not make as full and
   express a profession as the Israelites did, or was ever required by
   Christ or his apostles, in any instances that can be produced in the
   Bible, of bodies of men or particular persons admitted into visible
   covenant with God?"--He had before spoken of the words which the
   Israelites used in their entering into covenant with God. (p. 5. d.)
   Which must refer to their entering into covenant in the wilderness; for
   we have no account of any words at all used by that nation, at their
   entering into covenant, if not there. And this he sometimes speaks of
   as the covenant they made, when God took them into covenant. (p. 8. d.
   36. d. e. 37. a. b.) And (p. 20.) he allows that to be an instance of
   explicit covenanting: but ridicules my pretending to show, that
   explicit covenanting was a divine institution for all; when, he says,
   we have an account of but four instances of any explicit covenanting
   with God by the Jews, and those on most extraordinary occasions, and by
   the body of the people. But what matter is it, whether there were four,
   or but two, or only that one instance in the wilderness? when he
   himself with such earnestness declares, that all my opposers hold,
   every man must make as full and express a profession of the covenant as
   ever the Israelites did, or was ever required, in any instance that can
   be produced in the Bible, whether of bodies of men or particular
   persons' admission, &c. If this be so, and what he said before be also
   true, then all Israel, even every individual person among them, that
   ever was admitted to the privileges of the church, throughout all their
   generations, by his own confession and assertion, did personally make
   as explicit a profession of the covenant, as the body of the people did
   in that instance in the wilderness. And not only so, but the same must
   every individual person do, that ever comes to sacraments, through all
   ages, to the end of the world.--Thus Mr. W. fights hard to beat down
   himself. But I will not say in his own language, that in so doing he
   fights hard to beat down a poor man of straw.

   If any should say, that Mr. W. when speaking of an express profession,
   does not mean a profession in words, but only in actions; such as an
   outward attendance on ordinances and duties of worship: I answer, if
   such actions are a profession, yet certainly they are not an express
   profession; they are no more than an implicit profession. And besides,
   it is very plain, the profession he speaks of is a profession in words.
   Thus (p. 36. b.) when describing the profession which ought to be made,
   he says, "It is in as strong words, as were used by any whom the
   apostles admitted." And elsewhere (as was before noted) he often
   insists, that a profession should be made in words without any
   discrimination as to their meaning. Which shows, it is a profession in
   words, that he designs. And although (p. 104. e.) he speaks of a
   performance of the outward duties of morality and worship, as the only
   way that God ever appointed of making real saintship visible: yet this
   is only another instance of his great inconsistence with himself; as
   appears by what has already been observed, and appears further by this,
   that when he speaks of a profession of consent to the terms of the
   covenant, &c. he often speaks of it as a profession which ought to be
   made in order to admission to these ordinances, (p. 5. b. c. 10. a 35.
   e. 36. a. b. c. 132. b. and other places.) If so, then how can the
   attendance itself, on these ordinances of worship, be all the
   profession which is to be made? Must men first come to ordinances, in
   order to admission to ordinances? And moreover, Mr. W. himself
   distinguishes between engaging and swearing to keep covenant in the
   public profession, and attending on the ordinances and duties of
   worship, which he speaks of as belonging to the fulfilment of the
   engagement and oath. (p. 130.) And lastly I would observe, though it
   could be consistently made out (which it never can) that Mr. W. does
   not mean a professing in words, it would be nothing to the purpose. If
   it be in words, or in other signs which are equivalent to words, and
   which are a full and express profession, (as Mr. W. says,) it is
   exactly the same thing as to my purpose, and the consequence of the
   argument, which was, that real godliness must be professed. And indeed
   this very thing which I endeavoured to prove by all that I said on this
   head, is expressly again and again allowed by Mr. W. Yet he makes a
   great ado, as if there was a vast difference between him and me in this
   affair of public covenanting with God; and as though my notions of it
   were very singular, absurd, and mischievous.

   II. Mr. W. says a great deal in opposition to me, to show that swearing
   by God's name, swearing to the Lord, and the like, do not mean
   covenanting with God: but yet (in p. 18.) in the midst of his earnest
   dispute against it, he owns it.--I mentioned several prophecies,
   referring to the Gentile converts in the days of the gospel, which
   foretell that they should swear by God's name, swear to the Lord of
   hosts, &c. as a prediction of the Gentiles publicly covenanting with
   God; using that as one thing which confirmed, that this was commonly
   the meaning of such phrases in the Old Testament. But Mr. W. despises
   my interpretation of these prophecies, and my argument from them.
   Nevertheless, in his reply, he owns the very thing: he in effect owns,
   that entering into covenant, and owning the covenant, is what is meant
   by these prophecies; mentioning this, plainly with approbation, as the
   universal sense of protestant commentators. His words are, (p. 18. d.
   e.) "As to all these prophecies, which Mr. Edwards has quoted,
   referring to the Gentiles, and their swearing by the name of the Lord,
   the sense of protestant commentators upon them, I think, universally
   is, that when the Gentiles in God's appointed time should be brought
   into covenant with God, it should be as the Jews were, by being
   persuaded to consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, and
   engaging themselves to God, to be faithful to him, and keep covenant
   with him. He who heartily consents to the terms of the covenant of
   grace, gives up himself to the Lord, gives the hand to the Lord,
   engages to own and serve him; which is the thing signified in all those
   metaphorical phrases, which describe or point out this event, in the
   Old-Testament language."

   III. Mr. W. in these last-cited words, explains the phrase of giving
   the hand to the Lord, as signifying engaging themselves to God in
   covenant, and consenting to the terms of the covenant, and yet in the
   next page but two, he contemns and utterly disallows my interpreting
   the same phrase in the same manner. Mr. W. says, (p. 21. c.) " As to
   the words of Hezekiah, when he called the Israelites to the passover,
   bidding them yield or give the hand to the Lord; and in Ezra, they gave
   the hand to put away their wives; which he thinks to be a Hebrew phrase
   for entering into covenant; it carries its own confutation with it."

   IV. Mr. W. often speaks of the professions made by the ancient
   Israelites and Jewish Christians, when they entered into covenant, and
   were admitted into the church. Whereas, according to the doctrine of
   the same author, in the same book, we have no account of any profession
   made by either, on any such occasion. For he insists, that the children
   of such as are in covenant, are born in covenant; and are not admitted
   into covenant, any otherwise than as they were seminally in their
   ancestors; and that the profession of their ancestors, at the head of
   the covenant line, is that individual profession, which brings them
   into covenant. His words are, (p. 135. e. 136. a. b. c.) "It is one and
   the same individual profession and engagement, which brings them and
   their children into covenant. And if there is one instance in the
   Bible, where God ever took any man into covenant, and not his children
   at the same time, I should be glad to see it. It is by virtue of their
   being in covenant, that they have a right to the seals. And if these
   children are not cast out of covenant by God, their children have as
   good a right to the seals as they had. It is God's will, that his mark
   and seal should be set upon them, and their children, and their
   children for ever, till God casts them out of covenant. It is certain,
   they have an interest in the covenant, and they have a right to the
   privileges of the covenant so long as they remain in covenant; and that
   is, till God cuts them off, and casts them out."

   And accordingly he supposes, that John the Baptist never inquired into
   the doctrinal knowledge of those he baptized, because they were already
   in covenant with God, and members of his visible church, and not yet
   turned out: and he suggests, that John knew many of them not to be of a
   good moral character, (p. 98.) So he largely insists, that the three
   thousand Jews and proselytes that the apostles baptized, (Acts ii.)
   were not taken into covenant, but only continued in covenant. (p. 46,
   47.) So he supposes the eunuch, before Philip baptized him, was a
   member of the church, and in covenant with God. (p. 50.) Though he
   inconsistently mentions those same persons in the 2d of Acts, and the
   eunuch, as admitted into the church by the apostles, and primitive
   ministers. (p. 9. e. p. 10. a. p. 59. a.) And so (p. 8. d. p. 26. a.)
   he mentions God's taking all Israel into covenant: he mentions the
   profession which the Israelites made, (p. 25. e.) and (p. 5. d.) he
   speaks of the words which the Israelites used, in their entering into
   covenant with God. And (p. 36. d. e. p. 37. a. b.) he speaks of their
   profession in Moses's time, which God trusted so far as to admit them
   into covenant. Whereas indeed, according to Mr. W. they were not taken
   in, nor did they enter into covenant, neither in the plains of Moab,
   nor at mount Sinai. He says expressly, that they were in covenant
   before that time, when in Egypt, being taken in their ancestors,
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (p. 91. b.) But then we read of no words
   that these patriarchs used at their entering into covenant.--And it
   will undoubtedly follow, on Mr. W.s principles, that we must go further
   back still for Israel's being taken into covenant; we must go up even
   to Adam himself, the first father of mankind, who was visibly in
   covenant, and so his posterity, in the line of Noah's ancestors,
   without the line being broken by a visible cutting off, and casting out
   by God, as we have all reason to suppose. And after the flood, we have
   reason to think, God had a covenant race continued in Shem's posterity,
   especially in the line of Abraham's ancestors. And though Terah,
   Abraham's father, was tainted with the then prevailing idolatry; yet
   there is no appearance of the line being then cut off in the way Mr. W.
   speaks of, by God's visibly casting him out. On the contrary, God took
   a special fatherly care of him and his children, in bringing them from
   Ur of the Chaldees, the land of graven images, to Haran. (Gen. xi. 31.)
   And God is called the God of the father of Abraham and Nahor, that is,
   the God of Terah. (Gen. xxxi. 53.) And if it be said, that in Abraham
   began a new dispensation of the covenant; so that Abraham might
   properly on that account be said to be taken into covenant, as though
   his ancestors had not been in covenant: I answer, The alteration of the
   dispensation was in no measure so great as that after Christ's
   resurrection and ascension; and yet Mr. W. will not allow, that the
   Jewish converts, received (Acts ii.) on this new dispensation, were any
   more than continued in covenant, and in the church. So that, according
   to Mr. W.s scheme, it must be Adam's profession of religion, that was
   the individual profession which made all his posterity, in the line of
   the church, even to the apostles' days, visible saints, or (as he
   himself explains visible saintship) such as we have rational ground to
   think are real saints, possessed of gospel-holiness; and on that
   account have a right to sacraments. For so he says it is with the
   children of them that are in covenant, and their children, and their
   children for ever, till cut off and cast out by God.

   So that now we have the scheme in a true view of it.--The Pharisees and
   Sadducees that John baptized, whom Mr. W. supposes John knew to be not
   of a good moral character, and whose doctrinal knowledge he did not
   inquire into before he baptized them; because they had before been
   admitted in their ancestors; even these were visible saints, and such
   as John had rational ground to think had sufficient doctrinal knowledge
   and were orthodox and real saints, having moral evidence that they had
   gospel-holiness, because Adam their original ancestor made a profession
   of religion, in words of double meaning, without any marks of
   distinction or discrimination, by which any might know their meaning.

   And if we should go back no further than Abraham, it would not much
   mend the matter; supposing the case had been so, that we had the words
   of both Abraham's and Adam's profession written down in our Bibles:
   whereas, we have neither; no, nor have we the words of the profession
   of any one person, either in the Old Testament or New, at their being
   taken into the church, if the things which Mr. W. says are true; though
   he speaks so often of professions, and words of professions, and
   declarations, made on such occasions, as if we had an express account
   of them in Scripture.

   V. As our author abundantly maintains, that unsanctified men in
   covenanting with God, may and do promise the exercise of saving faith,
   repentance, love, &c.; so he holds, that they promise to begin the
   exercise of these graces immediately, from this moment, and to live in
   them from henceforth. (p. 25. c. e. and 26. a. and 28. a. c. 76. a. b.)

   Now I desire this matter may be looked into, and thoroughly
   examined.--Not only the Holy Scriptures, and agreeable to them, Mr.
   Stoddard, and sound divines in general, teach us, but Mr. W. himself
   maintains, that men who are unsanctified do for the present refuse and
   oppose these things. In a forecited place of his sermon on Isaiah xlv.
   11. our author says, that unregenerate and unsanctified men oppose all
   means for bringing them to these things, are willingly without them,
   and labour to find out all manner of difficulties and hinderances in
   the way of them; and if they pray for them, do not desire they should
   come yet, but would stay a while longer. Now, how is this consistent
   with such persons promising, with any sincerity at all, that they will
   comply with and perform these things immediately, from henceforth,
   without staying one moment longer? If God calls a man this moment to
   yield his whole heart to him in faith, love, and new obedience; and if
   he in answer to the call solemnly promises and swears [594] to God,
   that he will immediately comply with the call, without the least delay,
   and does it with any sincerity, how does he now willingly refuse,
   oppose, and struggle against it, as choosing to stay a while longer?

   Besides, such promises and oaths of unregenerate men must not only be
   contrary to sincerity, but very presumptuous, upon these two accounts.
   (1.) Because herein they take an oath to the Most High, which, it is
   ten thousand to one, they will break as soon as the words are out of
   their mouths, by continuing still unconverted; yea, an oath which they
   are breaking even while they are uttering it. And what folly and
   wickedness is it for men to take such oaths! and how contrary to the
   counsel given by the wise man, in Eccl. v. 2-6.! And to what purpose
   should ungodly men be encouraged to utter such promises and oaths
   before the church, for the church's acceptance; which are so far from
   being worthy to be credited, or a fulfilment of them to be expected,
   that it is many thousands, and perhaps millions, of times more likely
   to be otherwise? That is, it is so much more likely they will not be
   converted the very next moment.--(2.) When an unconverted man makes
   such a promise, he promises what he has not to give, or that for which
   he has no sufficiency. There is indeed a sufficiency in God to enable
   him; but he has no claim to it. For God's helping a man savingly to
   believe in Christ is a saving blessing: and Mr. W. himself owns, that a
   man cannot by promise claim any saving blessings, till he has fulfilled
   the conditions of the covenant of grace. (p. 22. e. and 28. e.) So that
   in vain it is said by Mr. W. (p. 27. e.) " I pray that it may be
   thoroughly considered what is propounded in the covenant of grace, and
   on what stock a man is to finish." Meaning (as appears by the sequel)
   the stock of God's sufficiency. To what purpose is this said? when the
   covenant of grace promises or makes over no such stock to him who has
   no interest in the promises of it, as having not yet complied with the
   condition of its promises. Nor does an unconverted man promise any
   thing in an humble dependence on that stock; no such men do lay hold on
   God's strength, or trust in God's sufficiency. For this is a
   discriminating mark of a true saint; as our author himself observes, in
   that forecited passage in his Sermons on Christ a King and Witness, p.
   19. c.

   I would here take notice of it as remarkable, that though Mr. W. had
   owned that a natural man can claim no saving blessings by God's
   promise, yet to help out his scheme of a natural man engaging and
   promising, even with an oath, the exercises of saving grace, he (in p.
   27, 28. especially p. 28. e.) speaking of the great encouragement on
   which unsanctified men can promise these things, supposes God has given
   such encouragement to them who promise and engage themselves to God,
   with that degree of earnestness and sincerity which he often speaks of
   as requisite to communion, that we have reason to determine that God
   never will fail of bestowing on them saving grace; so that they shall
   fulfil their promises. I say, he supposes that we have reason to
   determine this, because he himself determines it. His words are
   these:--"Though there be no promise of saving good, exclusive of faith,
   yet there being a command and encouragement, there are suitable springs
   of his endeavour and hope, in his engaging himself to God, and casting
   himself upon his mercy with all the earnestness and sincerity he can.
   God never will be worse than his encouragement, nor do less than he has
   encouraged; and he has said, To him that hath shall be given." Now if
   this be so, and if this will make it out, that an unconverted man who
   is morally sincere may reasonably, on this encouragement, promise
   immediately to believe and repent, though this be not in his own power;
   then it will follow, that whenever an unconverted man covenants, with
   such moral sincerity as gives a lawful right to sacraments, God never
   will fail of giving him converting grace that moment, to enable him
   from thenceforward to believe and repent, as he promises. And if this
   be so, and none may lawfully covenant with God without moral sincerity,
   (as Mr. W. also says,) then it will follow, that never any one person
   comes, nor can come, lawfully to the Lord's supper, in an unconverted
   state; because when they enter into covenant lawfully, (supposing them
   not converted before,) God al-ways converts them in the moment of their
   covenanting, before they come to the Lord's table.--And if so, what is
   become of all this grand dispute about the lawfulness of persons coming
   to the Lord's table, who have not converting grace?

   VI. Mr. W. greatly misrepresents me from time to time, as though I had
   asserted, that it is impossible for an unsanctified man to enter into
   covenant with God; and that those who were sanctified among the
   Israelites, did not enter into covenant with God; that the pretended
   covenanting of such is not covenanting, but only lying, wilful lying;
   and that no natural man can own the covenant, but that he, certainly
   lies, knows he lies, and designedly lies, in all these things, when he
   says them. (p. 26. d. 22. d. 24. d. 31. a. b. c. 21. c.) Whereas, I
   never said nor supposed any such thing. I never doubted but that
   multitudes of unsanctified persons, and in all ages of the christian
   church, and in this age, and here in New England, have entered visibly,
   and in profession, into the covenant of grace, and have owned that
   covenant, and promised a compliance with all the duties of it, without
   known or wilful lying; for this reason, because they were deceived, and
   did not know their own hearts: and that they (however deceived) were
   under the obligations of the covenant, and bound by their engagements
   and promises. And that in that sense, they were God's covenant people,
   that by their own binding act they were engaged to God in covenant;
   though such an act, performed without habitual holiness, be an unlawful
   one. If a thing be externally devoted to God, by doing what ought not
   to have been done, the thing devoted may, by that act, be the Lord's:
   as it was with the censers of Korah and his company. (Num. xvi. 37,
   38.)

   What I asserted, was, that none could profess a compliance with the
   covenant of grace, and avouch jehovah to be their God, and Christ to be
   their Saviour, i.e. that they are so by their own act and choice, and
   yet love the world more than jehovah without lying, or being deceived.
   [595] And that he who is wholly under the power of a carnal mind, which
   is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, cannot promise to
   love God with all his heart and with all his soul, without either great
   deceit, or the most manifest and palpable absurdity. Inasmuch as
   promising supposes the person to be conscious to himself, or persuaded
   of himself, that he has such a heart in him; because his lips pretend
   to declare his heart, and the nature of a promise implies real
   intention, will, and compliance of heart. [596] And what can be more
   evident than these propositions? Surely they that reject the covenant
   of grace in their hearts (as Mr. W. owns all unsanctified men do)
   cannot own it with their lips, without either deceiving or being
   deceived. Words cannot be a true signification of more than is in the
   mind. Inward covenanting, as Mr. S. taught, is by an act of saving
   faith. (Safety of Ap. p. 85. e. 86. a.) And outward covenanting is an
   expression of inward covenanting; therefore, if it be not attended with
   inward covenanting, it is a false expression. And Mr. W. in effect owns
   the same thing; for he says, (p. 21. b.) " That there is no doubt they
   who are wilful obstinate sinners, deal deceitfully and falsely when
   they pretend to covenant with God." But so do all unregenerate sinners
   under the gospel, according to Mr. Stoddard and his own doctrine. And
   thus the very point, about which he contests so earnestly and so long,
   and with so many great words, is, in the midst of it all, given up
   fully, by his own concession.

   VII. Mr. W. is greatly displeased with my saying (as above) that none
   who are under the power of a carnal mind can visibly own the covenant,
   without lying or being deceived, &c. And he finds great fault with my
   gloss on Psal. lxxviii. 36, 37. "They did flatter him with their mouth,
   and lied to him with their tongue:" which I interpret, as though they
   lied in pretending that respect to God, which indeed they had not. (p.
   35. a. of my Inquiry.) But he insists, that what is meant is only their
   lying in breaking their promise. (p. 24. e.) And he insists upon it,
   (as has been observed already,) that natural men may covenant with God
   and speak true. But it seems he has wonderfully changed his mind of
   late; for a little while ago he declared elsewhere for the very same
   things which he here inveighs against, and spoke of natural men's
   profession and pretence of respect to God, as being actually a lie in
   its own nature; and not only becoming so by their breaking covenant
   afterwards. Particularly, it is remarkable, he has thus interpreted
   this very text now in dispute. In his sermons on Christ a King and
   Witness, speaking of the outward acts of worship done by those that do
   not love God nor believe in Christ, he expressly says, (p. 77.) They
   are in their own nature a lie; a false pretence of something within,
   that is not there.--See (says Mr. W.) this interpretation of it, in
   Psal. lxxviii. 34-37. "They did flatter him with their mouths; they
   lied to him with their tongues," &c.--(Ibid. p. 74. b. e.) "Christ's
   visible church are such as visibly and outwardly profess to be his
   subjects, and act outwardly as if they believed on him. But these
   outward acts in themselves are not that religion and obedience, which
   Christ requires; nay, of themselves, they have no religion in them; and
   Christ has nothing to do with them, but as they are the fruits and
   expressions of the heart, as they are the language and index of the
   mind and conscience, and outward declarations of the inward frame,
   tempers and acting, of the soul. If they are not so, they are so far
   from having any religion in them, that they are hateful to him, being
   only the visible resemblance, the pretence and feigning, of religion;
   i.e. they are mockery, hypocrisy, falsehood, and lies; and belong not
   to the kingdom of Christ, but of the devil."--Let the reader now
   compare this with my gloss on the text.

   Thus I have considered the various pans and principles of Mr. W.s
   scheme, which are the foundations on which he builds all his
   superstructure, and the ground on which he proceeds in all his
   reasonings, through his book; and many particulars in his answers and
   arguments have been already considered.--Mr. W. says thus, (p. 135.a.)
   "I own, that at present I have no more expectation to see the scheme
   which Mr. Edwards aims to establish, defended upon Calvinistic
   principles, than the doctrine of transubstantiation." On which I shall
   only say, it might perhaps be thought very impertinent in me, to tell
   my readers what I do or what I do not expect, concerning his scheme.
   Every reader, that has reason enough of his own not to take the big
   words and confident speeches of others for demonstration, is now left
   to judge for himself, whose scheme is most akin to the doctrine of
   transubstantiation, for inconsistence and self-contradiction.
   Nevertheless, I will proceed to consider our author's reasonings a
   little more particularly, in the ensuing part.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [594] It must be observed, that Mr. W. often speaks of the promise
   which an unregenerate man makes in covenanting with God, as his oath.
   P. 18. d. p.100. p 101. a. p. 129. a p. 130. c. p. 143. b.

   [595] See my Inquiry, p. 33, 34.

   [596] Ibid. p.37,38.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   containing some remarks on mr. williams's exceptionable way of
   reasoning, in support of his own scheme, and in opposition to the
   contrary principles.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   General observations upon his way of arguing, and answering arguments;
   with some instances of the first method excepted against.

   Mr. W. endeavours to support his own opinion, and to confute the book
   he pretends to answer, by the following methods.

   1. By frequently misrepresenting what I say, and then disputing or
   exclaiming against what he wrongfully charges as mine.

   2. By misrepresenting what others say in their writings, whose opinions
   he pretends to espouse.

   3. By seeming to oppose and confute arguments, and yet only saying
   things which have no reference at all to them, but relate entirely to
   other matters, that are altogether foreign to the argument in hand.

   4. By advancing new and extraordinary notions; which are both
   manifestly contrary to truth, and also contrary to the common
   apprehensions of the christian church in all ages.

   5. By making use of peremptory and confident assertions, instead of
   arguments.

   6. By using great exclamation, in the room of arguing; as though he
   would amuse and alarm his readers, and excite terror in them, instead
   of rational conviction.

   7. By wholly overlooking arguments, and not answering at all;
   pretending, that there is no argument, nothing to answer; when the case
   is manifestly far otherwise.

   8. By frequently turning off an argument with this reflection, that it
   is begging the question; when there is not the least show or pretext
   for it.

   9. By very frequently begging the question himself, or doing that which
   is equivalent.

   10. By often alleging and insisting on things in which he is
   inconsistent with himself.

   As to the first of these methods used by Mr. W. i.e. his
   misrepresenting what I say, and then disputing or exclaiming against
   what he injuriously charges as mine, many instances have been already
   observed: I now would take notice of some other instances.

   In p. 15. c. He charges me with "affirming vehemently, in a number of
   repetitions, that the doctrine taught is, that no manner of pretence to
   any visible holiness is made or designed to be made." These he cites as
   my words, marking them with notes of quotation. Whereas I never said or
   thought any such thing, but the contrary. I knew, that those whose
   doctrine I opposed, declared that visible holiness was necessary: and
   take particular notice of it, (p. 8.) where I say, "It is granted on
   all hands, that none ought to be admitted, as members of the visible
   church of Christ, but visible saints:" and argue on this supposition
   for fifteen pages together, in that same part of my book where Mr. W.
   charges me with asserting the contrary. What I say is, that people are
   taught, that they come into the church without any pretence to
   sanctifying grace, (p. 15. d.) I do not say, without a pretence to
   visible holiness. Thus Mr. W. alters my words, to make them speak
   something not only diverse but contrary to what I do say, and say very
   often; and so takes occasion, or rather makes an occasion, to charge me
   before the world, with telling a manifest untruth, (p. 15. d.)

   Again, Mr. W. in answering my argument concerning brotherly love, (p.
   70. e. 71. a.) represents me as arguing, "That in the exercise of
   christian love described in the gospel, there is such an union of
   hearts, as there cannot be of a saint to an unsanctified man." Which is
   a thing I never said, and is quite contrary to the sentiments which I
   have abundantly declared. I indeed speak of that brotherly love, as
   what cannot be of a saint to one that is not apprehended and judged to
   be sanctified. But that notion of a peculiar love, which cannot be to
   an unsanctified man--or without the reality of holiness in the person
   beloved--is what I ever abhorred, and have borne a most loud and open
   and large testimony against, again and again, from the press, [597] and
   did so in the preface to that very book which Mr. W. writes against.

   In p. 74. a. b. Mr. W. represents me as supposing, that in the
   sacrament of the Lord's supper, both the covenanting parties, viz.
   Christ and the communicant, seal to the truth of the communicant's
   faith; or that both seal to this as true, that the communicant does
   receive Christ. Whereas, by me, no such thing was ever thought; nor is
   any thing said that has such an aspect. What I say, is very plain and
   express, (p. 75.) "That Christ by his minister professes his part of
   the covenant, presents himself, and professes the willingness of his
   heart to be theirs who receive him. That on the other hand, the
   communicant in receiving the offered symbols, professes his part in the
   covenant, and the willingness of his heart to receive Christ who is
   offered." How different is this from both parties sealing to the truth
   of the communicant's faith!

   In p. 76, 77, and 80, he greatly misrepresents my argument from . "Let
   a man examine himself," &c. as though I supposed, the Greek word
   translated examine, must necessarily imply an examination to
   approbation; that it signifies to approve; and that a man's examination
   must mean his approving himself to himself to be sanctified. This
   representation he makes over and over, and builds his answer to the
   argument upon it; and in opposition to this, he says, (p. 77. c.)
   "Wherever the word means to examine to approbation, it is not used in
   its natural sense, but metonymically." Whereas, there is not the least
   foundation for such a representation: no such thing is said or
   suggested by me, as if I supposed that the meaning of the word is to
   approve, or to examine to approbation. What I say is, that it properly
   signifies proving or trying a thing, whether it be true and of the
   right sort. (p. 77. d.) And, in the same place, I expressly speak of
   the word (in the manner Mr. W. does) as not used in its natural sense,
   but metonymically, when it is used to signify approve. So that Mr. W.s
   representation is not only diverse from, but contrary to, what I say.
   Indeed I suppose (as well I may) that when the apostle directs persons
   to try themselves with respect to their qualifications for the Lord's
   supper, he would not have them come, if upon trial they find themselves
   not qualified. But it would be ridiculous to say, that I therefore
   suppose the meaning of the word, try or examine, is to approve, when it
   is evident that the trying is only in order to knowing whether a thing
   is to be approved, or disapproved.

   In p. 98. b. on the argument from John's baptism, Mr. W. alters my
   words, bringing them the better to comport with the odious
   representation he had made of my opinion, viz. that I required giving
   an account of experiences, as a term of communion; he puts in words as
   mine which are not mine, and distinguishes them with marks of
   quotation; charging me with representing it as " probable that John had
   as much time to inquire into their experiences as into their doctrinal
   knowledge."--Whereas, my words are these, (p. 101. a.) He had as much
   opportunity to inquire info the credibility of their profession, as he
   had to inquire into their doctrinal knowledge and moral character.

   In p. 118. d. (and to the like purpose, p. 134. c.) our author
   represents me, and others of my principles, as holding, That the gospel
   does peremptorily sentence men to damnation for eating and drinking
   without sanctifying grace. But surely Mr. W. would have done well to
   have referred to the place in my Inquiry, where any thing is said that
   has such an appearance. For, I find nothing that I have said in that
   book, or any other writing of mine, about the gospel peremptorily
   sentencing such men to damnation, or signifying how far I thought they
   were exposed to damnation, or expressing my sentiments more or less
   about the matter.

   In p. 130. e. and 131. a. Mr. W. says, " When one sees with what
   epithets of honour Mr. Edwards in some parts of his book has
   complimented Mr. Stoddard, it must look like a strange medley to tack
   to them;--That he was a weak beggar of his question; a supposer of what
   was to be proved; taking for granted the point in controversy;
   inconsistent with himself; ridiculously contradicting his own
   arguments." These expressions, which Mr. W. speaks of as tacked to
   those honourable epithets, he represents as expressions which I had
   used concerning Mr. Stoddard. And his readers that have not consulted
   my book, will doubtless take it so from his manner of representation.
   Whereas, the truth is, no one of these expressions is used concerning
   Mr. S. any where in my book; nor is there one disrespectful word spoken
   of him there. All the ground Mr. W. had to make such a representation,
   was, that in answering arguments against my opinion I endeavoured to
   show them to be weak, (though I do not find that I used that epithet,)
   and certainly for one to pretend to answer arguments, and yet allow
   them to be strong, would be to show himself to be very weak. In
   answering some of these arguments, and endeavouring to show wherein the
   inconclusiveness of them lay, I have sometimes taken notice that the
   defect lay in what is called begging the question, or supposing the
   thing to be proved. And if I had said so concerning Mr. S--d's
   arguments, speaking of them as his, I do not know why it should be
   represented as any personal reflection, or unhandsome dishonourable
   treatment of him. Every inconclusive argument is weak; and the business
   of a disputant is to show wherein the weakness lies: but to speak of
   arguments as weak, is not to call men weak.--All the ground Mr. W. has
   to speak of me as saying, that Mr. S. ridiculously contradicted his own
   arguments is, that (in p. 11.) citing some passages out of Mr. S--d's
   Appeal, I use these words; "But how he reconciled these passages with
   the rest of his treatise, I would modestly say, I must confess myself
   at a loss." And particularly I observed, that I could not see how they
   consist with what he says, p. 16. and so proceed to mention one thing
   which appears to me not well to consist with them. But certainly this
   is not indecently to reflect on Mr. S. any more than Mr. W. indecently
   reflects on the first reformers, in his answer to Mr. Croswell, (p. 74,
   75.) where speaking of their doctrine of a particular persuasion as of
   the essence of saving faith, he says, They are found inconsistent with
   themselves, and their doctrine lighter than vanity. And again, (p. 82.)
   If ever, (says Mr. W.) any men were confuted from their own
   concessions, these divines are. And more to the like purpose.--Which
   gives me a fair occasion to express the like wonder at him, as he does
   at me, (p. 131. a.) but I forbear personal reflections.

   Mr. W. (in the same p. d.) has these words; "And to say, that all
   unsanctified men do profess and seal their consent to the covenant of
   grace in the Lord's supper, when they know at the same time they do not
   consent to it, nor have their heart at all in the affair,--is something
   worse than begging the question,"--that is, as I suppose, (the same
   that he charged me with before,) telling a manifest untruth. By which
   he plainly suggests, that I have said thus. Whereas, I no where say,
   nor in any respect signify that I suppose, all unsanctified
   communicants do know that they do not consent to the covenant of grace.
   I never made any doubt, but that multitudes of unsanctified
   communicants are deceived, and think they do consent to it.

   In p. 132. d. he says of me, "The author endeavours to show, that the
   admitting unsanctified persons tends to the ruin and reproach of the
   christian church; and to the ruin of the persons admitted." But how
   widely different is this from what I express in the place he refers to!
   (Inq. p. 121. c.) That which I say there, is, that "by express liberty
   given, to open the door to as many as please, of those who have no
   visibility of real saintship, and make no profession of it, nor
   pretension to it, is a method which tends to the ruin and great
   reproach of the christian church, and also to the ruin of the persons
   admitted." I freely grant, and show abundantly in my book, it is never
   to be expected, that all unsanctified men can be kept out, by the most
   exact attendance on the rules of Christ, by those that admit members.

   In p. 136. d. Mr. W. wholly without grounds speaks of me as
   representing, that "unconverted men make pretension to nothing but what
   God's enemies have, remaining in open and avowed rebellion against
   him." Whereas, I suppose that some natural men do profess, and profess
   truly, many things, which those have not, who are open and avowed
   enemies of God. They may truly profess that sort of moral sincerity, in
   many things belonging to morality and religion, which avowed enemies
   have not: nor is there any sentence or word in my book, which implies
   or intimates the contrary.

   In p. 141. c. d. Mr. W. evidently insinuates, that I am one of those
   who "If men live never so strictly conformable to the laws of the
   gospel, and never so diligently seek their own salvation, to outward
   appearance, yet do not stick to speak of them, and act openly towards
   them, as persons giving no more public evidence, that they are not the
   enemies of God and haters of Jesus Christ, than the very worst of the
   heathen." But surely every one that has read my book, every one that
   knows my constant conduct, and manner of preaching, as well as writing,
   and how much I have written, said, and done, against judging and
   censuring persons of an externally moral and religious behaviour, must
   know how injurious this representation of me is.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [597] Marks of a Work of the True Spirit, p. 101, 102.103,104. Thoughts
   on the Revival of Religion, from p. 292 to 303. Nature of Religious
   Affections, p. 85-87. Preface to Inquiry into Qualifications for
   Communion, p. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   Instances of the second thing mentioned as exceptionable in Mr. W.s
   method of managing this controversy; viz. His misrepresenting what is
   said in the writings of others, that he supposes favour his opinion.

   Perhaps instances enough of this have already been taken notice of; yet
   I would now mention some others.

   In what he says in reply to my answer to the eighth objection, he says,
   (p. 108.) "Mr. Stoddard does not say, If sanctifying Grace be necessary
   to a person's lawful partaking of the Lord's supper, then God would
   have given some certain rule, whereby those who are to admit them, may
   know whether they have such grace or not." Mr. W. there intimates (as
   the reader may see) as if Mr. S. spake so, that it is to be understood
   disjunctively, meaning, he would either have given some certain rule to
   the church who admit them, or else to the persons themselves: so that
   by one means or other, the Lord's supper might be restrained to
   converted men. And he exclaims against me for representing as though
   Mr. Stoddard's argument were concerning a certain rule, whereby those
   who are to admit them, may know whether they have grace, (see the
   foregoing page,) and speaks of it as nothing akin to Mr. S.s argument.
   Now let the reader take notice of Mr. S.s words, and see whether his
   argument be not something akin to this. He says expressly, (Appeal, p.
   75.) "God does not bind his church to impossibilities. If he had made
   such an ordinance, he would give gifts to his church, to distinguish
   sincere men from hypocrites, whereby the ordinance might have been
   attended.--The minor is also evident: he has given no such rule to his
   church, whereby it may be restrained to converted men. This appears,
   because by the rule that they are to go by, they are allowed to give
   the Lord's supper to many unconverted men. For all visible signs are
   common to men converted, and unconverted." So that Mr. S. in fact does
   say, If sanctifying grace be necessary to a person's lawful partaking
   of the Lord's supper, then God would have given some certain rule,
   whereby the church [those who are to admit them] may know," whether
   they have grace, or not. Though Mr. W. denies it, and says, this is
   nothing akin to Mr. S.s argument; contrary to the plainest fact.

   In p. 99. Mr. W. replying to my answer to the sixth objection,
   misrepresents Mr. Hudson, in the following passage. "This, (i. e.
   baptism,) says Mr. Hudson, makes them members of the body of Christ.
   And as for a particular explicit covenant, besides the general imposed
   on churches, I find no mention of it, no example, nor warrant for it,
   in all the Scripture."--Here Mr. W. is still manifestly endeavouring to
   discredit my doctrine of an explicit owning the covenant of grace; and
   he so manages and alters Mr. Hudson's words, as naturally leads the
   reader to suppose, that Mr. Hudson speaks against this: whereas, he
   says not a word about it. What Mr. H. speaks of, is not an explicit
   owning the covenant of grace, or baptismal covenant; but a particular
   church-covenant, by which a particular society bind themselves
   explicitly, one to another, jointly to carry on the public worship. Mr.
   Hudson's words are, (p. 19.) "I dare not make a particular explicit
   holy covenant to be the form of a particular church, as this
   description seemeth to do; because I find no mention of any such
   covenant, besides the general imposed on churches, nor example, nor
   warrant for it, in all the Scripture." And then afterwards Mr. Hudson
   says, "but it is the general covenant sealed by baptism, and not this,
   that makes them members of the body of Christ."--Mr. W. by citing
   distant passages in Mr. Hudson, and joining them, in his own way, by
   particles and conjunctions, which Mr. Hudson does not use, and leading
   out these words--To be the form of a particular church, as this
   description seemeth to do,--quite blinds the mind of his reader, as to
   Mr. Hudson's true sense, which is nothing to Mr. W.s purpose.--Mr.
   Hudson says not a word here against, or about an express or explicit
   covenanting, or owning the covenant in my sense: but in other places,
   in the same book, he speaks of it, and for it., as necessary for all
   Christians. Thus, (p. 69. b. c.) "There is one individual express,
   eternal covenant; not only on God's part,--but also it is one external,
   visible covenant, on men's part; which all Christians, as Christians,
   enter into, by their professed acceptance, and express restipulation,
   and promised subjection and obedience; though not altogether in one
   place, or at one time." He speaks again to the same purpose, p. 100.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Instances of the third thing observed in Mr. W.s manner of arguing,
   viz. His pretending to oppose and answer arguments, by saying things
   which have no reference to them, but relate to other matters, perfectly
   foreign to the subject of the argument.

   Such is his answer (p. 37, &c.) to my argument from Isa. lvi.
   Particularly from those words, Isaiah lvi. 6, 7. "Also the sons, of the
   stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, to love the
   name of the Lord, to be his servants,--even them will I bring to my
   holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer," &c. For I
   say nothing under that argument, (as Mr. W. in his answer presumes,)
   which supposes any antithesis or opposition here between the state of
   the Gentiles and eunuchs under the Old Testament, and under the gospel,
   as to terms of acceptance with God: nor any opposition, as to a greater
   necessity of sanctifying grace, to the lawful partaking of ordinances,
   under the gospel, than under the law; as Mr. W. also supposes in his
   arguings on this head. But the opposition I speak of, as plainly
   pointed forth in the chapter, is this: That whereas under the law, not
   only piety of heart and practice were required, but something else,
   even soundness of body and circumcision, it is foretold, that under the
   gospel, piety of heart and practice only should be required; that
   although they were eunuchs or uncircumcised, yet if it appeared that
   they loved the name of the Lord, &c. they should be admitted.

   So when I argued, that Christ, in the latter part of the 7th chap. of
   Matt.. representing the final issue of things, with regard to the
   visible church in general, speaks of all as those who had looked on
   themselves to be interested in him as their Lord and Saviour, and had
   an opinion of their good estate; though the hope of some was built on
   the sand, and others on a rock:--Mr. W. in his reply, (p. 40, 41.)
   entirely overlooks the argument, and talks about other things. He says,
   Christ does not find fault with those that cried, Lord, Lord, for
   entering into covenant, but for not keeping covenant, (p. 41. b.) Here
   he runs back to another thing, relating to another argument, to which
   this has no reference, which he dwells wholly upon; and says nothing to
   the argument I use in that place.

   So in his reply to what I say on the parable of the wheat and tares,
   (p. 98, &c.) he has entirely overlooked the argument. He says, to
   vindicate the objection, (p. 99.) "Which we think shows us the mind and
   will of Christ in this matter is, that his servants shall proceed only
   on certain established rules of his visible kingdom, and not upon any
   private rules of judging about them."--Whereas, I never said, or
   supposed, that Christ's servants must not proceed on certain
   established rules of his visible kingdom, or that they ought to go upon
   any private rules of judging; but particularly and largely expressed my
   mind to the contrary, in explaining the question; (Inq. p. 5.) "That it
   is properly a visibility to the eye of the public charity, and not of a
   private judgment, that gives a right to be received as visible saints
   by the public." And repeat the same thing again, p. 125. c. d.

   And as to what Mr. W. says in this place about infants being born in
   the church, it entirely diverts the reader to another point (which I
   shall hereafter particularly consider) wholly distinct from the subject
   of the argument; which is about rules of admission into the church,
   whenever they are admitted. If persons are born in the church in
   complete standing, as Mr. W. supposes, then they are not admitted at
   all, but in their ancestors. But, however, the question returns,
   whether ancestors that are unsanctified, can have a lawful right to
   come into the church? Mr. W. holds they may. The subject of the
   argument is about bringing in tares into the field, whenever they are
   brought in, whether sooner or later; and whether tares have a lawful
   right, by warrant from Christ, to be in the field; supposing this to
   intend the church of Christ. The argument I produced to the contrary
   was, that the tares were introduced contrary to the owner's design,
   through men's infirmity and Satan's procurement. Which argument, being
   entirely overlooked by my opponent, I desire it may be now particularly
   considered.

   When the devil brought in the tares, it is manifest, he brought in
   something that did not belong there; and therein counteracted the owner
   of the field, and did it under that very notion of crossing his design.
   An enemy (says the parable) hath done this. But how does this consist
   with the tares having a lawful right, by the owner's warrant and
   appointment, to have a standing in his field? If Christ by his
   institution has, in mercy to unsanctified men, given them a lawful
   right to come into the church, that it may be a means of their
   conversion; then it is a work of his kindness, as the compassionate
   Redeemer of souls, to bring them in; and not the doing of the great
   enemy and destroyer of souls. If the great Physician of souls has built
   his church, as an infirmary, in compassion to those that are sick, for
   this end, that they may be brought in and healed there; shall it be
   said with surprise, when such are found there, How came those sick
   people here? And shall the compassionate Physician, who built the
   hospital, make answer, An enemy hath done this?

   Besides, if Christ has appointed that unsanctified men should come into
   the church, in order to their conversion, it would be an instance of
   the faithfulness of his servants to bring in such. But the bringing in
   tares into the field, is not represented as owing to the faithfulness
   and watchfulness of the servants; but on the contrary, is ascribed to
   their sleepiness and remissness. They were brought in while they slept,
   who ought to have done the part of watchmen, in keeping them out, and
   preventing the designs of the subtle enemy that brought them
   in.--Perhaps some would be ready to make the reflection that those
   churches whose practice is agreeable to the loose principles Mr. W.
   espouses, do that at noon-day, in the presence of God, angels, and men,
   which the devil did in the dead of the night, while men slept!

   Again, Mr. W. in his reply to my argument from that christian brotherly
   love, which is required towards all members of the visible church, goes
   entirely off from the argument, to things quite alien from it. His
   first answer (p. 69. c.) is, that the exercise of this christian love
   is not the term of communion or admission into the visible church:
   which is perfectly foreign to the business. For the argument respects
   the object of this love, viz. visible saints, that are to be thus
   beloved; and not at all the qualifications of the inherent subject of
   it, or the person that exercises this love. If they that are admitted,
   are to be loved as true saints, or for the image of Christ appearing in
   them, or supposed to be in them, (as Mr. W. allows (p. 68. c.) then it
   will follow, that none are to be admitted, but such as can reasonably
   be the objects of christian love, or be loved as true saints, and as
   those who have the image of Christ appearing in them. Whether the
   exercise of this love be the term of communion, or not; yet if we are
   commanded to exercise this love to all that are admitted to communion,
   then it will certainly follow, that some reasonable ground for being
   thus beloved, must be a term of communion in such as a are admitted. To
   suppose it appointed, that we should love all that are admitted as true
   saints, and yet that it is not appointed that such as are admitted
   should exhibit any reasonable grounds for such a love, is certainly to
   suppose very inconsistent appointments. [598]

   Mr. W.s second answer (p. 70. b.) is no less impertinent; viz. That
   men's right to communion in gospel-ordinances does not depend upon the
   corruptions of other men, in their forbearing to love them. As if my
   argument were, that unless men are actually loved, as true saints, they
   have no right to communion! Whereas, the argument was very diverse,
   viz. That unless men have a right to be so loved, they have no right to
   communion. If men have an appearance, to reason, of being true saints,
   they may have a right to be loved as true saints, and to be admitted as
   such; however corrupt and void of love other men are: but without such
   an appearance to reason, it is no corruption, not to love them as true
   saints; unless it be corrupt, not to act without reason. [599] --As to
   Mr. W.'s third answer, and the misrepresentation it is built upon, it
   has already been taken notice of.

   In Mr. W.s reply to my answer to the first objection, (p. 81, &c.) he
   wholly leaves the argument, and writes in support and defence of other
   matters, quite different from those which I mentioned, or had any
   concern with. The objection which I mentioned, and which had been much
   insisted on by some against my opinion, was, That church-members are
   called disciples, or scholars; a name, that gives us a notion of the
   visible church as a school; and leads us to suppose, that all who
   profess that sort of faith and sincerity, which implies a disposition
   to seek christian learning and spiritual attainments, are qualified for
   admission. But Mr. W. says nothing at all in support of this objection.
   In answer to it, I endeavoured to show, that the name disciples given
   to church-members, does not argue that unsanctified persons are fit to
   be members. He says nothing to show that it does. He says, if it will
   not follow from Christ's visible church being represented as Christ's
   school, that it is in order to all good attainments; yet it is in order
   to all that they have not yet attained. Which is nothing to the
   purpose, but foreign to the thing in debate, viz. Whether sanctifying
   grace is one of those things which are not yet attained by those that
   are lawfully in the church. He there says nothing to prove that it is;
   and especially to prove it from the meaning of the word, disciples;
   which was the argument in hand. He insists, that men may be
   sufficiently subject to Christ as their master and teacher, in order to
   be in his school or church, without grace: but then the thing to be
   proved, was, that church-members being called disciples makes this
   evident, in order to support the argument or objection I was upon:
   which argument is entirely neglected throughout all his discourse under
   this head.

   So in his reply to my answer to the eleventh objection, (p. 123, &c.)
   he wholly neglects the argument, and labours to support a different
   one. I endeavoured, without concerning myself about the words of any
   argument in Mr. Stoddard's Appeal, to answer an argument abundantly
   used at Northampton against my doctrine, of unsanctified men not having
   a right to come to the Lord's supper; which was this, "You may as well
   say, that unsanctified men may not attend any other duty of worship:"
   and particularly, "You may as well forbid them to pray."--As for Mr.
   S.s objection, in these words, "If unsanctified men may attend all
   other ordinances or duties of worship, then they may lawfully attend
   the Lord's supper;" it was an argument I was not obliged to attend to
   in the words in which he delivered it, because it was not an argument
   brought against my scheme of things, but one very diverse: since it is
   not my opinion, that unsanctified men may attend all other ordinances,
   or duties of worship, besides the Lord's supper; for I do not suppose,
   such may offer themselves to baptism; which Mr. S. takes for granted,
   in his argument. And therefore what Mr. W. says in support of it, is
   quite beside the business. As to the argument I was concerned with,
   taken especially from the lawfulness of unsanctified men praying, to
   prove, that therefore it must be lawful for them to come to the Lord's
   supper, certainly if there be any consequence in it, the consequence
   depends on the truth of this supposition, that the same thing which
   makes it lawful for a man to pray, also makes it lawful for him to come
   to the Lord's supper. And seeing this position is proved to be not
   true, the argument falls to the ground. And Mr. W.s nice observations
   and distinctions, of a non obstante, and a simply and per se, are
   nothing to the purpose.

   This good reason (with several others) may be given, why the same that
   makes it lawful for a man to pray and hear the word, will not make it
   lawful for him to partake of sacraments, viz. that the sacraments are
   not only duties, but covenant privileges, and are never lawfully given
   or received but under that notion. Whereas, it is not so with prayer
   and hearing the word: and therefore they who have no interest in the
   covenant of grace, and are in no respect God's covenant people, may
   lawfully hear the word and pray. But it is agreed on all hands, that
   they who are not in some respect God's covenant people, may not come to
   sacraments: and the reason is this, because sacraments are covenant
   privileges. And this same reason will prove, that none but true
   believers, or those that have saving faith, the only condition of the
   covenant of grace, have a right to sacraments. For, as was observed
   before, the condition of any covenant is the condition of all the
   benefits or privileges of that covenant. (See Part II. sect. 8.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [598] "The apostles looked on all those, whom they gathered into
   churches or christian congregations to eat the Lord's supper, as having
   the truth dwelling in them: and so they behoved, every one of them, to
   look upon one another: seeing they could not love one another as
   brethren in the truth, without acknowledging that truth as dwelling in
   them. And so we see the apostles, in their writings to the churches,
   supposing all their members objects of this brotherly love.--Christ's
   visible church then is the congregation of those whom the apostle could
   call the saints and faithful in Christ Jesus."--Glass's Notes on
   Scripture Texts, Numb. 5. p. 32.

   [599] A good argument might also be drawn from the corruption of
   unsanctified men; for that they are all sounder the power of
   corruption, that they are not able to love saints, or any one else,
   with truly christian love. Agreeable to what Mr. Stoddard says in his
   three sermons, (p. 40 ) "Men are obliged to love their neighbours as
   themselves. But no natural men do in any measure live up to this rule;
   but men are great enemies one to another, hateful and hating one
   another. They do but little good one to another: they do a great deal
   of hurt one to another." Now is it reasonable to suppose, that such men
   have the proper qualifications, by divine institution, for a lawful
   right to be members of the visible family of God?
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   The fourth thing observed in Mr. W.s method of managing the
   controversy, particularly considered, viz. His advancing new and
   extraordinary notions, not only manifestly contrary to truth, but also
   to the common and received principles of the christian church.

   Thus it is with regard to many things which have already been taken
   notice of. As, that men may be ungodly, and yet truly profess to love
   God more than the world; that men may be professors of religion and
   have no true grace, and yet not be lukewarm, but serve God as their
   only master; that such may profess to be subject to Christ with all
   their hearts, and to give up all their hearts and lives to Christ, and
   speak true, &c. &c.

   I shall now take notice of another remarkable instance, viz. That Mr.
   W. in his reply to my argument from the epithets and characters given
   by the apostles to the members of visible christian churches, in their
   epistles, represents, (p. 56. d.) That there "is no difference in all
   the epithets and characters, which I had heaped up from the New
   Testament" from those that are given in the Old Testament, to the whole
   body of the Jewish church; which he elsewhere abundantly suppose to be
   the whole body of the Jewish nation; yea, even in their worst times,
   till the nation was rejected and cast off by God from being any longer
   his people; as I shall have occasion particularly to observe
   afterwards.

   That it may be the more easily judged, how manifestly this is contrary
   to truth, I shall here repeat some of those epithets and characters I
   before mentioned, to which Mr. W. has reference. This is very manifest
   concerning most of them; but that I may not be tedious, I will now
   rehearse but a few instances: viz. Being "made free from sin, and
   becoming the servants of righteousness;" Having "the spirit of
   adoption:" Being "the children of God, heirs of God, joint-heirs with
   Christ:" Being "vessels of mercy, prepared unto glory:" Being such "as
   do not live to themselves, nor die to themselves; but live to the Lord,
   and die unto the Lord;" and who "living and dying are the Lord's:"
   Being those that have "all things for theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos,
   or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
   things to come; because they are Christ's": Being "begotten through the
   gospel:" Being such as "shall judge the world:" Being "washed,
   sanctified, justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
   of our God:" Being "manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ,
   written not with ink, but by the Spirit or the living God; not in
   tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart:" Being such as
   "behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the
   same image, from glory to glory:" Being "chosen in Christ before the
   foundation of the world, that they should be holy and without blame
   before him in love; and predestinated unto the adoption of children:"
   Being "sealed by that holy spirit of promise:" Being "quickened, though
   once dead in trespasses and sins:" Being "made meet to be partakers of
   the inheritance of the saints in light:" Being "dead, and having their
   life hid with Christ in God;" and being those who, "when Christ who is
   our life shall appear, shall also appear with him in glory; having put
   off the old man with his deeds, and having put on the new man, which is
   renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him:" Being
   "begotten again to a living hope--to an inheritance incorruptible, and
   undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for them; who
   are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; who love
   Christ, though they have not seen him; in whom, though now they see him
   not, yet believing, they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
   glory; having purified their souls in obeying the truth through the
   Spirit; knowing him that is from the beginning; having their sins
   forgiven; having overcome the wicked one; having an unction from the
   Holy One, by which they know all things; who are now the sons of God;
   and who, when Christ shall appear, shall be like him, because they
   shall see him as he is."

   Now let the christian reader judge, with what face of reason our author
   could represent as though there were nothing in all these epithets and
   characters, more than used of old to be given to the whole nation of
   the Jews, and that even in times of their greatest corruption and
   apostacy, till the nation was rejected of God! One would think, there
   is no need of arguing the matter with any that have read the Bible.

   This representation of Mr. W.s is not only very contrary to truth, but
   also to the common sentiments of the christian church. Though I pretend
   not to be a person of great reading, yet I have read enough to warrant
   this assertion. I never yet (as I remember) met with any author that
   went the same length in this matter with Mr. W. but Mr. Taylor, of
   Norwich, in England, the author who lately has been so famous for his
   corrupt doctrine. In his piece which he calls A Key to the Apostolic
   Writings, where he delivers his scheme of religion, (which seems
   scarcely so agreeable to the christian scheme, as the doctrine of many
   of the wiser heathen,) he delivers the same opinion, and insists
   largely upon it; it being a main thing to establish his whole scheme.
   And it evidently appears, in the manner of his delivering it, that he
   is sensible it is exceeding far from what has hitherto been the
   commonly received sentiment in the christian world. He supposes that as
   all those epithets and characters belong to the whole nation of the
   Jews, even in their most corrupt times, so they belong to all
   christendom, even the most vicious parts of it; that the most vicious
   men, who are baptized, and profess to believe Jesus to be the Messiah,
   are "chosen before the foundation of the world, predestinated according
   to the foreknowledge of God, regenerated, justified, sanctified,
   children of God, heirs of God, joint-heirs with Christ, the spouse of
   Christ, the temple of God, made to sit together in heavenly places in
   Christ, being the family of heaven," &c. &c. And certainly he may with
   as good reason, and with the same reason, suppose this of all
   christendom, even the most vicious parts of it, as of the whole nation
   of the Jews, however corrupt, till there was a national rejection of
   them.

   Indeed, it is manifest there is no other way of evading the force of
   the argument from the epistles, but by falling into Taylor's scheme. If
   his scheme of religion be not true, then it is plain as any fact in the
   New Testament, that all the christian churches, through the whole
   earth, in the apostles' days, were constituted in the manner that I
   insist on. The Scripture says ten times as much to demonstrate this
   matter, as it does about the manner of discipline, officers and
   government of the church, or about the several parts of the public
   worship, or the sanctification of the christian sabbath.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. V.

   Instances of the fifth and sixth particulars, in Mr. W.s method of
   disputing, viz. his using confident and peremptory assertions, and
   great exclamations, instead of arguments.

   We have an instance of the former, in his reply to my answer to the
   14th objection, viz. That it is not unlawful for unsanctified men to
   carry themselves like saints. I objected against this, if thereby be
   meant, that they may lawfully carry themselves externally like saints
   in all respects, remaining ungodly; and mentioned some things which
   belonged to the external duty of godly men, which no ungodly man,
   remaining such, may do. To which Mr. W. makes no reply; but to prove
   the point says, "Mr. St--d knew, and all divines know, That the
   external carriage of some unsanctified men is to the outward
   appearance, and the public judgment of the church, the same with the
   carriage of the saints; and they know they are bound to such a
   behaviour." And this peremptory confident assertion is all the argument
   he brings to prove the thing asserted.

   Again, I observe, that sometimes Mr. W. uses great exclamation, as
   though he intended to alarm, and excite terror in his readers, and
   raise their indignation; though they are perhaps never likely to know
   for what. We have two very remarkable instances of this, (p. 136 and
   137.) where he says, "I shall further take notice of two extraordinary
   and surprising passages, if I understand them. And I have with great
   diligence tried to find out the meaning of them. One is p. 129. between
   the 17th and 23d lines; if it be rightly printed."--He does not quote
   my words; this mighty exclamation would have become too flat, and
   appeared ridiculous, if he had.--The passage referred to is in these
   words--"Indeed such a tendency (i. e. a tendency to irreligion and
   profaneness) it would have, to shut men out from having any part in the
   Lord, in the sense of the two tribes and half, Josh. xxii. 25. or to
   fence them out by such a partition-wall, as formerly was between Jews
   and Gentiles; and so to shut them out as to tell them, if they were
   never so much disposed to serve God, he was not ready to accept them:
   according to the notion the Jews seem to have had of the uncircumcised
   Gentiles." That is, plainly to shut them out so as to tell them, that
   let them have hearts never so well and piously disposed to love and
   serve God, their love and service could not be accepted.--This
   doubtless would have a tendency to discourage religion in men. And how
   the owning of it, is an owning my scheme to have such a tendency, I do
   not know. Mr. W. might as well have picked out any other sentence
   through all the 136 pages of the book, and called it an extraordinary
   postage, and stood astonished over it, and told how he was ready to
   doubt whether it was rightly printed, and what great diligence he had
   used to find out the meaning of it!

   The other extraordinary passage he stands thunderstruck with, is in
   these words; "May it not be suspected, that this way of baptizing the
   children of such as never make any proper profession of godliness, is
   an expedient originally invented for that very end, to give ease to
   ancestors with respect to their posterity, in times of great declension
   and degeneracy?"--Mr. W. knows, that through the whole of my book I
   suppose, this practice of baptizing the children of such as are here
   spoken of, is wrong; and so does he too; for he abundantly allows, that
   persons in order to be admitted to the privileges of visible saints,
   must make a profession of real piety, or gospel-holiness. And if it be
   wrong, as we are both agreed, then surely it is nothing akin to
   blasphemy, to suspect that it arose from some bad cause.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VI.

   Instances of the seventh particular observed in Mr. W's way of
   disputing, viz. His wholly overlooking arguments, pretending there is
   no argument, nothing to answer; when the case is far otherwise.

   Thus in his reply to my tenth argument, which was this, "It is
   necessary, that those who partake of the Lord's supper, should judge
   themselves truly and cordially to accept of Christ as their Saviour,
   and chief good; for this is what the actions, which communicants
   perform at the Lord's table, are a solemn profession of." I largely
   endeavoured (in p. 75, 76, and 77.) to prove this, from the nature of
   those significant actions, of receiving the symbols of Christ's body
   and blood when offered, representing their accepting the thing
   signified, as their spiritual food, &c. To all which Mr. W. says,(p.
   74. a.) "I do not find that Mr. Edwards has said any thing to prove the
   proposition, which is the whole argument offered here in proof of the
   point proposed to be proved, but only gives his opinion, or paraphrase,
   of the purport and nature of the sacramental actions."--Since Mr. W.
   esteems us it no argument, I desire it may be considered impartially
   whether there be any argument in it or no.

   These sacramental actions all allow to be significant actions: they are
   a signification and profession of something: they are not actions
   without a meaning. And all allow, that these external actions signify
   something inward and spiritual. And if they signify any thing
   spiritual, they doubtless signify those spiritual things which they
   represent. But what inward thing does the outward taking or accepting
   the body and blood of Christ represent, but the inward accepting
   Christ's body and blood, or an accepting him in the heart? And what
   spiritual thing is the outward feeding on Christ in this ordinance a
   sign of, but a spiritual feeding on Christ, or the soul's feeding on
   him? Now there is no other way of the soul's feeding on him, but by
   that faith, by which Christ becomes our spiritual food, and the
   refreshment and vital nourishment of our souls. The outward eating and
   drinking in this ordinance is a sign of spiritual eating and drinking,
   as much as the outward bread in this ordinance is a sign of spiritual
   bread; or as much as the outward drink is a sign of spiritual drink.
   And doubtless those actions, if they are a profession of any thing at
   all, are a profession of the things they signify. [600] To say, that
   these significant actions are appointed to be a profession of
   something, but not to be a profession of the things they are appointed
   to signify, is as unreasonable as to say, that certain sounds or words
   are appointed to be a profession of something, but not to be a
   profession of the things signified by those words.

   Again, Mr. W. in his reply to my answer to the second objection, with
   like contempt passes over the main argument which I offered, to prove
   that the nation of Israel were called God's people, and covenant
   people, in another sense besides a being visible saints. My argument
   (in p. 85, 86.) was this: That it is manifest, something diverse from
   being visible saints, is often intended by that nation being called
   God's people, and that the family of Israel according to the flesh--not
   with regard to any moral and religious qualifications--were in some
   sense adopted by God, to be his peculiar and covenant people; from Rom.
   ix. 3, 4, 5.--"I could wish myself accursed from Christ for my brethren
   according to the flesh; who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the
   adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law,
   and the service of God, and the promises; whose are the fathers, " &c.
   I observed, that these privileges are spoken of as belonging to the
   Jews, not now as visible saints, not as professors of the true
   religion, not as members of the visible church of Christ, (which they
   did not belong to,) but only as a people of such a nation, such a
   blood, such an external carnal relation to the patriarchs, their
   ancestors; Israelites according to the flesh: inasmuch as the apostle
   is speaking here of the unbelieving Jews, professed unbelievers, that
   were out of the christian church, and open visible enemies to it; and
   such as had no right at all to the external privileges of Christ's
   people.--I observed further, that in like manner this apostle in Rom.
   xi. 28, 29. speaks of the same unbelieving Jews, that were enemies to
   the gospel, as in some respect an elect people, and interested in the
   calling, promises, and covenants, God formerly gave their forefathers,
   and are still beloved for their sakes. "As concerning the gospel, they
   are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the election, they are
   beloved for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are
   without repentance."

   All that Mr. W. says, which has any reference to these things, is,
   "That he had read my explication of the name of the people of God, as
   given to the people of Israel, &c. But that he confesses, it is
   perfectly unintelligible to him. "The impartial reader is left to
   judge, whether the matter did not require some other answer.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [600] Mr. Stoddard owns, that the sacramental actions, both in baptism
   and the Lord's supper, signify saving faith in Christ. Safety of App.
   p. 120. "By baptism is signified our fellowship with Christ in his
   sufferings. That is signified hereby, that we have an interest in the
   virtue of his sufferings, that his sufferings are made over unto us,
   and that we do participate in the good and benefit of them.----It was
   John the Baptist's manner, before he baptized persons, to teach them
   that they must believe on Christ. And the apostles and apostolical men
   would not baptize any adult persons but such as professed to believe on
   Christ--He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved. Baptism is
   mentioned as the evidence of faith."--So concerning the Lord's supper,
   ibid. p. 122. e. 123. a. "In this ordinance we are invited to put our
   trust in the death of Christ Take, eat: this is my body: and drink ye
   all of it. When the body feeds on the sacramental bread and wine, the
   soul is to do that which answers unto it. The soul is to feed on Christ
   crucified; which is nothing else but the acting faith on him."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VII.

   What is, and what is not, begging the question; and how Mr. W. charges
   me, from time to time, with begging the question, without cause.

   Among the particulars of Mr. W.s method of disputing, I observed, that
   he often causelessly charges me with begging the question, while he
   frequently begs the question himself, or does that which is equivalent.

   But that it may be determined with justice and clearness, who does, and
   who does not, beg the question, I desire it may be particularly
   considered, what that is which is called begging the question in a
   dispute.--This is more especially needful for the sake of illiterate
   readers. And here,

   1. Let it be observed, that merely to suppose something in a dispute,
   without bringing any argument to prove it, is not begging the question:
   for this is done necessarily, in every dispute, and even in the best
   and clearest demonstrations. One point is proved by another, till at
   length the matter is reduced to a point that is supposed to need no
   proof; either because it is self-evident, or is a thing wherein both
   parties are agreed, or so clear that it is supposed it will not be
   denied.

   2. Nor is begging the question the same thing as offering a weak
   argument, to prove the point in question. It is not all weak arguing,
   but one particular way of weak arguing, that is called begging the
   question.

   3. Nor is it the same thing as missing the true question, and bringing
   an argument that is impertinent, or beside the question.

   But the thing which is called begging the question, is the making use
   of the very point in debate, or the thing to be proved, as an argument
   to prove itself. Thus, if I were endeavouring to prove that none but
   godly persons might come to sacraments, and should take this for an
   argument to prove it, that none might come but such as have saving
   faith, taking this for granted; I should then beg the question: for
   this is the very point in question, whether a man must have saving
   faith or no? It is called begging the question, because it is a
   depending as it were on the courtesy of the other side, to grant me the
   point in question, without offering any argument as the price of it.

   And whether the point I thus take for granted, be the main point in
   question, in the general dispute, or some subordinate point, something
   under consideration, under a particular argument; yet if I take this
   particular point for granted, and then make use of it to prove itself,
   it is begging the question.

   Thus if I were endeavouring, under this general controversy between Mr.
   W. and me, to prove that particular point, that we ought to love all
   the members of the church as true saints; and should bring this as a
   proof of the point, that we ought to love all the members of the church
   as true Christians, taking this for granted; this is only the same
   thing, under another term, as the thing to be proved; and therefore is
   no argument at all, but only begging the question.

   Or if the point I thus take for granted, and make use of as an
   argument, be neither the general point in controversy, nor yet the
   thing nextly to be proved under a particular argument; yet if it be
   some known controverted point between the parties, it is begging the
   question, or equivalent to it: for it is begging a thing known to be in
   question in the dispute, and using it as if it were a thing allowed.

   I would now consider the instances, wherein Mr. W. asserts or suggests
   that I have begged the question.

   In p. 30. d. e. and 31. a. b. he represents the force of my reasoning
   as built on a supposition, that there is no unsanctified man, but what
   knows he has no desire of salvation by Christ, no design to fulfil the
   covenant of grace, but designs to live in stealing, lying,
   adultery,--or some other known sin: and then says, "Is it not manifest,
   that such sort of reasoning is a mere quibbling with words, and begging
   the question?" And so insinuates, that I have thus begged the question.
   Whereas, I nowhere say or suppose this which he speaks of, nor any
   thing like it. But on the contrary, often say, what supposes an
   unsanctified man may think he is truly godly, and that he has truly
   upright and gracious designs and desires.--Nor does any argument of
   mine depend on any such supposition. Nay, under the argument he speaks
   of, I expressly suppose the contrary, viz. That unsanctified men who
   visibly enter into covenant, may be deceived.

   In p. 38. a. Mr. W. makes a certain representation of my arguing from
   Isaiah lvi. and then says upon it, "It is no arguing, but only begging
   the question." But as has been already shown, that which he represents
   as my argument from that scripture, has no relation to my argument.

   In p. 59. in opposition to my arguing from the Epistles, that the
   apostles treated those members of churches which they wrote to, as
   those who had been received on a positive judgment, i.e. (as I explain
   myself,) a proper and affirmative opinion, that they were real saints;
   Mr. W. argues, that the apostles could make no such judgment of them,
   without either personal converse, or revelation; unless it be supposed
   to be founded on a presumption, that ministers who baptized them, would
   not have done it, unless they had themselves made such a positive
   judgment concerning their state: and then adds these words, This may do
   for this scheme, but only it is a begging the question. Whereas, it is
   a point that never has been in question in this controversy, as ever I
   knew, whether some ministers or churches might reasonably and
   affirmatively suppose, the members of other churches they are united
   with, were admitted on evidence of proper qualifications, (whatever
   they be, whether common or saving,) trusting to the faithfulness of
   other ministers and churches. Besides, this can be no point in question
   between me and Mr. W. unless it be a point in question between him and
   himself. For he holds, as well as I, that persons ought not to be
   received as visible Christians, without moral evidence (which is
   something positive, and not a mere negation of evidence of the
   contrary) of gospel-holiness.

   In p. 82. of my book I suppose, that none at all do truly subject
   themselves to Christ as their master, but those who graciously subject
   themselves to him, and are delivered from the reigning power of sin.
   Mr. W. suggests, (p. 83. d.) that herein I beg the question. For which
   there is no pretext, not only as this is no known point in controversy
   between the parties in this debate; but also as it is a point I do not
   take for granted, but offer this argument to prove it, that they who
   have no grace, are under the reigning power of sin, and no man can
   truly subject himself to two such contrary masters, at the same time,
   as Christ and sin. I think this argument sufficient to obtain the
   point, without begging it. And besides, this doctrine, that they who
   have no grace do not truly subject themselves to Christ, was no point
   in question between me and Mr. W. But a point wherein we were fully
   agreed, and wherein he had before expressed himself as fully, and more
   fully, than I. In his sermons on Christ a King and Witness, (p. 18. b.)
   he speaks of all such as do not depend on Christ, believe in him, and
   give up themselves and all to him, as not true subjects to Christ; but
   enemies to him, and his kingdom. We have expressions to the same
   purpose again, in p. 74. and 91. and in p. 94. d. e. of the same book,
   he says, "It is utterly inconsistent with the nature of the obedience
   of the gospel, that it should be a forced subjection.--No man is a
   subject of Christ, who does not make the laws and will of Christ his
   choice, and desire to be governed by him, and to live in subjection to
   the will of Christ, as good and fit, and best to be the rule of his
   living, and way to his happiness. A forced obedience to Christ is no
   obedience. It is in terms a contradiction. Christ draws men with the
   cords of love, and the bands of a man. Our Lord has himself expressly
   determined this point. There are other passages in the same book to the
   same purpose. So that I had no need to beg this point of Mr. W. since
   he had given it largely, and that in full measure, and over and over
   again, without begging.

   In p. 120. b. he observes, " That to say, such a profession of internal
   invisible things is the rule to direct the church in admission,--is to
   hide the parallel, and beg the question. For the question here is about
   the persons' right to come, and not about the church's admitting them."
   Here Mr. W. would make us believe, that he does not know what begging
   the question is: for it is evident, his meaning is, that my saying so
   is beside the question. But to say something beside the question, is a
   different thing from begging the question, as has been observed. My
   saying, that a profession of invisible things is the church's rule in
   admission, is not begging the question: because it is not, nor ever
   was, any thing in question. For Mr. S. and Mr. W. himself are full in
   it, that a profession of invisible things, such as a believing that
   Christ is the Son of God, &c. is the church's rule. Yea, Mr. W. is
   express in it, that a credible profession and visibility of
   gospel-holiness is the church's rule, p. 139. Nor is my saying as
   above, beside the question then, in hand, relating to the church of
   Israel admitting to the priesthood, those that could not find their
   register. For that wholly relates to the rule of admission to the
   priesthood, and not to the priests' assurance of their own right. For,
   as I observed, if the priests had been never so fully assured of their
   pedigree, yet if they could not demonstrate it to others, by a public
   register, it would not have availed for their admission.

   Again, in p. 124. e. Mr. W. charges me with begging the question, in
   supposing that sacraments are duties of worship whose very nature and
   design is an exhibition of those vital and active principles and inward
   exercises, wherein consists the condition of the covenant of grace. He
   charges the same thing as a begging the question, p. 131. d.--But this
   is no begging the question, for two reasons; (1.) Because I had before
   proved this point, by proofs which Mr. W. has not seen cause to attempt
   to answer, as has been just now observed, in the last section. (2.)
   This, when I wrote, was no point in question, wherein Mr. W. and I
   differed; but wherein we were agreed, and in which he had declared
   himself as fully as I, in his sermons on Christ a King and Witness; p.
   76. c. "When we attend sacraments (says he) we are therein visibly to
   profess our receiving Christ, and the graces of his Spirit, and the
   benefits of his redemption, on his own terms and offer, and giving up
   the all of our souls to him, on his call, covenant, and engagement."
   And in the next preceding page but one, in a place forecited, he speaks
   of these acts "as mockery, hypocrisy, falsehood, and lies, if they are
   not the expressions of faith and hope, and spiritual acts of
   obedience." So that I had no manner of need to come to Mr. W. as a
   beggar for these things, which he had so plentifully given me, and all
   the world that would accept them, years before.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. VIII.

   Showing how Mr. W. often begs the question himself.

   The question is certainly begged in that argument which Mr. W. espouses
   and defends, viz. That the Lord's supper has a proper tendency to
   promote men's conversion. In the prosecution of the argument Mr. W.
   implicitly yields, that it is not the apparent natural tendency alone,
   that is of any force to prove the point; but the apparent tendency
   under this circumstance, that there in no express prohibition. And thus
   it is allowed, that in the case of express prohibition with respect to
   the scandalous and morally insincere, no seeming tendency in the nature
   of the thing proves the ordinance to be intended for the conviction and
   conversion of such. So that it is a thing supposed in this argument,
   that all morally insincere persons are expressly forbidden, but
   unsanctified persons not so. Now when it is supposed, that morally
   insincere persons are expressly forbidden, the thing meant cannot be,
   that they are forbidden in those very words; for no such prohibition is
   to be found: nor are men that live in sodomy, bestiality, and
   witchcraft, any where expressly forbidden in this sense. But the thing
   intended must be, that they are very evidently forbidden, by plain
   implication, or consequence. But then the whole weight of the argument
   lies in this supposition, that unsanctified persons are not also
   plainly and evidently forbidden; which is the very point in question.
   And therefore to make this the ground of an argument to prove this
   point, is a manifest begging the question. And what Mr. W. says to the
   contrary, (p. 127. a.) that Mr. Stoddard had proved this point before,
   avails nothing: for let it be never so much proved before, yet, after
   all, to take this very point and make use of it as a further argument
   to prove itself, is certainly begging the question. The notion of
   bringing a new argument is bringing additional proof: but to take a
   certain point, supposed to be already proved, to prove itself with over
   again, certainly does not add any thing to the evidence.

   Mr. W. says, my supposing unconverted persons, as such, to be as
   evidently forbidden, as scandalous persons, is as much begging the
   question. I answer, So it would be, if I made that point an argument to
   prove itself with, after Mr. W.'s manner. But this is far from being
   the case in fact.

   And the question is again most certainly begged, in that other thing
   said to support this argument, viz. That though the Lord's supper may
   seem to have a tendency to convert scandalous sinners, yet there is
   another ordinance appointed for that. Here the meaning must be, that
   there is another ordinance exclusive of the Lord's supper; otherwise it
   is nothing to the purpose. For they do not deny but that there are
   other ordinances for the conversion of sinners, who are morally
   sincere, as well as of those who are scandalous. But the question is,
   Whether other ordinances are appointed for their conversion exclusive
   of the Lord's supper; or, whether the Lord's supper be one ordinance
   appointed for their conversion? This is the grand point in question.
   And to take this point as the foundation of an argument, to prove this
   same point, is plainly begging the question. And it is also giving up
   the argument from the tendency, and resting the whole argument on
   another thing.

   Mr. W. again plainly begs the question in his reply, (p. 127. c. d.)
   That God's prohibition is an argument, that God saw there was no such
   tendency for their conversion. His so saying supposes again, that there
   is no evident prohibition of unsanctified persons. In which he again
   flies to the very point in question, and rests the weight of his
   reasoning upon it.

   Just in the same manner Mr. W. begs the question in espousing and
   making use of that argument, That all in external covenant, and neither
   ignorant nor scandalous, are commanded to perform all external covenant
   duties. Here it is supposed, that scandalous persons, (which, according
   to Mr. W.s scheme, must include all that have not moral sincerity,)
   though in the external covenant, are expressly, that is, evidently,
   excepted and forbidden: and that unsanctified men are not also
   evidently forbidden; which is the point in question. For if
   unsanctified men, though in external covenant, are as evidently
   forbidden and excepted, as scandalous men that are in external
   covenant, then the argument touches not one any more than the other. So
   that the argument is entirely a castle in the air, resting on nothing
   but itself. The grand thing to be proved, first taken for granted, and
   then made an argument to prove itself!

   In explaining the nature of begging the question, I observed, that it
   is begging the question, or equivalent to it, whether the point that is
   taken for granted, and made an argument of, be the main point in
   controversy, or some particular known disputed point between the
   controverting parties: I will now illustrate this by an example. It is
   a known disputed point in this controversy, whether in the parable
   concerning the man without the wedding garment, the king condemned the
   man for coming into the church without grace. Now supposing that I,
   because I look on the matter as very clear, should, besides using it as
   one distinct argument, also make it the basis of other arguments; and
   should use it in opposition to the strongest arguments of my opposers,
   as if it were sufficient to stop their mouths, without offering any
   proper solution of those arguments: as, in case I were pressed with the
   argument from the passover, if I should fly to the man without the
   wedding garment; and should say, It is certain, this argument from the
   passover can be of no force against the express word of God in the 22nd
   of Matt.. For there it is plain as any fact that ever the sun shone
   upon, that the king condemns the man for coming into the church without
   a wedding garment; and it is plain as the sun at noonday, that the
   wedding garment is grace.--And if when the argument from Judas's
   partaking of the Lord's supper is alleged, I should again fly to the
   man without a wedding garment, and say, whatever reasons Christ might
   have for admitting Judas, yet it is plainly revealed, in Matt. xxii.
   12. that God does not approve of men coming into the church without a
   wedding garment. This would be a beggarly impertinent way of disputing,
   thus to answer one argument by throwing another in the way, which is
   contested, and the validity of which is denied. It is fair, that I
   should have liberty to use the argument concerning the wedding garment,
   in its place, and make the most of it: but to use it as the support of
   other arguments, is to produce no additional proof. And thus, from time
   to time, to produce the disputed hypothesis of one argument, for answer
   to the arguments of my antagonist, instead of solving those arguments,
   is flying and hiding from arguments, instead of answering them: instead
   of defending the fortress which is attacked, it is dodging and flying
   from one refuge to another.

   Mr. W. acts this part from time to time, in the use he makes of his
   great argument from the Old-Testament church and its ordinances. Thus
   (in p. 8.) he takes this method to answer my argument from the nature
   of visibility and profession, insisting that the Israelites avouching
   and covenanting was a thing compatible with ungodliness; which he knows
   is a disputed point in this controversy, and what I deny.--Again, he
   makes use of the same thing, in answer to my argument from the nature
   of covenanting with God. (p. 23, 24.) And again he brings it in, (p.
   25. e. 26. a.) answering what I say, by confidently asserting that
   concerning the church of Israel, which he knows is disputed, and I
   deny; viz. That the covenanting of Israel did not imply a profession
   that they did already believe and repent: as in these words, "This was
   never intended nor understood, in the profession which the Israelites
   made; but that they would immediately and from thenceforth comply with
   the terms of the covenant; and by the help of God, offered in it, would
   fulfil it. I am sure, this was what they professed; and I am sure, God
   declared he took them into covenant with him." And the same thing is
   brought in again to answer the same argument, (p. 31. c.)--The same
   thing is thrown in, once and again, as an answer to what I say of the
   unreasonableness of accepting such professions as leave room to judge
   the greater part of the professors to be enemies of God. (p. 34. b. c.)
   The same thing is cast in as a sufficient block in the way of my
   arguing from the unreasonableness of accepting such professions, as
   amount to nothing more than lukewarmness. (p. 36. d. e.) The same is
   brought in, and greatly insisted on, to stop my mouth, in arguing from
   the Epistles. (p. 56, 57.) The same is brought in again, to enervate my
   argument concerning brotherly love. (p. 69. d.) And this is made use of
   as the support of other arguments; as that from the name disciples, and
   about the church being the school of Christ; and to confute what I say,
   in answer to that argument. (p. 84. a.) The same is brought in as a
   support of the eleventh objection, and a confutation of my answer to
   that. (p. 125. c. d. e.) And again, in reply to what I say in answer to
   the nineteenth objection. (p. 137. b. c.)

   Another thing, near akin to begging the question, is resting the weight
   of arguments on things asserted without proof; which, though they do
   not properly make a part of the controversy, yet are things not allowed
   by those on the other side.--Thus does Mr. W. in his arguing from the
   success of the Lord's supper in the conversion of sinners, (p.
   137,138.) Supposing, not only that the Lord's supper has been the
   occasion of the conversion of many, but that their communicating was
   the means of it. This he offers nothing to prove, and it is not allowed
   by those on the other side. [601] And it is what would be very hard to
   prove: if many were converted at the Lord's table, (which yet is not
   evident,) it would not prove, that their partaking was the means of
   their conversion; it might be only what they saw and heard there, which
   others may see and hear, that do not partake.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [601] Thus that very eminent divine, and successful minister of Christ,
   the late Dr. Doddridge, in his Sermons on Regeneration, speaking of the
   means of regeneration (p. 251. e. 252. a.) says, "I do not mention the
   administration of sacraments, upon this occasion; because, though they
   have so noble and effectual a tendency to improve men's minds in piety,
   and to promote christian edification; yet I do not remember to have
   heard of any instance, in which they have been the means of men's
   conversion; which is the less to be wondered at, as they are appointed
   for a very different end."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IX.

   Mr. W.s inconsistence with himself, in what he says in answer to my
   third and fourth arguments, and in his reply to my arguments from the
   Acts, and the Epistles.

   The last thing observed in Mr. W.s way of disputing, is his alleging
   and insisting on things wherein he is inconsistent with himself. His
   inconsistencies are of many sorts. Sometimes he alleges those things
   that are inconsistent with the doctrine of those whose principles he
   pretends to maintain.--He abundantly urges those things against my
   scheme, which are in like manner against his own. He often argues
   against those things which he allows, and strenuously insists on. He
   denies what he affirms, and affirms what he utterly denies; laying down
   and urging those things which are contrary to what he says in other
   books; and sometimes contrary to what he says in the same book.
   Yielding up the thing wherein the argument lies, yet strenuously
   maintaining the argument.--Allowing both premises and consequence, yet
   finding fault, and opposing. Sometimes he urges things which are
   contrary to what he says under different arguments; and sometimes
   contrary to what he says under the same argument. Sometimes he
   contradicts himself in the plain sense and meaning of what he says; at
   other times even in plain terms. Sometimes in effect contradicting
   himself in the same breath, and in the same sentence.

   These various kinds of inconsistence have many of them been already
   observed. And will further appear by a particular consideration of what
   he says on several heads, in what remains.

   In my third argument, I insisted, that it could not be much to God's
   honour, for men to profess the assent of their judgment to the true
   religion, without pretending to any real friendship or love to God in
   their hearts. Mr. W. in opposition, (p. 34. d. e.) speaks of it as an
   honour to God, that secret hypocrites openly declare their conviction
   of the truth of God's word, &c. as in the multitude of subjects is the
   king's honour. And yet he himself represents the matter quite otherwise
   in his sermons on Christ a King and Witness; there (p. 87. a.) he has
   these words, " to promote the kingdom of Christ, is not to do that
   which may prevail with men to make pretences that they are Christians,
   or that they own Jesus Christ as their Saviour, and to call him Lord,
   Lord, when really he is not so."

   In answer to my fourth argument (p. 35. d.) Mr. W. says, I make great
   misrepresentation of the matter, in insinuating that according to Mr.
   S--d's scheme, (of which scheme he declares himself to be,) they who
   are admitted make a pretence of no more than moral sincerity, and
   common grace. And yet he insists, that when Philip required a
   profession of the eunuch's faith his question designed no more than an
   assent of the understanding, (p. 51. a. b.) which he there
   distinguishes from saving faith: and says, that it is morally certain
   that his inquiry amounted to no more. And yet in his discourse on the
   same head (p. 49. c.) he inveighs against me for supposing it a
   consequence of the opinion of my opposers, that the eunuch, in order to
   come to sacraments, had no need to look at any such qualification in
   himself as saving faith.--Certainly the eunuch in making answer to
   Philip's inquiry, had no need to look at any more than Philip inquired
   after. In p. 50. a. he says, "It does not seem at all probable, that
   Philip inquired any thing about the regeneration or sanctification of
   the eunuch." And yet in the next preceding sentence, he refers me over
   to another judgment, for representing as though my opposers supposed,
   that it was no matter whether a person coming to gospel-ordinances had
   any grace or not, and had no manner of need to inquire any thing about
   his sincerity.

   And though he highly blames me for insinuating, as above, that my
   opposers require a pretence of no more than common grace and moral
   sincerity; yet in opposition to my insisting on a profession of saving
   faith, speaking of the profession which the apostles required, he says,
   (p. 58. c.) "It is certain, that a profession in these words, which was
   wont to be required, do sometimes import no more than a conviction of
   the understanding on moral evidence." So he says concerning those whose
   admission into the christian church we have an account of in Acts ii.
   (p. 45. e.) "There is not one word said about any other faith, but
   believing that Jesus was the Messiah." And if so, then certainly no
   more was professed.

   In p. 35. e. he allows, that all visible saints who are not truly
   pious, are hypocrites; and yet maintains, that the profession they make
   is no more than what they may make and speak honestly and truly. (p.
   105. d. and 47. c.) How then are they all hypocrites, if they are
   honestly and truly what they profess to be?

   In supporting the argument from John's baptism, he insists, that the
   profession the people made, did not imply, that they had savingly
   repented: and that John openly supposed, that their profession did not
   imply it, in what he said to them. (p. 97. a. b. c.)--And (p. 98. a.
   b.) he says, "We read not a word of John's inquiring whether these
   people made a credible profession of true piety." And he there
   manifestly suggests, that John knew they were not pious, as he knew
   they were a generation of vipers. Yet how often elsewhere does Mr. W.
   insist, that men in order to come to sacraments must make a credible
   profession of true piety and gospel-holiness, and that they must in a
   judgment of charity be supposed to have real godliness?

   In answer to my argument from the instance of the converts in Acts ii.
   Mr. W. speaking of their convictions, and being pricked in their
   hearts, (p. 45. c. d. e.) says, "They were convinced that Jesus was the
   true Messiah and Saviour, whom God had promised to Israel,--whereupon
   convinced of their sin, they cry out, What shall we do? To which the
   apostles reply, Repent and be baptized,--in the name of the Lord Jesus
   Christ for the remission of sins.--There is not one word said about any
   other faith, but believing that Jesus was the Messiah."--And in the two
   next pages Mr. W. insists, that their gladly receiving the word can by
   no necessity from the text imply more, than that they now believed that
   Jesus was the Messiah, and that it was matter of joy to them that the
   Messiah was come.--So that we have this inconsistent account of the
   matter from Mr. W. that these people are first convinced that Jesus is
   the Messiah, and this is cause of distress to them: and they ask, what
   they shall do? Hereupon the apostles direct them to believe that Jesus
   is the Messiah; which they believed already, before they asked the
   question: but however, when they heard this, they believed that Jesus
   was the Messiah. They now found it out, as a new thing they did not
   know of before, and are glad at the joyful discovery; though just
   before they believed the same thing, and the discovery filled them with
   distress.

   In p. 47. b. whereas it is said concerning these new converts,--" That
   such were added to the church, as were the saved"--Mr. W. says, the
   like appellation is given to the whole church of Israel. And in this
   and the foregoing page, he insists, that these converts were before in
   the church of Israel, and were not now admitted, but only continued as
   some of God's people. But if these things were so, they were the saved
   before their conversion to Christianity, as much as after; and others
   that were in the Jewish church, that were not yet converted to
   Christianity, were as much the saved as they. And then why is their
   being saved spoken of as what was now brought to pass, and as a thing
   that distinguished the believing Jews from others?

   In the same page, c. Mr. W. says, "we do not dispute but that the
   apostles supposed and believed in charity, so far as they had any thing
   to do to suppose or believe any thing about it, that God had given
   these persons saving repentance, and a heart-purifying faith." And yet
   in p. 61. he speaks of the apostles as supposing the contrary of many
   of those that had been admitted into the primitive church; in that they
   speak of them, as such temples of God as might be destroyed: "which
   (says Mr. W.) cannot be true of sanctified persons, unless they can
   fall from grace."

   In his answer to the argument from Philip and the eunuch he supposes,
   that believing with all the heart is only such a belief of the doctrine
   of Christianity as unsanctified men may have. And yet in that
   forementioned place, (Christ a King and Witness, p. 144.) he says, a
   man before he is renewed by the Holy Ghost, has a view of the truth as
   a doubtful uncertain thing. And in the book now especially attended to,
   he in effect owns the thing, which he earnestly disputes against in
   reply to this argument. He greatly insists, that the phrase, with all
   the hearty does not signify gracious sincerity; and yet he owns it
   does. (p. 51. e. and 52. a. b.) He owns, that according to the usual
   way of speaking among mankind, both in our days, and also in the times
   when the Scriptures were written, "god requires men to give him their
   hearts, intending by it such a sincerity as God will own and accept;
   which be sure (says he) is nothing less than a gracious sincerity;
   which never can be, unless the whole soul and all its faculties be
   engaged for God." Then afterwards adds, "But how will this any ways
   prove, that when men use the same expressions, it must necessarily be
   understood in the same sense?" And yet in the same breath, he had
   observed that god in thus using the phrase, uses it according to the
   usual manner of speaking among mankind. He gives this reason, why the
   phrase need not be understood in the same sense when used by men, that
   men are not searchers of hearts. But the argument is about the phrase
   as Philip put it to the eunuch's own conscience, which was or ought to
   be a searcher of his heart.

   And by the way I must observe, that Mr. W. would have done well, if he
   was able, to have reconciled these repugnant things, taken notice of in
   my book; "That with the heart man believeth to righteousness," and that
   if men believe with the heart that God raised Christ from the dead,
   they shall be saved; agreeable to Rom. x. 9, 10. And yet that men may
   believe this with their heart, yea, and with all their heart, and still
   not believe to righteousness, nor ever be saved. So likewise that
   "whoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in
   him, and he in God;" as in 1 John iv. 15. And that " whosoever
   believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God," 1 John v. 1. And
   yet, that a man may believe this very thing " with all his heart, and
   confess it with his mouth;" and this in the language of the same
   apostles and primitive ministers; and still not be born of God, nor
   have a spark of grace in him.

   It may also be worthy to be considered, whether it be reasonable to
   suppose, that the faith which a man must profess, in order to being in
   the visible kingdom of Christ, and not in the visible kingdom of the
   devil, must not be some other sort of faith than that which the devil
   has: that seeing the very design of a public profession of religion is
   to declare on which side we are, whether on Christ's, or on the
   devil's, no other faith is required to be professed, than such as Satan
   himself has, and such as is not at all inconsistent with being a
   willing, cursed servant and slave of the devil, and enemy to Christ; as
   Mr. W. says all unsanctified men are.

   Mr. W. in his reply to my argument from the epistles, (p. 55.) speaks
   of it as an unaccountable thing, that I should represent as if
   according to the principles of my opposites, the primitive Christians
   were not admitted under any such notion of their being really godly
   persons, or with any respect to such a character: [602] and yet in his
   discourse on the same head, he abundantly insists, that it was not real
   holiness, but only federal holiness, which was the qualification to
   which the apostles had respect in admitting them; expressly, from time
   to time, distinguishing federal holiness from real. In p. 56. e. and
   57. a. "It makes it evident (says he) that this manner of treating
   churches and bodies of men, and such expressions used to them and of
   them, are to be understood in no other sense, than to signify federal
   holiness."--So in p. 60 he affirms the same thing, once and again,
   distinguishing federal holiness from real. He says, they formed no
   positive judgment of their real piety.--And knew nothing at all about
   them, but only that they were federally holy. And again, "They did not
   make a positive judgment, that these persons were really godly; and the
   high characters they gave them, and the hopes they expressed concerning
   them, could be understood in no other sense than as holding forth a
   federal holiness."--So that by this, they expressed no hopes concerning
   any thing more than their federal holiness, as distinguished from real.
   And he argues earnestly, through the two next pages, that they could
   not be looked upon, many of them, as having real holiness. How does
   this consist with their being treated as visible saints; under the
   notion of their having real holiness, and from respect to such a
   character appearing on them? or with none being visible saints, but
   such as have a credible visibility of gospel-holiness?

   So in p. 63. b. he speaks of the gross scandals of many of those to
   whom the apostles wrote, as an absolute proof, that they considered
   them only as federally holy; which he in the same place distinguishes
   from real holiness. Then how were they treated (as he insists) as those
   that had the character of real piety appearing on them, and as making a
   credible profession of gospel-holiness, and real Christianity? Which,
   he abundantly allows, all must make in order to being visible saints.
   See also p. 64. e.

   In p. 58. Mr. W. insists, that it does not appear, that those who were
   admitted into the primitive church, made a declaration that they had
   saving faith, but only that they engaged to that faith.--But how does
   this consist with what he abundantly says elsewhere, that they must
   pretend to real piety, make a profession of gospel-holiness, exhibit
   moral evidence, that they have such holiness, &c.? These things are
   something else besides engaging to saving faith and gospel-holiness for
   the future.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [602] So in p. 132. c. he exclaims against me thus; " After all this,
   to repeat it again and again, that these persons have no visibility to
   reason of real, saintship, &c. I think, gives better ground to retort
   Mr. Edwards's words
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. X.

   The unreasonableness and inconsistence of Mr. W.s answer to my argument
   from the man without a wedding garment, and concerning brotherly love,
   and from 1 Cor. xi. 28. and of what he says in support of the 15th
   objection.

   Mr. W. in answering my argument from Matt. xxii. 11. allows that the
   king's house, into which the guest came, is the visible church, (p. 43.
   c. and 44. d.) So that the man's coming in hither, is his coming into
   the visible church. Nor does he at all dispute but that by the wedding
   garment is meant saving grace; (for truly the thing is too evident to
   be disputed;) and yet he says, (p. 43. b. c.) "We read nothing of
   Christ condemning the man for coming into the church without saving
   grace." So that Mr. W.s answer amounts plainly to this; the king, when
   he comes to judgment, will say, I do not at all condemn thee for coming
   in hither without a wedding garment; but friend, how comest thou in
   hither without a wedding garment? And no wonder; the case is too plain
   to allow of any other than such a lamentable refuge as this is.--If the
   wedding garment be saving grace, which is not denied; and if coming
   into the king's house be coming into the visible church, as Mr. W.
   owns; then if the king condemns the man for coming into the house
   without a wedding garment, he condemns him for coming into the visible
   church without saving grace.

   It is plain, the thing the man is blamed for, is something else than
   simply a being without grace, or without a wedding garment. The king's
   words have respect to this as it stands in connexion with coming into
   the king's house. If Christ has commanded men who are not converted, to
   come into the church, that they may be converted, he will never say to
   them, upon their obeying this command, Friend, how comest thou in
   hither before thou wast converted? Which would be another thing than
   blaming him simply for not being converted. If a man, at his own cost,
   sets up a school, in order to teach ignorant children to read; and
   accordingly ignorant children should go thither in order to learn to
   read, would he come into the school, and say in anger to an ignorant
   child that he found there, How comest thou in hither, before thou hadst
   learnt to read? Did the apostle Paul ever rebuke the heathen, who came
   to hear him preach the gospel, saying, How came you hither to hear me
   preach, not having grace? This would have been unreasonable, because
   preaching is an ordinance appointed to that end, that men might obtain
   grace. And so, in Mr. W.s scheme, is the Lord's supper.--Can we
   suppose, that Christ will say to men in indignation, at the day of
   judgment, How came you to presume to use the means I appointed for your
   conversion, before you were converted!

   It is true, the servants were to invite all. both bad and good, to come
   to the feast, and to compel them to come in: but this does not prove,
   that bad men, remaining in their badness, have a lawful right to come.
   The servants were to invite the vicious, as well as the moral; they
   were to invite the heathen, who were especially meant by them that were
   in the highways and hedges: yet it will not follow, that the heathen,
   while remaining heathen, have a lawful right to come to christian
   sacraments. But heathen men must turn from their heathenism, and come:
   so likewise wicked men must turn from their wickedness, and come.

   I endeavoured to prove, that that brotherly love, which is required
   towards the members of the christian church in general, is such a love
   as is required to those only whom we have reason to look upon as true
   saints. Mr. W. disputes, through two pages, (p. 66, 67 ) against the
   force of my reasoning to prove this point; and yet when he has done, he
   allows the point. He allows it (p. 68. d, e.) as an undisputed thing,
   that it is the image of God and Christ appearing or supposed to be in
   others, that is the ground and reason of this love. And so again (p.
   71. d e.) he grants, that there must be some apprehension, and judgment
   of the mind, of the saintship of persons, in order to this brotherly
   love. Indeed he pretends to differ from me in this, that he denies the
   need of any positive judgment: but doubtless the judgment or
   apprehension of the mind must be as positive as love founded on that
   apprehension and judgment of the mind.

   In p. 78, 79. he seems to insist, that what the apostle calls unworthy
   communicating, is eating in a greedy, disorderly, and irreverent
   manner: as though men might communicate without grace, and yet not
   communicate unworthily, in the apostle's sense. But if so, the apostle
   differed much in his sense of things from Mr. W.--The latter says, in
   his sermon on Christ a King and Witness, (p. 77, 78.) "These outward
   acts of worship, when not performed from faith in Christ, and love to
   God, are mocking God--in their own nature a lie--the vilest
   wickedness;--instead of being that religion, which Christ requires, it
   is infinitely contrary to it--the most flagrant and abominable impiety,
   and threatened with the severest damnation." Is not this a
   communicating unworthily enough of all reason?

   In p. 132, 133. Mr. W. strenuously opposes me in my supposition, that
   the way of freely allowing all that have only moral sincerity to come
   into the church, tends to the reproach and ruin of the church. On the
   contrary, he seems to suppose it tends to the establishing and building
   up of the church. But I desire that what Mr. Stoddard says, in his
   sermon on the danger of speedy degeneracy, may be considered under this
   head. He there largely insists, that the prevailing of unconverted men
   and unholy professors among a people, is the principal thing that
   brings them into danger of speedy degeneracy and corruption. He says,
   that where this is the case, there will be many bad examples, that will
   corrupt others; and that unconverted men will indulge their children in
   evil, will be negligent in their education; and that by this means
   their children will be very corrupt and ungoverned; [603] that by this
   means the godly themselves that are among them, will be tainted, as
   sweet liquor put into a corrupt vessel will be tainted; that thus a
   people will grow blind, will not much regard the warnings of the word,
   or the judgments of God; and that they will grow weary of religious
   duties after awhile; and that many of their leading men will be carnal;
   and that this will expose a people to have carnal ministers and other
   leading men in the town and church.

   And I desire also, that here may be considered what Mr. W. himself
   says, in that passage forecited, (p. 86,87.) of his sermons on Christ a
   King and Witness; where, in explaining what it is to promote the
   kingdom of Christ, he says negatively, "That it is not to do that which
   may prevail on men to make pretences, that they are Christians, and
   that they own Jesus Christ as their Saviour, and to call him Lord,
   Lord, when really he is not so." Which he supposes is the case with all
   unsanctified professors; for in the same book, he abundantly declares,
   that they who make such pretences, and have not true faith and love,
   make false and lying pretences; as has been several times observed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [603] If we have reason to expect it will be thus with ungodly parents,
   with respect to their children, then certainly such cannot reasonably
   expect ministers and churches should admit their children to baptism,
   in a dependence that they do give them up to God, and will bring them
   up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, if they make no
   profession that implies more than moral sincerity; and none but what
   wicked men may as well make as the godly, and speak true.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XI.

   The impertinence of arguments, that are in like manner against the
   schemes of both the controverting parties: And this exemplified in what
   Mr. W. says concerning the notion of Israel being the people of God,
   and his manner of arguing concerning the members of the primitive
   christian church.

   Inasmuch as in each of the remaining instances of Mr. W.s arguing, that
   I shall take notice of, he insists upon and urges arguments which are
   in like manner against his own scheme, as against mine, I desire, that
   such a way of arguing may be a little particularly considered.

   And here I would lay down this as a maxim of undoubted verity; That an
   argument, brought to support one scheme against another, can avail
   nothing to the. purpose it is brought for, if it is at the same time
   against the scheme it would support, in like manner as against that
   which it would destroy.

   It is an old and approved maxim, That argument which proves too much,
   proves nothing, i. e. If it proves too much for him that brings
   it--proves against himself in like manner as against his opponent--then
   it is nothing to help his cause.--The reason of it is plain: the
   business of a dispute is to make one cause good against another, to
   make one scale heavier than the other. But when a man uses an argument
   which takes alike out of both scales, this does not at all serve to
   make his side preponderate, but leaves the balance just as it was.

   Arguments brought by any man in a dispute, if they be not altogether
   impertinent, are against the difference between him and his opponent,
   or against his opponent's differing from him: for wherein there is no
   difference, there is no dispute.--But that can be no argument against
   his opponent differing from him, which is only an argument against what
   is common to both, and taken from some difficulty that both sides
   equally share in. If I charge supposed absurdities or difficulties
   against him that differs from me, as an argument to show the
   unreasonableness of his differing; and yet the difficulty is not owing
   to his differing from me, inasmuch as the same would lie against him,
   if he agreed with me, my conduct herein is both very impertinent and
   injurious.

   If one in a dispute insists on an argument, that lies equally against
   his own scheme as the other, and yet will stand to it that his argument
   is good, he in effect stands to that his own scheme is not good; he
   supplants himself, and gives up his own cause, in opposing his
   adversary; in holding fast his argument, he holds fast what is his own
   overthrow; and in insisting that his argument is solid and strong, he
   in effect insists that his own scheme is weak and vain. If my
   antagonist will insist upon it, that his argument is good, that he
   brings against me, which is in like manner against himself; then I may
   take the same argument, in my turn, and use it against him, and he can
   have nothing to answer; but has stopped his own mouth, having owned the
   argument to be conclusive.--Now such sort of arguments as these Mr. W.
   abundantly uses.

   For instance, the argument taken from the whole nation of Israel being
   called God's people, and every thing that Mr. W. alleges, pertaining to
   this matter, is in like manner against his own scheme as against mine:
   and that, let the question be what it will; whether it be about the
   qualifications which make it lawful for the church to admit, or about
   the lawfulness of persons coming to sacraments; whether it be about the
   profession they should make before men, or the internal qualification
   they must have in the sight of God. And what Mr. W. says to the
   contrary, does not at all deliver the argument from this embarrassment
   and absurdity. After all he has said, the argument, if any thing
   related to the controversy, is plainly this, That because the whole
   nation of Israel were God's visible people, (which is the same as
   visible saints,) therefore the scripture notion of visible saintship is
   of larger extent than mine; and the Scripture supposes those to be
   visible saints, which my scheme does not suppose to be so.

   But if this be Mr. W. s argument, then let us see whether it agrees any
   better with his own scheme. Mr. Blake (Mr. W.s great author) in his
   book on the Covenant,(p. 190. b.) insists, that Israel at the very
   worst is owned as God's covenant people, and were called God's people;
   and (p. 149. e.) that all the congregation of Israel, and every one of
   them, are called holy, and God's own people, even Korah and his
   company.--And (p. 253. e. 254. a.) he urges, that every one who is
   descended from Jacob, even the worst of Israel, in their lowest state
   and condition, were God's people in covenant, called by the name of
   God's people. And Mr. W. herein follows Mr. Blake, and urges the same
   thing; that this nation was God's covenant people, and were called
   God's people, at the time that they were carried captive into Babylon,
   (p. 24. d.) when they were undoubtedly at their worst, more corrupt
   than at any other time we read of in the Old Testament; being
   represented by the prophets, as overrun with abominable idolatries, and
   other kinds of the most gross, heaven-daring impieties, most obstinate,
   abandoned, pertinacious, and irreclaimable in their rebellion against
   God, and against his word by his prophets. But yet these, it is urged,
   are called the people of God; not agreeable to my notion of visible
   saintship, but agreeable to Mr. W.s. What his notion of visible saints
   is, he tells us in p. 139. He there says expressly, that he "does not
   suppose persons to be visible saints, unless they exhibit a credible
   profession and visibility of gospel-holiness." Now do those things said
   about those vile wretches in Israel, agree with this? Did they exhibit
   moral evidence of gospel-holiness?--But if we bring the matter lower
   still, and say, the true notion of visible saintship is a credible
   appearance and moral evidence of moral sincerity; does this flagrant,
   open, abandoned, obstinate impiety consist with moral evidence of such
   sincerity as that? It is as apparent therefore, in Mr. W.s scheme as
   mine, that when these are called God's people, it is in some other
   sense than that wherein the members of the christian church are called
   visible saints. And indeed the body of the nation of Israel, in those
   corrupt times, were so far from being God's church of visibly pious
   persons, visibly endowed with gospel-holiness, that that people, as to
   the body of them, were visibly and openly declared by God, to be a
   whore and a witch, and her children bastards, or children of adultery.
   Isa. lvii. . "Draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of
   the adulterer and the whore." We have the like in other places. And so
   the body of the same people in Christ's time--which Mr. W. supposes
   even then to be branches of the true olive, in the same manner as the
   members of the christian church were in the apostles' times--are
   visibly declared not to be God's children, or children of the true
   church, but bastards, or an adulterous brood. Matt. xii. 39. "An evil
   and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign." Ver. 45. " Even so
   shall it be with this wicked generation." And certainly the people were
   then, visibly and in the eyes of men, such as Christ had visibly and
   openly, and in the sight of men, declared them to be.

   If the question be not concerning the visibility which makes it lawful
   for others to admit persons, but concerning the qualifications which
   render it lawful for them to come, still the objection is no more
   against my scheme than against Mr. W.s. He (in p. 84--86.) says, that
   such openly scandalous persons ought not to be admitted into the
   church; insinuating, that these scandalous people among the Jews were
   otherwise when they were admitted at first: but that being taken in,
   and not cast out again, it was lawful for them to be there, and they
   had a lawful right to the privileges of the church. But this
   supposition, that all who are lawfully admitted by others, may lawfully
   come into the church, and lawfully continue to partake of its
   privileges till cast out, is utterly inconsistent with Mr. W.s own
   scheme. For according to his scheme, it is not lawful for men that are
   not morally sincere, to partake of the privileges of the church; but
   yet such may in some cases be lawfully admitted by others; for he
   maintains, that in admitting them, they are not to act as searchers of
   hearts, even with regard to their moral sincerity; and so argues, (p.
   106.) that Christ might give Judas the sacrament, when not morally
   sincere. If Christ as head of the visible church might admit Judas to
   his table, when he knew he was not morally sincere, and when it was not
   lawful for Judas himself to come; then it is lawful for men to admit
   some, for whom it is not lawful to be there; contrary to Mr. W.s
   assertion in p. 86. b.

   It is true, that persons may become grossly scandalous, after having
   been regularly admitted on Mr. W.s principles, on a profession in words
   of indiscriminate signification. And so they may after being regularly
   admitted, according to my principles, on a credible profession of
   gospel-holiness in words of a determinate meaning: and therefore the
   gross wickedness of such apostates as we read of in Scripture, is no
   more an objection against my principles, than his.

   Just in the same manner is Mr. W.s arguing (p. 59--63.) concerning the
   members of churches mentioned in the epistles, equally against his own
   scheme and mine. He largely insists on it, that the apostle speaks of
   many of them as grossly scandalous, notoriously wicked persons,
   idolaters, heretics, fornicators, adulterers, adulteresses, &c. &c. In
   his arguing from these things, he is inconsistent with his own
   principles, two ways. (1.) Such a character is as plainly inconsistent
   with the character he insists on as necessary to render it lawful for
   persons themselves to come to sacraments, as mine. And, (2.) It is
   utterly inconsistent with what he often declares to be his notion of
   visible saintship, necessary to a being admitted by others; so no more
   an argument against my opinion of visible saintship, than his own.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XII.

   The great argument from the Jewish sacraments, of the Passover, and
   Circumcision, considered.

   As has been observed concerning the argument from the Jewish nation, so
   the argument from the Jewish ordinances, if it be against my scheme, is
   as plainly, in every respect, against Mr. W.s.--This grand argument, as
   plainly expressed, or implied, in Mr. Stoddard's words (which Mr. W.
   insists I should attend to,) is this:

   God did expressly command all the nation of Israel to be circumcised;
   and he also expressly commanded the whole nation to come to the
   passover; excepting such as were ceremoniously unclean, or on a
   journey. Therefore it was lawful for unsanctified men to come. (See Mr.
   S s sermon on the contrary. p. 8. and Appeal, p. 51.) The want of
   sanctification never was alleged by any man as a reason for forbearing
   the passover. (Appeal, p. 51.) Unsanctified persons attending this
   ordinance is never charged on them as a sin in Scripture. (Ibid.) Jesus
   Christ himself partook of the passover with Judas; which proves it to
   be lawful for unsanctified men to come to the passover. But such as
   might lawfully come to the passover, may lawfully come to the Lord's
   supper.

   Now let us consider what are the qualifications, which are necessary,
   according to Mr. W.s scheme, to a lawful coming to christian
   sacraments; and then see whether this objection, in every part of it,
   and every thing that belongs to it, be not as plainly and directly
   against his own scheme, as mine.

   According to Mr. W. it is not lawful for a man to come unless he is
   morally sincere. (Pref. p. 2 and 3. p. 21. b. 25. d. e. 30. d. 35. e.
   36. a. 111. b. c. 115. b.) And, according as he has explained that
   moral sincerity, which is necessary in order to come to sacraments, it
   implies "a real conviction of the judgment and conscience of the truth
   of the great things of religion, a deep conviction of a man's undone
   state without Christ, and an earnest concern to obtain salvation by
   him,--a fervent desire of Christ and the benefits of the covenant of
   grace, with an earnest purpose and resolution to seek salvation on the
   terms of it;--a man's being willing to do the utmost that he can, by
   the utmost improvement of his natural and moral power, in the most
   earnest and diligent use of the ordinances of salvation;--being
   resolved for Christ, coming to a point, being engaged for
   heaven;--having a settled determination of the judgment and affections
   for God;--giving up all his heart and life to Christ," &c. &c. [604]
   Such moral sincerity as this is necessary, according to Mr. W. to be
   found in professing Christians, in order to their lawful coming to
   christian sacraments. And he says, they are received into the church,
   on like terms, by entering into covenant in like manner, as the Jews;
   and that their holiness, both real and federal, is the same with
   theirs, (p. 56, 57. p. 61. e. p. 65. c.) So that according to this
   scheme, none but those that had such qualifications as these, such a
   sincerity and engagedness in religion as this, might lawfully come to
   the passover.--But now, do the things alleged agree any better with
   this scheme, than with mine? If the case be so, to what purpose is it
   alleged, that God, in Numb. ix. expressly commanded all of that
   perverse, rebellious, and obstinate generation in the wilderness, and
   the whole nation of Israel in all generations, to keep the passover,
   excepting such as were ceremonially unclean or on a journey, without
   the exception of any other? Was every one else of such a character as
   is above described? Was every one under deep convictions, and persons
   of such earnest engagedness in religion, of such settled strong
   resolution to give up their utmost strength and all their heart and
   life to God, &c.? Mr. W. suggests, that those who had not moral
   sincerity are expressly excepted from the command, (p. 93. d.) But I
   wish he had mentioned the place of Scripture. He cites Mr. Stoddard,
   who says, God appointed sacrifice to be offered for scandal, with
   confession. But where did God appoint sacrifice, for the want of such
   sincerity, for the want of such deep conviction, earnest desire, and
   fixed resolution, as Mr. W. speaks of? And where are such as are
   without these things, expressly excepted from the command to keep the
   passover? Besides, there were many scandalous sins, for which no
   sacrifice was appointed: as David's murder and adultery, and the sin of
   idolatry--which the nation in general often fell into--and many other
   gross sins. Nor was there any precept for deferring the keeping of the
   passover, in case of scandalous wickedness, or moral uncleanness, till
   there should be opportunity for cleansing by sacrifice, &c. as was in
   the case of ceremonial uncleanness.

   Mr. S. says, The want of sanctification was never alleged by any man as
   a reason for forbearing the passover. Where do we read in any part of
   the Bible, that the want of such deep conviction, &c. as Mr. W. speaks
   of, or indeed any scandalous moral uncleanness, was ever alleged by any
   man, as a reason for forbearing to eat the passover?--Mr. S. urges,
   that unsanctified persons attending the passover was never charged on
   them as a sin. And where do we read of persons coming without such
   moral sincerity being any more charged on them as a sin, than the
   other? We have reason to think, it was a common thing for parents that
   had no such moral sincerity yea, that were grossly and openly wicked,
   to have their children circumcised; for the body of the people were
   often so: but where is this charged as a sin? Mr. S. says, (Serm. p.
   7.) Ishmael was circumcised, but yet a carnal person. And there is as
   much reason to say, he was not of the character Mr. W. insists on,
   under deep convictions, having earnest desires of grace, a full and
   fixed determination, with all his heart, to the utmost of his power, to
   give his whole life to God, &c.--Mr. S. says, (Serm. p. 8.) Hezekiah
   sent to invite the people of Ephraim and Manasseh, and other tribes, to
   celebrate the passover, though they had lived in idolatry for some
   ages. But if so, this was as much of an evidence, that they were not of
   such a character as Mr. W. insists on, as that they were without
   sanctifying grace.--Mr. W. says, (p. 91. c.) The Israelites had
   carefully attended the seal of circumcision, from the time of its
   institution, till the departure out of Egypt. But surely most of them
   at the same time were without Mr. W.'s moral sincerity; for it is
   abundantly manifest, that the body of the people fell away to idolatry
   in Egypt. (See Levit. xvii. 7. Josh. xxiv. 14. Ezek. xx. 8. and Ezek.
   xxiii. 3, 8, 27.) And there is not the least appearance of any more
   exception, either in the precepts or history of the Old Testament, of
   the case of moral insincerity, in such as attended these ordinances,
   than of ungodliness, or an unsanctified state.

   Mr. S. urges, that Jesus Christ himself partook of the passover with
   Judas; and thence he would argue, that it was lawful for an
   unregenerate person to partake of the Lord's supper. But there can be
   no argument, in any sort, drawn from this, to prove that it is lawful
   for men to partake of the Lord's supper without sanctifying grace, any
   more than that it is lawful for them to partake without moral
   sincerity: for it is every whit as evident, that Judas was at that time
   without moral sincerity, as that he was unregenerate. We have no
   greater evidence, in all the scripture history, of the moral
   insincerity of any one man, than of Judas, at the time when he partook
   of the passover with Christ; he having just then bargained with the
   high priest to betray him, and being then in prosecution of the horrid
   design of the murder of the Son of God.

   If any thing contrary to my principles could be argued from all Israel
   being required, throughout their generations, to come to the passover
   and circumcision, it would be this; that all persons, of all sorts,
   throughout all christendom, might lawfully come to baptism and the
   Lord's Supper; godly and ungodly, the knowing and the ignorant, the
   moral and the vicious, orthodox and heretical, protestants and papists
   alike. But this does not agree with Mr. W.'s principles, any better
   than with mine.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [604] P. 10. d. 11 c. d. 30. e. 31. a. e. 35. e. 36. a. 53 b. 83. d.
   125. b. and many other places.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIII.

   Concerning Judas's partaking of the Lord's supper.

   I think, we have a remarkable instance of tergiversation, in what Mr.
   W. says in support of the argument from Judas's partaking of the Lord's
   supper. By those on his side of the question, it is insisted upon, as a
   clear evidence of its being lawful for unsanctified men to come to the
   Lord's table, that Christ gave the Lord's supper to Judas, when he knew
   he was unsanctified. In answer to which I showed, that this is just as
   much against their own principles, as mine; because Christ knew as
   perfectly that he was not morally sincere, as that he was not
   graciously sincere; and they themselves hold, that it is not lawful for
   such as are not morally sincere, to partake. Mr. W. ridicules this, as
   very impertinent and strange; because Christ did not know this as head
   of the visible church, but only as omniscient God and searcher of
   hearts. And what does this argue? Only, that although Judas was really
   not fit to come, yet, inasmuch as Christ, acting as king of the visible
   church, did not know it, he might admit him: but not, that it was
   lawful for Judas himself to come, who knew his own heart in this
   matter, and knew his own perfidiousness and treachery; Mr. W. denies,
   that it is lawful for such to come, as have no moral sincerity. So that
   here the question is changed; from, who may lawfully come, to who may
   lawfully be admitted? Mr. W. abundantly insists, that the question is
   not, who shall be admitted? but, who way lawfully come? Not, whether it
   be lawful to admit those who have not a visibility of saintship, or do
   not appear to be true saints? but whether those who are not true
   saints, may lawfully partake? And this he insists upon in his discourse
   on this very argument, (p. 104, c. d.) And to prove this latter point,
   viz. That those, who are not real saints, may lawfully come, the
   instance of Judas's coming to the Lord's supper is produced as an
   undeniable evidence. But when it is answered, that the argument does
   not prove this, any more than that the morally insincere may lawfully
   come; because Judas was morally insincere: then Mr. W. (p. 106.) to
   shelter himself, evidently changes the question, at once, to that which
   he had so much exclaimed against as not the question. Now, to serve his
   turn, the question is not, whether Judas might lawfully come? but,
   whether Christ might lawfully admit him, acting on a public visibility?
   And he makes an occasion to cry out against me, as talking strangely,
   and soon forgetting that I had said, Christ in this matter did not act
   as searcher of hearts. Whereas, let the question be what it will, the
   argument from Judas's partaking, (should the fact be supposed,) if it
   proves any thing relating to the matter, is perfectly, and in every
   respect, against the one, just as it is against the other. It the
   question be about profession and visibility to others, and who others
   may lawfully admit, then Judas's being admitted, (if he was admitted,)
   no more proves, that men may be admitted without a visibility and
   profession of godliness, than without a visibility of moral sincerity.
   For it no more appears, that he was without a profession and visibility
   of the former, than of the latter. But if the question is not about
   visibility to others, or who others may admit, but who may lawfully
   come, then Judas's coming no more proves, that a man may come without
   grace, than without moral necessity; because he was in like manner
   without both: and Christ knew as perfectly, that he was without the
   one, as the other; and was not ignorant of the one case, as king of the
   visible church, any more than of the other. So that there is no way to
   support this argument, but to hide the question, by shifting and
   changing it; to have one question in the premises, and to slip in
   another into the conclusion. Which is according to the course Mr. W.
   takes. In the premises, (p. 104, 105.) he expressly mentions Mr. S--d's
   question, as now in view: and agreeably must here have this for his
   question, whether it was lawful for a man so qualified to come to the
   Lord's supper? Who, according to Mr. W.s own doctrine, (p. 111.) ought
   to act as a discerner of his own heart. But in his conclusion, (p.
   106.) he has this for his question, whether Christ might lawfully admit
   a man so qualified, therein not acting as the searcher of hearts?--What
   shuffling is this!
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XIV.

   Concerning that great argument, which Mr. W. urges in various parts of
   his book of those being born in the church, who are children of parents
   that are in covenant.

   It is hard to understand distinctly what Mr. W. would be at, concerning
   this matter, or what his argument is. He often speaks of parents that
   are in covenant, as born in covenant, and so born in the church. For to
   be in covenant, is the same with him as to be members of the visible
   church. (See p. 98. c. 88. d. 89. b. 59. e. 60. a. 136. b.) And he
   speaks of them as admitted into the church in their ancestors, and by
   the profession of their ancestors. (p. 135. e. 136. a.) Yea, for ought
   I can see, he holds that they were born members in complete standing in
   the visible church, (p. 3.)

   And yet he abundantly speaks of their being admitted into the church,
   and made members, after they are born, viz. by their baptism. And his
   words (unless we will suppose him to speak nonsense) are such as will
   not allow us to understand him, merely, that baptism is a sign and
   public acknowledgment of their having been admitted in their ancestors,
   in preceding generations. For he speaks of baptism as the only rite (or
   way) of admission into the visible church, applying it to the baptism
   of children; and as that which makes them members of the body of
   Christ. (p. 99. c. d.) And he grants, that it was ordained for the
   admission of the party baptized into the visible church. (p. 99. e. p.
   100. c.) That baptism is an admission; and that they were thus before
   admitted, (p. 100. c.) still speaking of the baptism of infants, and of
   admission of members into churches.--But surely these things do not
   harmonize with the doctrine of their first receiving being in the
   church--as a branch receives being in the tree, and grows in it and
   from it--or their being born in the covenant, born in the house of God.
   And yet these repugnant things are uttered as it were in the same
   breath by Mr. W. (p. 99.) And he joins them together in the same line,
   (p. 46. e.) in these words,--"Baptism instituted by him, as a rite of
   admission into his church, and being continued in covenant with
   God."--Certainly, being then admitted into the church, and being
   continued in covenant (or in the church) into which they were admitted
   before, are not the same thing, nor consistent one with another. If
   infants are born members in complete standing, as it seems Mr. W.
   holds, then their baptism does nothing towards making them members; nor
   is there any need of it to make the matter more complete.

   Again, (p. 3. b. where he also speaks of infants as members having a
   complete standing in the church,) he maintains, that nothing else is
   requisite in order to communion and privileges of members in complete
   standing, but only that they should be capable hereof, and should
   desire the same, and should not be under censure, or scandalously
   ignorant or immoral. (See also p. 100. c. d. to the same purpose.) Mr.
   W says this in opposition to my insisting on something further, viz.
   making a profession of godliness. And yet he himself insists on
   something further, as much as I; which has been observed before. For he
   abundantly insists on a personal, explicit profession and open
   declaration of believing that the gospel is indeed the revelation of
   God, and of a hearty consent to the terms of the covenant of grace, &c.
   And speaks of the whole controversy as turning upon that single point,
   of the degree of evidence to be given, and the kind of profession to be
   made, whether in words of indiscriminate meaning? (See p. 5. b. c. p.
   6. c. d.) And consequently not, whether they must make any profession
   at all, having been completely admitted before, in the profession of
   their ancestors?

   Therefore, if the infants of visible believers are born in the church,
   and are already members in complete standing, and do not drop out of
   the church, and fall from a complete standing, when they grow up; and
   therefore if they are not ignorant nor immoral, and desire full
   communion, nothing else can be required of them: and it will hence
   follow, contrary to my principles, that they cannot be required to make
   a profession in words of discriminate meaning: but then, it also
   equally follows, contrary to his principles, that neither can they be
   required to make a profession in words of indiscriminate meaning. If
   nothing else besides those forementioned things is necessary, then no
   profession is necessary, in any words at all, neither of determinate
   nor indeterminate signification. So that Mr. W. in supposing some
   personal profession to be necessary, gives up and destroys this grand
   argument.

   But if he did not give it up by this means, it would not be tenable on
   other principles belonging to his scheme; such as its being necessary
   in order to a being admitted to sacraments, that persons should have a
   visibility that recommends them to the reasonable judgment and
   apprehension of the minds of others, as true Christians, really pious
   persons, and that there should be such a profession as exhibits moral
   evidence of this. For who will say, that the individual profession of
   an ancestor, a thousand or fifteen hundred years ago, is a credible
   exhibition and moral evidence of the real piety of his present
   posterity, without any personal explicit profession of any thing about
   religion, in any one of the succeeding generations. And if Mr. W. had
   not said, there must be a credible exhibition of gospel-holiness, but
   only some common faith or virtue; yet no such thing is made visible to
   a rational judgment and apprehension of mind, by this means. How, for
   instance, does it make orthodoxy visible? What reasonable ground is
   there in it, at such a day as this in England, to believe concerning
   any man, that he believes the doctrine of the Trinity, and all other
   fundamental doctrines, with full conviction, and with all his heart,
   because he descended from an ancestor that made a good profession, when
   the ancient Britons or Saxons were converted from heathenism, and
   because withal he is free from open scandalous immorality, and appears
   willing to attend duties of public worship? If an attendance on these
   public duties was in its own nature a profession of orthodoxy, or even
   piety; yet the reason of mankind teaches them the need of joining words
   and actions together in public manifestations of the mind, in cases of
   importance: speech being the great and peculiar talent, which God has
   given to mankind, as the special means and instrument of the
   manifestation of their minds one to another. Thus, treaties among men
   are not concluded and finished, only with actions, without words.
   Feasting together was used of old, as a testimony of peace and covenant
   friendship; as between Isaac and Abimelech, Laban and Jacob, but not
   without a verbal profession. Giving the hand, delivering the ring, &c.
   are to express a marriage agreement and union; but still a profession
   in words is annexed. So we allow it to be needful, after persons have
   fallen into scandal, that in manifesting repentance there should be a
   verbal profession, besides attending duties of worship. Earthly princes
   will not trust a profession of allegiance in actions only, such as
   bowing, kneeling, keeping the king's birth-day, &c. but they require
   also a profession in words, and an oath of allegiance is demanded. Yea,
   it is thought to be reasonably demanded, in order to men's coming to
   the actual possession and enjoyment of those privileges they are born
   heirs to. Thus the eldest sons of noblemen in Great Britain, are born
   heirs to the honours and estate of their fathers; yet this no way
   hinders but they may be obliged, when they come to ripeness of age, in
   order to being invested in the actual possession, to take the oath of
   allegiance: though in order to their lawfully doing it, it may be
   necessary they should believe in their hearts, that King George is the
   lawful prince, and that they should not be enemies to him, and friends
   to the Pretender.

   But moreover, if this objection of Mr. W. about infants being born in
   the church be well considered, it will appear to be all beside the
   question, and so nothing to the purpose. It is not to the purpose of
   either of the questions, Mr. W.s or mine. The question as I have stated
   it, is concerning them that may be admitted members in complete
   standing; not about them that have a complete standing in the church
   already, and so are no candidates for admission; which, he says, is the
   case of these infants. And the question as he often states it is
   concerning them that may lawfully come. And this objection, from
   infants being born in the church, as it must be understood from Mr. W.
   does not touch this question. For when Mr. W. objects, that some
   persons are born in the church, and therefore may lawfully come to
   sacraments, he cannot be understood to mean, that their being born in
   the church alone is sufficient; but that, besides this, persons must
   have some virtue or religion, of one sort or other, in order to their
   lawful coming. For he is full in it, that it is not lawful for men to
   come without moral virtue and sincerity. Therefore the question comes
   to this in the result: seeing persons, besides their being born in
   covenant, must have some sort of virtue and religion, in order to a
   lawful coming to the Lord's supper, what sort of virtue and religion
   that is, whether common or saving? Now this question is not touched by
   the present objection. Merely persons being born in covenant, is no
   more evidence of their having moral sincerity, than saving grace. Yea,
   there is more reason to suppose the latter, than the former without it,
   in the infant children of believing parents. For the Scripture gives us
   ground to think, that some infants have the habit of saving grace, and
   that they have a new nature given them. But no reason at all to think,
   that ever God works any mere moral change in them, or infuses any
   habits of moral virtue without saving grace.--And we know, they cannot
   come by moral habits in infancy, any other way than by immediate
   infusion. They cannot obtain them by human instruction, nor contract
   them by use and custom. And especially there is no reason to think,
   that the children of such as are visible saints, according to Mr. W's
   scheme, have any goodness infused into them by God, of any kind. For in
   his scheme, all that are morally sincere may lawfully receive the
   privileges of visible saints; but we have no scripture grounds to
   suppose, that God will bless the children of such parents as have
   nothing more than moral sincerity, with either common or saving grace.
   There are no promises of the covenant of grace made to such parents,
   either concerning themselves, or their children. The covenant of grace
   is a conditional covenant; as both sides in this controversy suppose.
   And therefore, by the supposition, men have no title to the promises
   without the condition. And as saving faith is the condition, the
   promises are all made to that, both those which respect persons
   themselves, and those that respect their seed. As it is with many
   covenants or bargains among men; by these, men are often entitled to
   possessions for themselves and their heirs: yet they are entitled to no
   benefits of the bargain, neither for themselves, nor their children,
   but by complying with the terms of the bargain. So with respect to the
   covenant of grace, the apostle says, (Acts ii. 39.) "The promise is to
   you and to your children." So the apostle says to the jailor, (Acts
   xvi. 31.) "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved,
   and thy house." And we find many promises, all over the Bible, made to
   the righteous, that God will bless their seed for their sakes. Thus,
   Psal. cxii. 2. "The generation of the upright shall be blessed." Psal.
   lxix. 35, 36. "For God will save Zion;--The seed also of his servants
   shall inherit it; and they that love his name shall dwell therein."
   (See also Prov. xiv. 26. Psal. cii. 28. Psal. ciii. 17, 18. Exod. xx.
   5, 6. Deut. vii. 9.) Supposing these to be what are called indefinite
   promises; yet do they extend to any but the seed of the righteous?
   Where are any such promises made to the children of unsanctified men,
   the enemies of God, and slaves of the devil, (as Mr. W. owns all
   unsanctified men are,) whatever moral sincerity and common religion
   they may have?

   The baptism of infants is the seal of these promises made to the seed
   of the righteous: and on these principles, some rational account may be
   given of infant baptism; but there is no account can be given of it on
   Mr. W.s scheme, no warrant can be found for it in Scripture; for they
   are promises, that are the warrant for privileges: but there are no
   promises of God's word to the seed of morally sincere men, and only
   half Christians. Thus this argument of Mr. W.s, let us take it which
   way we will, has nothing but what is as much, yea, much more, against
   his scheme, than against mine.

   However, if this were not the case, but all the show or pretence of
   strength there is in the argument, lay directly and only against me,
   yet the strength of it, if tried, will avail to prove nothing at all.
   The pretended argument, so far as I can find it out, is this; The
   children of visible saints are born in covenant; and being already in
   covenant, they must have a right to the privileges of the covenant,
   without any more ado: such therefore have a right to come to the Lows
   supper, whether they are truly godly or not.

   But the show of argument there is here, depends on the ambiguity of the
   phrase, being in covenant; which signifies two distinct things: either,
   (1.) Being under the obligation and bond of the covenant; or, (2.)
   Being conformed to the covenant, and complying with the terms of it.
   Being the subject of the obligations and engagements of the covenant,
   is a thing quite distinct from being conformed to these obligations,
   and so being the subject of the conditions of the covenant.

   Now it is not being in covenant in the former, but the latter sense,
   that gives a right to the privileges of the covenant. The reason is
   plain, because compliance and conformity to the terms of a covenant, is
   the thing which gives right to all the benefits; and not merely being
   under ties to that compliance and conformity. Privileges are not
   annexed merely to obligations, but to compliance with obligations.

   Many that do not so much as visibly comply with the conditions of the
   covenant, are some of God's covenant people in that sense, that they
   are under the bonds and engagements of the covenant; so were Korah and
   his company; so were many gross idolaters in Israel, that lived openly
   in that sin; and so may heretics, deists, and atheists be God's
   covenant people. They may still be held under the bonds of their
   covenant engagements to God; for their great wickedness and apostacy
   does not free them from the obligation of the solemn promises and
   engagements they formerly entered into. But yet being in covenant
   merely in this sense, gives them no right to any privileges of the
   covenant. In order to that, they must be in covenant in another sense;
   they must cordially consent to the covenant; which indeed Mr. W.
   himself owns, when he acknowledges, that in order to come to
   sacraments, men must profess a cordial consent to, and compliance with
   the conditions of the covenant of grace. [605] And if Mr. W. inquires,
   Why those children that were born in the covenant, are not cast out,
   when in adult age they make no such profession; certainly, it as much
   concerns him to answer, as me; for it is as much his doctrine, as mine,
   that they must profess such consent.--But I am willing to answer
   nevertheless.--They are not cast out, because it is a matter held in
   suspense, whether they do cordially consent to the covenant, or not; or
   whether their making no such profession do not arise from some other
   cause. And none are to be excommunicated, without some positive
   evidence against them. And therefore they are left in the state they
   were in, in infancy, not admitted actually to partake of the Lord's
   supper (which actual participation is a new positive privilege) for
   want of a profession, or some evidence, beyond what is merely negative,
   to make it visible that they do consent to the covenant. For it is
   reasonable to expect some appearance more than what is negative, of a
   proper qualification, in order to being admitted to a privilege beyond
   what they may have hitherto actually received. A negative charity may
   be sufficient for a negative privilege, such as freedom from censure
   and punishment; but something more than a negative charity, is needful
   to actual admission to a new positive privilege.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [605] If it be said here, those who have been born of baptized
   ancestors, though they do not comply with the terms of the covenant,
   are in covenant, in this sense, that they have a right to the promises
   of the covenant conditionally, in case they will hereafter comply: I
   answer, So are all mankind in covenant, God may be said to have bound
   himself to them all conditionally; and many have these promises
   declared to them, that still remain Jews, Mahometans, or heathens.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XV.

   A particular examination of Mr. W.s defence of the ninth objection, or
   that boasted argument, that if it be not lawful for unconverted men to
   come to the Lord's supper, then none may come but they that know
   themselves to be converted.

   This argument has been greatly gloried in, as altogether invincible.
   Mr. W. seems to have been alarmed, and his spirits raised to no small
   degree of warmth, at the pretence of an answer to it: and he uses many
   big words and strong expressions in his reply; such as, It is
   absolutely certain--It is beyond my power to comprehend, and I believe
   beyond the power of any man to tell me--this I assert and stand to--as
   plain as the sun--a contradiction of the Bible, of the light of nature,
   and of the common sense of mankind, &c. &c. But let us get away from
   the noise of a torrent, and bring this matter to the test of calm
   reasoning, and examine it to the very bottom.

   Here let it be considered, wherein precisely the argument consists.--If
   it has any strength in it, it consists in this proposition, viz. That
   it is not lawful for men to come to sacraments, without a known right.
   This is a proposition Mr. S. himself reduces the argument to, in his
   Appeal, p. 62,63. And it is very evident, that the whole strength of
   the argument rests on the supposed truth of this proposition.

   And here let it be noted, what sort of knowledge of a right Mr. S. and
   Mr. W. mean in this argument. It is knowledge as distinguished from
   such an opinion, or hope, as is founded on probability. Thus Mr. S.
   expressly insists, that a man must not only think he has a right, but
   he must know it--(Appeal, p. 62.) And again, (p. 63.) Probable hopes
   will not warrant him to come.

   Mr. W. uses many peremptory strong expressions (p. 109.) to set forth
   the certainty of that which never was denied; viz. That a man cannot
   know he has a right, unless he knows he has the qualification which
   gives him a right. But this is not the thing in question: The point is,
   Whether a man may not have a lawful right, or way not lawfully come,
   and yet not know his right, with such a knowledge and evidence as is
   beyond probability? This is the thing asserted, and herein lies the
   argument. And the negative of this cannot be maintained, in order to
   maintain Mr. W.s scheme, without the grossest absurdity; it being a
   position, which, according to Scripture, reason, Mr. S.s doctrine, and
   Mr. W.s own, effectually destroys his scheme.

   To this purpose, I observed, if this proposition be true, that no man
   may come, save he who not only thinks but knows he has a right, then it
   will follow, that no unconverted person may come, unless he knows that
   doctrine to be true, That unconverted men may have a right. Because an
   unconverted man cannot know, that he himself has a right, unless he
   knows that doctrine which Mr. S. maintained, to be true, viz. That men
   may have a right, though they are unconverted. And consequently no one
   unconverted man may lawfully come to the Lord's supper, unless he is so
   knowing in this point of controversy, as not only to think, and have
   probable evidence, that this opinion is right, but knows it to be
   so.--Mr. W. endeavours to help the matter by a distinction, of
   different kinds of knowledge: and by the help of this distinction would
   make it out, that common people in general, and even boys and girls of
   sixteen years old, may with ease know, that his doctrine about
   unsanctified men's lawful coming to the Lord's supper, is true. And we
   must understand him (as he is defending Mr. S.s argument) that they may
   know it with that evidence which is distinguished from probability; and
   this according to Mr. W. himself, is certainty; which he speaks of as
   above a thousand probabilities. (See p. 118. c.) But how miserable is
   this; o pretend, that his doctrine about qualifications for sacraments,
   is so far from a disputable point, that it is of such plain and obvious
   evidence to common people, and even children, that without being
   studied in divinity, they may not only think it to be exceeding
   probable, but know it to be true! When it is an undeniable fact, that
   multitudes of the greatest ability and piety, that have spent their
   lives in the study of the Holy Scriptures, have never so much as
   thought so.

   Again, I observed, that according to Mr. S.s doctrine, not one
   unconverted man in the world can know, that he has warrant to come to
   the Lord's supper; because, if he has any warrant, God has given him
   warrant in the Scriptures: and therefore if any unconverted man, not
   only thinks, but knows, that he has warrant from God, he must of
   consequence not only think, but know, the Scriptures to be the word of
   god. Whereas it was the constant doctrine of Mr. S. that no unconverted
   man knows the Scriptures to be the word of God. [606] --But Mr. W.
   would make it out, that Mr. S. did hold, unconverted men might know the
   Scriptures to be the word of God; but only not know it with a gracious
   knowledge, such as effectually bowed men's hearts, and influenced them
   to a gracious obedience, (p. 113. b.) But let us see whether it was so,
   or not. Mr. S. in his Nature of Saving Conversion (p. 73.) says, "The
   carnal man is ignorant of the divine authority of the word of God;--His
   wound is, that he does not know certainly the divine authority of these
   institutions; he does not know but they are the inventions of men."
   Again (ibid. p. 74.) he says, "The carnal man is uncertain of those
   things that are the foundation of his reasonings. He thinks there is a
   great probability of the truth of these things; but he has no
   assurance. His principles are grounded on an uncertain proposition."
   And he observes, (p. 20.) "Men when converted, do not look on it as
   probable, that the word is his word, as they did before; but they have
   assurance of the truth of it."--So elsewhere, (Guide to Christ, p. 26.)
   "They that have not grace, do not properly believe the word of
   god."--And in another book, (Safety of Ap. p. 6.) "The gospel always
   works effectually where it is believed and received as the truth of
   god."--In another book, (Benef. of the Gos. p. 149.) " Common
   illumination does not convince men of the truth of the gospel."--In his
   discourse on the Virtue of Christ's Blood, (p. 27.) speaking of such as
   have no interest in the blood of Christ, he says, "They are strangers
   to the divine authority of the word of god." Again, (ibid. p. 16.)
   "Before [i.e. before saving faith] they were at a loss whether the word
   was the word of god."--To the like purpose are many other passages in
   his writings. (See Nat. of Sav. Conv. p. 72. Safety of Ap. p. 6, 7, 99,
   107, 186, 187, 229.--Benef. of the Gosp. p. 89.)

   So that here, if it be true, that some unconverted men have a divine
   warrant to come to the Lord's supper; and if the thing which is the
   foundation of this argument, be also true, viz. That in order to men's
   warrantably coming to the Lord's supper, they must not only think but
   know they have a right; then it must be true likewise, that they not
   only think but know, that the Scripture, wherein this warrant is
   supposed to be delivered, is the word of god. And then we have the
   following propositions to make hang together: that unconverted men are
   ignorant of the Scripture's being the word of God, are uncertain of it,
   have no assurance of it, are not convinced of it, do not properly
   believe it, are at a loss whether it be the word of God, or not; and
   yet they not only think, but know, that the Scriptures are the word of
   God, and that the gospel, which is the charter of all christian
   privileges, is divine; they have a knowledge of it, which is above all
   probable hope or thought, and attended with evidence above a thousand
   probabilities.

   And now let it be considered, whether this agrees better with Mr. W.'s
   own doctrine, concerning men's knowing the truth and divine authority
   of the gospel, in what has been before cited from his sermons on Christ
   a King and Witness. Where he expressly says, that man, since the fall,
   is ignorant of the divine truth, and full of prejudices against it; has
   a view of the truth contained in the Bible, as a doubtful uncertain
   thing; receives it as what is probably true; sees it as a probable
   scheme, and something likely to answer the end proposed: but that after
   conversion it appears divinely true and real. (See p. 114, 115, and
   144.) Then unconverted men only looked on the truth of the word of God,
   as probable, something likely, yet as a doubtful uncertain thing; but
   now they not only think but know it to be true.

   No distinction, about the different kinds of knowledge, or the various
   ways of knowing, will ever help these absurdities, or reconcile such
   inconsistencies. If there be any such sort of knowing, as is
   contra-distinguished to probable thinking, and to such opinion as is
   built on a thousand probabilities, which yet is inconsistent with being
   ignorant, not believing, being uncertain, nor assured, nor convinced,
   only looking on a thing probable, looking on it doubtful and uncertain,
   it must certainly be a new and very strange sort of knowledge.

   But this argument, that is so clear and invincible, must have such
   supports as these, or must quite sink to the earth. It is indeed a
   remarkable kind of argument. It is not only as much against the scheme
   it is brought to support, as against that which it would confute; but
   abundantly more so. For if it were the case in truth, that none might
   come to the Lord's supper, but they that know they have a right, yet it
   would be no direct and proper proof, that unconverted men might come.
   It would indeed prove, that many godly men might not come; which, it is
   true, would bring some difficulty on the scheme opposed; yet would be
   no proof against it. But it is direct and perfect demonstration against
   the scheme it would support: it demonstrates according to the
   Scripture, and according to the doctrine of those that urge the
   argument, that not one unconverted man in the world may lawfully come
   to the Lord's supper; as no one of them certainly knows the gospel to
   be divine, and so no one knows the charter to be authentic, in which
   alone the right of any to christian privileges is conveyed; hence no
   one unsanctified man is sure of his right; and therefore (as they draw
   the consequence) no one unsanctified man may come to the Lord's supper.
   And so it follows, that the more strongly Mr. W. stands to this
   argument, the more peremptory and confident his expressions are
   concerning it, the more violently and effectually does he supplant
   himself.

   And this position, that a man must not take any privilege, till he not
   only thinks, but knows, he has a right, is not only unreasonable, as
   used by Mr. W. against me, when indeed it is ten times as much against
   himself; but it is unreasonable in itself, as it is an argument, which
   if allowed and pursued, will prove, that a man may do nothing at all,
   never move hand or foot, for his own advantage, unless he first, not
   only thinks, but knows, it is his duty. Mr. W. himself owns (p. 116.)
   that all the duties, which God requires of us in his instituted
   worship, are privileges, as well as the Lord's supper: and so is every
   other duty, which we are to do for our own benefit. But all human
   actions are, upon the whole, either good or evil: every thing that we
   do as rational creatures, is either a duty, or a sin; and the neglect
   of every thing that is our duty is forbidden. So that we must never so
   much as take a step, or move a finger, upon only a probable judgment
   and hope; but must first know it to be our duty, before we do it: nay,
   we must neither move, nor voluntarily forbear to move, without a
   certainty of our duty in the case, one way or other!

   As to its being alike difficult for men to know or be assured of their
   moral sincerity, as of their real sanctification, I shall speak to that
   under the next head; whereby it will appear again, another way, that
   this argument is vastly more against Mr. W.'s scheme than mine.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [606] I did not say, that it was also a doctrine according to
   Scripture; for there was no occasion for this, among those with whom I
   had chiefly to do in this controversy; with whom I knew it was a point
   as much settled and uncontroverted, as any doctrine of Mr. S. whatever.
   And I know it to be the current doctrine of orthodox divines: who ever
   allow this doctrine to be implied in such texts as those. John xvii. 7.
   1 John iv. 15, 16. Chap. v. 1, 10. and many others.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XVI.

   A consideration of Mr. W.'s defence on the 10th objection, against the
   doctrine of the unlawfulness of unsanctified men coming to the Lord's
   supper, that it tends to the great perplexity and torment of many godly
   men in their attendance on this ordinance.

   My first reply to this objection was, that it is for want of like
   tenderness of conscience, that the other doctrine which insists on
   moral sincerity, does not naturally bring such as are received on those
   principles, into as great perplexities.--Mr. W. in his animadversions
   upon it says, "This is an assertion which I take to be contrary to
   common sense, and the experience of mankind: and the allowing of it to
   be true, must overthrow the law of nature, and cast infinite reproach
   upon the author of it."

   These are strong expressions; but let us bring the matter to the test
   of reason.--The necessary qualification, on Mr. W.'s principles, is
   moral sincerity, and a certain degree of moral sincerity. For there is
   scarcely any man, that lives under the light of the gospel, and is not
   an atheist, or deist, but what has some degree of moral sincerity, in
   some things pertaining to Christianity and his duty; some degree of
   common faith, some degree of conviction of the need of Christ, some
   desire of him, and moral willingness though from selfish
   considerations, to be good; and some purpose to endeavour a conformity
   to the covenant of grace, and to seek salvation on the terms of it. But
   how shall a man know what is a sufficient degree of these things? Mr.
   W. has determined the matter thus; that his belief of the doctrine of
   the gospel, and moral willingness, to be conformed to the covenant of
   grace, must be with his whole heart, (p. 49. e. p. 5. c. 36. a.) And
   that his conviction of his undone state without Christ must be deep;
   and his desire of Christ and his benefits fervent, and his purpose
   earnest, (p. 75. e. p. 11. c.) so as to induce him to enter into
   covenant with all the earnestness he can, and engage him to use
   endeavours with all the strength and power that he has. (p. 83. e. p.
   32. d. p. 36. a.)

   Now how exceeding difficult must it be for unsanctified men to
   determine, with any assurance, whether they have moral sincerity to
   such a degree!--How difficult for them to know, whether their
   convictions are thus deep! Every one that is used to deal with souls
   under conviction, knows, that when they are indeed under deep
   convictions, they are especially apt to complain of the hardness of
   their hearts, and to think their convictions are not deep.--How
   difficult to determine, with any assurance, whether their assent rises
   so high, that they can truly be said to believe with all their hearts!
   Whether their moral willingness to be conformed to the covenant of
   grace, be with their whole heart! And whether they are really engaged
   with all the solicitude they can, and are willing to do all that they
   can! These things, I am pretty sure, are of vastly more difficult
   determination, than whether a man has any true holiness, or not. For in
   the former case, the determination is concerning the degree of things,
   that are capable of an infinite variety of degrees; some of which are
   nearer to, and others are further from, the lowest sufficient degree:
   and consequently some of the degrees that are not sufficient, may yet
   be very near; which renders the matter of very difficult determination;
   unspeakably more so, that when what is to be distinguished, is the
   nature of things, which in all degrees is widely diverse, and even
   contrary to that which it is to be distinguished from: as is the case
   between saving and common grace; which Mr. W. himself acknowledges.
   [607] It is more easy to distinguish light from darkness, than to
   determine the precise degree of light; and so it is more easy to
   determine, whether a man be alive or dead, than whether there be
   exactly such a certain degree of vigour and liveliness.

   This moral sincerity, which Mr. W. insists on, is a most indeterminate
   uncertain thing; a phrase without any certain precise meaning; and must
   for ever remain so. It being not determined, how much men must be
   morally sincere; how much they must believe with a moral sincerity;
   whether the deeply awakened and convinced sinner must believe, that God
   is absolutely sovereign with respect to his salvation, and that Christ
   is perfectly sufficient to save him in particular; and to what degree
   of moral assent and consent, he must believe and embrace these things,
   and comply with the terms of the covenant of grace; whether he must be
   willing to obey all God's commands, the most difficult, as well as the
   most easy, and this in all circumstances, even the most difficult that
   can arise in providence; or whether only in some circumstances; and
   what, and how many. The Scripture gives us many infallible rules, by
   which to distinguish between saving grace, and common. But I know of no
   rules given in the Bible, by which men may certainly determine this
   precise degree of moral sincerity. So that if grace is not the thing
   which gives a right to sacraments in the sight of God, we have no
   certain rule in the Bible, commensurate to the understanding of
   mankind, by which to determine when we have a right, and when not.--Now
   let the impartial reader judge, which scheme lays the greatest
   foundation for perplexity to communicants of tender consciences,
   concerning their qualifications for the Lord's supper; and whether this
   argument drawn from such a supposed tendency to such perplexity (if
   there be any force in it) is not vastly more against Mr. W.s scheme,
   than mine.

   And here by the way, let it be noted, that by these things it is again
   demonstrated, that the ninth objection, the great argument considered
   in the preceding section, concerning the necessity of a known right, in
   order to a lawful partaking, is exceedingly more against Mr. W.s
   principles, than mine; inasmuch as, on his principles, it is so much
   more difficult for men to know, whether they have a right, or have the
   prescribed qualification, or not.

   I answered this argument in the second place, by alleging, that this
   doctrine of the necessity of saving grace in order to a right to the
   Lord's supper, is not properly the cause of the perplexities of
   doubting saints, in their attendance on this ordinance; though it may
   be the occasion: but that their own negligence and sin is the true
   cause; and that this doctrine is no more the cause of these
   perplexities, than the doctrine of the necessity of saving grace in
   order to salvation, is the cause of the perplexity of doubting saints
   when they come to die. Upon which Mr. W. says, There is no shadow of
   resemblance of these cases, because death is no ordinance, &c. But if
   death is no ordinance, yet it is the required duty of the saints to
   yield themselves to the Lord, and resign to the will of God, in their
   death. And in this respect, the cases are exactly parallel, that
   perplexities are just so much the consequence of the respective
   doctrines, in one case, as in the other; that is, the perplexities of a
   doubting saint on a death-bed, the difficulty and trouble he meets with
   in resigning himself to the will of God in dying, is just in the same
   manner the consequence of the doctrine of the necessity of saving grace
   in order to eternal salvation, as the perplexities of a doubting saint
   at the Lord's table are the consequence of the doctrine of the
   necessity of saving grace in order to a right to the Lord's supper. And
   this is sufficient for my purpose.

   Mr. W. himself says, in his answer to Mr. Croswell, (p. 122. c.)
   "Although there are comparatively few that obtain assurance; yet it is
   through their own sloth and negligence that they do not. We fully agree
   with Mr. Perkins, that a man in this life may ordinarily be infallibly
   certain of his salvation. So Mr. Stoddard (in his sermon on one good
   sign--) says, "There is no necessity, that the people of God should lie
   under darkness and temptation; they may obtain assurance."--Now, if
   this be the case, then certainly there is no justice in laying the
   temptation and uneasiness, which is the effect of sloth and negligence,
   to the doctrine I maintain, in those that embrace it. It is a wise
   dispensation of God, that he has so ordered things, that comfort in
   ordinances, and in all duties, and under all providences, should be to
   be obtained in a way of diligence; and that slothfulness should be the
   way to perplexity and uneasiness, and should be a way hedged up with
   thorns, agreeable to Prov. xv. 19.--That it is so ordered, is for the
   good of the saints, as it tends to turn them out of this thorny path,
   into the way of diligence. And so this doctrine, as it has this
   tendency, has a tendency in the end to that solid peace and comfort,
   which is the happy fruit of their holy diligence. And that, and not the
   saints' perplexity, is properly the effect of this doctrine.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [607] See his serm. on Christ a King and Witness, (p. 84. e.) where he
   says, "notwithstanding the visible likeness of nominal and real
   Christians, there is a wide difference, as there is between the
   subjects of christ and the slaves of the devil."
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. XVII.

   Containing some further observations on what is said by Mr. W. in
   support of the 13th objection, concerning God's commanding all the
   members of the visible church, that are not ignorant nor scandalous, to
   attend all external covenant duties.

   It has been already demonstrated (sect. 8th of this third part) that in
   this argument the question is begged, notwithstanding what Mr. W. has
   said to the contrary, which sufficiently overthrows the whole argument.
   Nevertheless, that I may pass by nothing, which those who are on Mr.
   W.s side may be likely to think material, I will here make some further
   observations on this objection, as represented and supported by Mr. W.

   The chief thing, that has the plausible appearance of argument in what
   Mr. S. and Mr. W. say on this head, is this; "That for God to require
   all who are in covenant to come to the Lord's supper, and yet to forbid
   them to come unconverted, is to suppose, that he both commands them and
   forbids them at the same time." And this is thought to be the more
   manifest, inasmuch as conversion is not in men's power. Though it is
   not denied, but that God justly requires men to be converted, or to be
   truly holy. (See p. 129, 130.)

   To this I would say,

   (1.) If when they speak of commanding and forbidding at the same time,
   they mean God's commanding and forbidding the same thing at the same
   time, no such consequence follows from my principles. For that thing,
   and that only, which I suppose God requires of any, is to come to the
   Lord's supper with a sanctified heart; and that this God requires at
   all times, and never forbids at any time; and that to come without this
   qualification, is what he always forbids, and requires at no time. So
   that what he requires, at the same time he forbids something, is not
   the same thing that he forbids; but a very different and contrary one.
   And it is no absurdity, to suppose, that God requires one thing, and
   forbids a contrary thing at the same time.

   To illustrate this by an example: It was the duty of the Jews at
   Jerusalem, openly to confess christ, to own him as the Messiah, at that
   hour when he was led away to be crucified, and openly to testify their
   adoring respect to him on that extraordinary occasion. But yet they did
   not believe him to be the Messiah, and could not believe it, (many of
   them at least,) since they looked on his present abject circumstances
   as a demonstration, that he was not the Messiah. It was beyond their
   power, at least at once, in that instant, to give their assent, with
   all their hearts, to such a supposition. Nor was it in their power, to
   exercise an adoring respect to him: for, besides their strong
   prejudices, most of them were judicially hardened, and given up to a
   spirit of unbelief and obstinate rejection of him; as appears by that
   account, (John xii. 39, 40.) "Therefore they could not believe, because
   that Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their
   heart, that they should not see with their eyes," &c. (See also Luke
   xix. 41, 42. and Matt. xiii. 14, 15.) And yet it would have been
   unlawful for them to have made a lying profession; to profess, that
   they believed him to be the Messiah, and that they received and loved
   him as such, when at the same time they hated him, and did not believe
   he was the Messiah.--But here is no requiring and forbidding the same
   thing at the same time: for the only thing required of them was, to
   have faith and love, and to testify it; which was not at all forbidden.

   (2.) None of the difficulties, which Mr. S. or Mr. W. object--either
   God's supposed requiring impossibilities, or his requiring and
   forbidding at the same time--do follow, any more on my principles, than
   on Mr. W.s. Mr. W. maintains, that God calls men this moment to enter
   into covenant with him, and commands them to do it. (p. 28. c.) One
   thing implied in this, according to his own frequent explanation of
   visibly entering into covenant, is professing a belief of the
   fundamental doctrines of Christianity. Now therefore, we will suppose a
   man to be a candidate for baptism, who has been brought up in Arianism;
   and is strongly persuaded, that the doctrine of the trinity is not
   true: yet he is this moment required to profess that doctrine; but has
   no ability in a moment to believe the doctrine, because he does not at
   present see the evidence of it. For as Mr. W. himself says, (Sermon on
   Christ a King and Witness, p. 91. d. e. and 92. a.) "The understanding
   cannot be brought to yield its assent to any truth, which it does not
   see the truth or apprehend the evidence of.--If you would hire him with
   cart-loads or ship-loads of gold and silver; if you should imprison
   him, whip him, burn him; you cannot make him believe a thing to be
   true, which he apprehends to be incredible, or which he sees no
   sufficient reason to believe." Now therefore what shall the man do, on
   Mr. W.'s principles? He is commanded to profess the doctrine of the
   Trinity, which must be professed in order to be lawfully baptized in
   the name of the Trinity; and on Mr. W.s principles, he is commanded to
   do it this moment. Yet also on his principles, if the man professes it,
   and is not morally sincere, or knows he does not believe it, he is
   guilty of horrible falsehood and prevarication; which God doubtless
   forbids. Therefore here is certainly as much of an appearance of
   commanding and forbidding the same thing at the same time, as in the
   other case.

   Every husbandman in Israel, that lived even in Christ's time, was
   required to offer a basket of the first-fruits; and was commanded when
   he offered it, solemnly to make that profession, concerning the
   principal facts relating to the redemption out of Egypt,--which is
   prescribed in . "A Syrian ready to perish was my father," &c. Now
   supposing there had been an Israelite, who did not believe the truth of
   all these facts, which came to pass so many ages before, (as there are
   now many in christendom, who do not believe the facts concerning Jesus
   Christ,) and continued in his unbelief, till the very moment of his
   offering: God peremptorily requires him to make this profession; yet
   none will say, that he may lawfully profess these things, at the same
   time when he does not believe them to be true. However, here is no
   commanding and forbidding the same thing at the same time: because,
   though God required the Jews to make this profession, yet the thing
   required was to believe it and profess it. Though some might not
   believe it, nor be able for the present to believe it; yet this
   inability arose from depravity and wickedness of heart, which did not
   at all excuse their unbelief, for one moment.* Mr. W. himself owns, (p.
   129. b. c.) that God may require those things which are out of men's
   natural power.

   Now this may be laid down as a truth, of easy and plain evidence; if
   God may require what wicked men, while such, are unable to perform,
   then he may also require those things which are connected with it, and
   dependent on it, and which, if the other be done, they would be able to
   do, and might do, and without which they may not do it. So, if God may
   require an unsanctified man to love him, then he may require him to
   testify and profess his love, as I suppose Christians do in the act of
   partaking of the Lord's supper; and yet it may not be lawful for him to
   testify and profess love, when he has it not. [608]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [608] Much of the controversy discussed in this book (and the preceding
   one) which was agitated with great warmth in the American churches, and
   which is not unfrequently started among congregational churches in
   Great Britain, seems to originate in the want of clearly stating the
   scriptural design of entering into full communion. If this be not
   previously settled, there is but little hope of a satisfactory
   adjustment. Without entering here into the minutia of proofs, the
   following particulars are submitted to the reader's consideration, as
   probably calculated to aid his inquiries. 1. The chief end of every
   human society, as well as of every intelligent being, ought to be this.
   viz. To glorify God, or to represent him as glorious in all his
   perfections and ways. No human society, of whatever kind, is exempt
   from this obligation. For a society is only an aggregate of
   individuals; and as every individual is obliged to do this in all his
   actions, he is therefore thus obliged in his social capacity. This
   obligation arises from the respective natures of God and the creature,
   and it is clearly enjoined in the Holy Scripture. "Whatsoever ye do, do
   all to the glory of God"--But. 2. The distinguishing subordinate end or
   special design of any society, must designate its peculiar nature,
   whereby it is best adapted to promote that end. Though every society is
   bound to seek the one chief end, yet every social union is not adapted
   to answer all social ends. Societies of a religious, moral, charitable,
   scientific, or political design, must have members of a corresponding
   character, otherwise the proposed end cannot be answered. The
   qualifications of the members must have an aptitude to promote the
   design. 3. The distinguishing design of a society denominated a church,
   evidently, is to promote religion. Numbers are united by divine
   appointment, to maintain religion--to exhibit before the world real
   Christianity-- to encourage those who seek the right way--to edify one
   another--and the like. Such particulars we gather from the sacred
   Scriptures. " Striving together for the faith of the gospel."--"That ye
   may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God (resembling him) without
   rebuke (or, cause of rebuke) in the minds of a crooked and perverse
   nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the
   word of life."-A church of Christ is appointed to shine in a dark
   world, to be blameless and harmless among the crooked and perverse, to
   imitate God, as far as practicable, while among the children of the
   wicked one, to give no offence to those who are without or those who
   are within the church, to hold forth, and hold fast, the word of life,
   by doctrine, by discipline, and by practice. "Him that is weak in the
   faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations." Provided a person
   be desirous of christian fellowship, and is possessed of so much
   knowledge, so much experienced efficacy of truth, and so much good
   conduct, as is calculated to answer, in a prevailing degree, the design
   of a church being at all formed, let him not be rejected. "Wherefore
   comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye
   do?" This is done by mutual instructions, exhortations, prayers, and
   praises; by watchful discipline, and the exercise of religious gifts;
   by friendly offices, and acts of christian kindness. 4. The preceding
   particulars are produced only as instances; but in order accurately to
   ascertain the special end of christian fellowship, in full communion,
   all the passages contained in the New Testament relating to the subject
   ought to be included. For until the revealed special design for which a
   church of Christ is instituted be ascertained, it is obviously not
   possible to ascertain the precise nature of the society, and
   consequently the qualifications of its members. However, 5. We will
   suppose that, by an appeal to all the passages of the New Testament,
   the precise design is known; from whence the nature of a church is
   deduced: the question returns,--Is there any general rule that may form
   an invariable standard by which all qualifications of candidates may be
   measured? There undoubtedly is, for this plain reason, because a church
   is a society instituted for specific ends, revealed in the New
   Testament. Now as these ends are matter of divine record, and not of
   human opinion, the standard is invariable. 6. We will further suppose,
   that the general rule, by which to measure qualifications for full
   communion, is The scriptural design for which a gospel church in full
   communion is divinely instituted. No party, however they may differ
   about other things, can object to this rule, with any colour of reason.
   To deny its claim, they must either subvert the evident principles of
   all voluntary societies, or else hold, that a christian church is not
   instituted in the New Testament for any specific end. But this no
   reasonable person, much less a serious Christian, will maintain. Hence,
   7. Those candidates for full communion, and only those, who are
   conformed to this rule, are fully qualified. But here it is of
   essential importance to observe, that though a rule is, and from its
   very nature must be, fixed and invariable, the qualifications of
   individuals are variable things, admitting of more or less conformity
   to it. The conjectures of men, however ingenious and plausible, cannot
   be admitted as a rule, because they are variable; but the rule must be
   deduced from the design itself of instituting a church, which is
   evidently a matter of pure divine pleasure, and which could not be
   known without a revelation from God. A rule, then, must be sought from
   the sacred oracles by an induction of particulars relating to the point
   in question, and from their harmonious agreement: and it is the
   business of every christian church, minister and member, to search the
   Scriptures in order to ascertain it. To contend about qualifications,
   before this is agreed upon, is to contend about the dimensions of
   different things, before a standard is fixed upon which to measure
   them. But the constituent parts of the qualifications in candidates
   cannot be found in Scripture: they must, most evidently, be sought in
   the characters of the individuals, which are indefinitely variable. To
   suppose that the character, or the actual attainment, of each candidate
   is revealed in Scripture, is too absurd to be maintained by any
   rational mind. Therefore, 8. What remains for a church to do in judging
   of qualifications, is to compare the proficiency of the candidate, with
   the scriptural rule. The former, admitting of indefinite degrees of
   approximation to the standard, must be learnt from the person himself,
   from his conduct, and from the testimony of others. His profession, his
   declared experience of divine truth, his deportment in society, in
   short, his general character, is to be viewed, in comparison with the
   evident design of God in forming a church. 9. Should it be objected,
   that different persons, or churches, might fix on a different standard,
   by adding more texts of Scripture out of which a various general result
   would arise; it is answered, that therefore this is the point to be
   first settled. When any disagree about the rule, they cannot of course
   agree about the qualifications. There are many texts, however, such as
   those above produced, concerning which there can be no disagreement.
   The rule therefore should be admitted, as far as it goes. A measure of
   a foot long may, as far as it goes, be a standard of straightness and
   of measure, as well as a yard or a fathom. Or, to change the
   comparison, a small measure of capacity may be equally accurate, to a
   certain degree, as a larger measure. Let the church of small
   attainments act charitably, and wait for brighter evidence. If any lack
   wisdom, let them ask of God, who giveth liberally. "Let us therefore,
   as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be
   otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless,
   whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
   mind the same thing." 10. The scriptural rule is not only invariable,
   but also perfect in its kind, as dictated by infinite wisdom for the
   noblest ends. But no human character, in the present state, is perfect,
   so as to comport universally with the standard. Therefore no candidate
   for communion is perfectly qualified; that is, his qualifications are
   only comparative. One may be qualified in a greater, and another in a
   smaller degree. One is qualified to fill his place eminently, another
   moderately well. One may be strong, and another weak in the faith. Yet
   he who is weak in the faith may be comparatively qualified. Therefore,
   11. Since qualifications are so various, and admit of indefinite
   approximations to the perfect standard, or deviations from it, we are
   bound to accede to another conclusion, viz. That whatever kind or
   degree of qualification appears to befriend, rather than to oppose, to
   honour, rather than to discredit, the scriptural design of full
   communion, ought to be admitted by the church. When a candidate for
   communion is proposed to a church, its immediate business is to consult
   the scriptural design of communion; and then to consider how far the
   qualifications of the candidate appear to befriend and to honour it 12.
   From the premises it follows, that to reason from qualifications for
   communion in the Jewish church, to those for full communion in a gospel
   church, must needs be uncertain and inconclusive; except it could be
   first proved, that the revealed design of each was the same. But it
   requires no great labour to show by an induction of particulars, that
   the design was very different; and consequently, that what would be a
   suitable qualification for the one. would not be so for the other. 13.
   We may further infer, that when a church requires a probable evidence
   of grace as the measuring rule of admission, and directs nearly all its
   attention to ascertain this point, its proceedings are irregular,
   unscriptural, and therefore unwarrantable. The rule of judging, as
   before shown, must be found in the Scripture, and not in the candidate.
   14. We may further infer from the preceding observations, that a
   probable evidence of grace in a candidate, is not the precise ground of
   the qualification, however desirable that evidence may be. Yet, because
   ordinarily, and most probably, the absence of saving grace implies the
   absence of the precise ground of answerableness to the scriptural
   design of full communion, such probable evidence is of great
   importance. However nice this distinction may appear to some, the want
   of attending to it seems to have constituted the chief difference
   between our author and his antagonists. And, in fair investigation,
   another question, different from what was agitated, ought to have been
   first settled, viz. Whether any person, who is not visibly the subject
   of saving grace, can "befriend, rather than oppose, can honour, rather
   than discredit, the scriptural design of full communion? " Fairly to
   answer this question in the negative, it is not enough to prove, that
   such a person cannot fully answer the scriptural design. But it ought
   to be proved, that no person destitute of such probable evidence of
   saving grace, in any circumstances whatever, can be found, who might
   befriend and honour the scriptural design of communion, rather than the
   contrary. This is the real hinge of the controversy. 15. It is an
   unscriptural notion, too much taken upon trust, that the immediate
   business of a church, is to form an opinion respecting the spiritual
   state of a person before God; as. whether be is the subject of saving
   grace --whether he has a principle of sincerity--whether his motives
   are spiritually pure, &c. Whereas, a church ought not to act the part
   of a jury on the candidate's real state towards God, but on his state
   towards the church. They are to determine, whether he is or is not
   eligible to answer the scriptural ends of such a society, and indeed of
   that particular church. For, as the circumstances of divers churches
   may be very different, there may be cases, where the same person may be
   eligible to one church, and not to another. In one church he may
   promote its welfare, in another hinder it. This may greatly depend on
   his peculiar tenets, and the zeal with which he may be disposed to
   maintain them. In one society he may be a source of disquiet and
   confusion, but in another the reverse. 16 Hence it is evident, that a
   visibility of saving grace, though it claims the christian love and
   respect of the church, does not in all cases constitute eligible
   qualifications. For, whatever has an evident tendency to produce
   disputes, animosities, and divisions in a church, ought to be kept out
   of it. But the admission of a person who appeared zealous for
   sentiments and customs opposite to those held by the church, would have
   this apparent tendency, notwithstanding his possessing a visibility of
   grace, on other accounts. Therefore, though a visibility of grace, in
   some cases, may be sufficiently plain, yet an apparent failure in other
   respects may be sufficient to show that a person is not qualified for
   full communion. In short, if the church have good reason to think, that
   his admission would do more harm than good, he should be deemed
   unqualified for membership in that society, though he may be entitled
   to a charitable opinion, or even christian love, on other accounts:
   and, on the contrary, if the church have good reason to think, that his
   admission would do more good than harm, he should be deemed qualified
   for membership--even though he may be less entitled to a charitable
   opinion of his state towards God, than the other. COROLLARIES 1. Any
   candidate who appears, in the charitable judgment of a christian
   church, likely to give a favourable representation of Christianity to
   the church and the world--to encourage the desirous, by his knowledge
   and tempers--and to give and receive christian edification in that
   communion--is, in the scripture sense, qualified for full communion. 2.
   Personal religion, in the sight of God, is to be deemed necessary only
   for the sake of enabling the candidate to answer such ends,--as far as
   membership is concerned; but, as final salvation is concerned, personal
   religion is indispensably necessary, this connexion being clearly
   revealed, as well as founded in the nature of things. 3. A christian
   minister may consistently exercise holy jealousy over some
   church-members, and warn them of the danger of hypocrisy, without
   threatening them with exclusion from their membership; because only
   their overt-acts (including sentiments, tempers, and conduct.) are the
   object of discipline, as they were of admission. 4. Some persons,
   though in a safe state towards God, may not answer the forementioned
   ends of membership, better than others who are not in such a state. 5.
   A person may be qualified for the society of heaven, while not
   qualified for full communion in a christian church; because the natures
   of the two societies are different, and consequently the scriptural
   ends of their admission into each. For infants, and idiots &c. may be
   qualified by grace for the society of heaven; but are totally
   unqualified for full communion in the church on earth. 6. Were
   christian churches to act always on these principles, much bitter
   strife and useless discussions would be avoided, in the admission and
   exclusion of members. For, in neither the one nor the other, would the
   church pronounce on the state of the persons towards God; for when any
   were admitted, no handle would be afforded to the presumption, that
   membership below is a qualification for heaven - and when any were
   excluded, no occasion would be given to the excommunicated person, or
   to the world, to pass the censure of uncharitableness on the church;
   for every voluntary society has a right to judge, according to its own
   appropriate rules, who is, and who is not, qualified to promote its
   welfare.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      AN APPENDIX.

   Being a Letter to the people of the first church and congregation in
   Northampton.

   Dear brethren,

   Though I am not now your pastor, yet having so long stood in that
   relation to you, I look on myself obliged, notwithstanding all that has
   of late passed between us, still to maintain a special concern for your
   spiritual welfare. And as your present circumstances appear to me very
   evidently attended with some peculiar dangers, threatening the great
   wounding of the interest of vital religion among you; which probably
   most of you are not well aware of; I look on myself called to point
   forth your danger to you, and give you warning. What I now especially
   have respect to, is the danger I apprehend you are in, from the
   contents of that book of Mr. W. of Lebanon, to which the foregoing
   performance is a reply; which I perceive has been written and published
   very much by your procurement and at your expense; and so (it may
   naturally be supposed and expected) is dispersed in your families, and
   will be valued and much used by you as a book of great importance. What
   I regard, is not so much the danger you are in of being established by
   that book in your former principles, concerning the admission of
   members; (though I think these principles are indeed very opposite to
   the interest of true piety in churches;) but what I now mean is the
   danger there is, that while you are making much of that book as a means
   to maintain Mr. Stoddard's doctrine concerning the terms of communion,
   you, and especially your children, will by the contents of it be led
   quite off from other religious principles and doctrines, which Mr. S.
   brought you up in, and always esteemed as of vastly greater importance,
   than his particular tenet about the Lord's supper; and be naturally led
   into notions and principles, which he ever esteemed as of fatal
   tendency to the souls of men.

   By the way, I would have it observed, that when I take notice of these
   things in his book, my aim is not to beget in you an ill opinion of Mr.
   W. as though he were as corrupt in his settled persuasion, as one would
   be ready to think, if he were to judge only by things delivered in some
   parts of this book; and especially if it should be supposed, that he
   embraced all the consequences of what he here maintains. Men often do
   not see or allow the plain consequences of their own doctrines. And
   therefore, though I charge very pernicious consequences on some things
   he says, yet I do not charge him with embracing these consequences: nor
   will I undertake to explain how it could come to pass, that he should
   maintain things now in this book, in opposition to me, which are so
   contrary to the good and sound doctrines he has formerly delivered in
   other books. Let that be as it will, and however orthodox the
   principles may be, which he more ordinarily maintains; yet the ill and
   unsound things he delivers here, may do nevertheless hurt to you and
   your children, who may read this book without having in view the more
   wholesome doctrines of his other writings.

   For instance, you have ever been taught, that unconverted men do not
   really believe the gospel, are never truly convinced of its truth.; and
   that it is of great importance that sinners should be sensible of the
   unbelief and atheism of their hearts. But contrary to this, Mr. W.s
   book abundantly teaches you and your children this notion, That
   unsanctified men may really be convinced of the divine truth of the
   gospel, and believe it with all their hearts.

   You have been ever taught, that Christless sinners, especially when
   under some more slight awakenings, are very ready to flatter themselves
   that they are willing to accept of Christ as their Saviour; but that
   they must be brought off from their vain imagination, and be brought to
   see that the fault is in their own wills, and that their not being
   interested in Christ is owing to their obstinacy and perverseness, and
   wilful wicked refusal of God's terms; on which account they are wholy
   inexcusable, and may justly be cast off by God. But contrary to these
   things, this book of Mr. W. abundantly teaches you, that men in an
   unconverted state, may indeed cordially consent to the terms of the
   covenant of grace, may comply with the call of the gospel, may submit
   to its proposals, may have satisfaction in the offer God makes of
   himself as our God in Christ, may fall in with the terms of salvation
   propounded in the gospel, and renounce all other ways, and may
   sincerely and earnestly desire salvation in this way: and that some
   unconverted men are not wilful obstinate sinners, (p. 21. b.) Which
   doctrines, if embraced and retained by your children as true, will tend
   forever to hinder that conviction of the opposition and obstinacy of
   the heart, which Mr. S. ever taught you to be of such importance in
   order to the soul's humiliation, and thorough conviction of the justice
   of God in its damnation.

   You have ever been taught, that the hearts of natural men are wholly
   corrupt, entirely destitute of any thing spiritually good, not having
   the least spark of love to God, and as much without all things of this
   nature, as a dead corpse is without life: nevertheless, that it is hard
   for sinners to be convinced of this; that they are exceeding prone to
   imagine, there is some goodness in them, some respect to God in what
   they do; yet that they must be brought off from such a vain conceit of
   themselves, and come to see themselves utterly depraved and quite dead
   in sin.--But now this book of Mr. W. leads you to quite other notions;
   it leads you to suppose, that some natural men are above lukewarmness
   in religion, that they may truly profess to be the real friends of
   Christ, and to love God, more than his enemies, and above the world.

   It was a doctrine greatly inculcated on you by Mr. S. as supposing it
   of great importance for all to be convinced of it, that natural men are
   not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be; that they never do
   truly serve God, but are wholly under the dominion of sin and
   Satan.--But if sinners believe Mr. W.s book, they will not be convinced
   of these things; nay, they will believe quite contrary things, viz.
   That sinners, while in a state of nature, may have a cordial subjection
   to Jesus Christ, and may be subject to him with all their hearts, and
   may be so devoted to the service of Christ as to be above those that
   serve two masters, may give up themselves to be taught, ruled, and led
   by him in a gospel-way of salvation, and may give up all their hearts
   and lives to him.--And is it likely, while sinners believe these
   doctrines of Mr. W. that they will ever be brought to a thorough
   humiliation, in a conviction of their being wholly under the power of
   enmity against God, which Mr. S. taught you to be of such great
   importance?

   You know it was always a doctrine greatly insisted on by Mr. S. as a
   thing of the utmost consequence, that sinners who are seeking
   converting grace, should be thoroughly sensible of God's being under no
   manner of obligation, from any desires, labours, or endeavours of
   theirs, to bestow his grace upon them; either in justice, or truth, or
   any other way; but that when they have done all, God is perfectly at
   liberty, whether to show them mercy, or not; that they are wholly in
   the hands of God's sovereignty. (See Guide to Christ, p. 75. c. d. and
   Benef. of the Gosp. p. 64. and p. 75, 76.)--Whereas, if a sinner
   seeking salvation believes Mr. W.s book, it will naturally lead him to
   think quite otherwise. He (in p. 28.) speaking of such sincerity and
   earnestness of endeavours as may be in natural men, to qualify them to
   come to the sacrament, and of the great encouragement God has given,
   that he will bestow his saving grace on such as use such endeavours,
   adds these words, (near the bottom of the page,) "God never will be
   worse than his encouragement, nor do less than he has encouraged; and
   he has said, to him that hath, shall be given." Naturally leading the
   awakened sinner, who is supposed to have moral sincerity enough to come
   to the sacrament, to suppose, that God is not wholly at liberty; but
   that he has given so much encouragement, that it may be depended upon
   he will give his grace; and that it would not be reasonable or becoming
   of God to do otherwise; because if God should do so, he would be worse
   than his encouragement, and would not fulfil that word of his, to him
   who hath shall be given. And how will this tend effectually to prevent
   the sinner looking on God as absolutely at liberty, and prevent his
   resigning himself wholly into the hands of God, and to his sovereign
   pleasure!

   It is a doctrine which has ever been taught you, and used for the
   warning, awakening, and humbling of gospel sinners, that they have
   greater guilt, and are exposed to a more terrible punishment, than the
   heathen.--But this is spoken of by Mr. W. as an unsufferable treatment
   of visible saints; naturally tending to alleviate and smooth the matter
   in the consciences of those that are not scandalous persons, though
   they live in unbelief and the rejection of Christ under gospel light
   and mercy.

   If you will believe what Mr. W. says, (p. 56.) those blessed epithets
   and characters in the epistles of the apostles, which you always, from
   the first foundation of the town, have been taught to be peculiar and
   glorious expressions and descriptions of the blessed qualifications and
   state of true saints, and heirs of eternal happiness; such as "being
   elected, chosen before the foundation of the world, predestinated to
   the adoption of children through Jesus Christ; quickened, and made
   alive to God, though once dead in trespasses and sins; washed,
   sanctified, justified;--made to sit together in heavenly places in
   Christ; begotten again, to an inheritance incorruptible,
   undefiled;"--with innumerable others the like:--I say if you believe
   Mr. W. you have been quite mistaken all your days, and misled by all
   your ministers; these things are no more than were said of the whole
   nation of the Jews, even in their worst times! Which is (as I have
   observed) exactly agreeable to the strange opinion of Mr. Taylor, of
   Norwich, in England, that author who has so corrupted multitudes in New
   England. Thus you are at once deprived of all the chief texts in the
   Bible, that hitherto have been made use of among you, as teaching the
   discriminating qualifications and privileges of the truly pious, and
   the nature and benefits of a real conversion; too much paving the way
   for the rest of Taylor's scheme of religion, which utterly explodes the
   doctrines you have been formerly taught concerning eternal election,
   conversion, justification; and so, of a natural state of death in sin;
   and the whole doctrine of original sin, and of the mighty change made
   in the soul by the redemption of Christ applied to it.

   And this, taken with those other things which I have observed, in
   conjunction with some other things which have lately appeared in
   Northampton, tend to lead the young people among you apace into a
   liking to the new, fashionable, lax schemes of divinity, which have so
   greatly prevailed in New England of late; as wide as the East is from
   the West, from those great principles of religion, which have always
   been taught, and have been embraced, and esteemed most precious, and
   have justly been accounted very much your glory by others.

   If this book of Mr. W. with all these things, is made much of by you,
   and recommended to your children, as of great importance to defend the
   principles of the town, how far has your zeal for that one tenet,
   respecting natural men's right to the Lord's supper, transported you,
   and made you forget your value and concern for the most precious and
   important doctrines of Jesus Christ, taught you by Mr. Stoddard, which
   do most nearly concern the very vitals of religion!

   I beseech you, brethren, seasonably to consider how dark the cloud is
   that hangs over you, and how melancholy the prospect (especially with
   regard to the rising generation) in many respects. I have long been
   intimately acquainted with your religious circumstances, your notions
   and principles, your advantages and dangers; having had perhaps greater
   opportunity for it than any other person on earth.--Before I left you,
   it was very evident, that Arminianism, and other loose notions in
   religion, and Mr. Taylor's in particular, began to get some footing
   among you; and there were some things special in your circumstances,
   that threatened a great prevailing of such like notions: which if they
   should by degrees generally prevail, will doubtless by degrees put an
   end to what used to be called saving religion.

   Therefore let me entreat you to take the friendly warning I now give
   you, and stand on your guard against the encroaching evil. If you are
   not inclined to hearken to me, from any remaining affection to one
   whose voice and counsels you once heard with joy, and yielded to with
   great alacrity; yet let me desire you not to refuse, as you would act
   the part of friends to yourselves and your dear children.

   I am,

   Dear Brethren,

   He who was once (as I hope through grace) Your faithful pastor,

   And devoted servant for Jesus' sake,

   J. E.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    A HISTORY

        OF THE

  WORK OF REDEMPTION,

        CONTAINING

      THE OUTLINES OF A BODY OF DIVINITY,

        INCLUDING

  A VIEW OF CHURCH HISTORY,

      IN A METHOD ENTIRELY NEW.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PREFACE.

   It has long been desired by the friends of Mr. Edwards, that a number
   of his manuscripts should be published; but the disadvantage under
   which all posthumous publications must necessarily appear, and the
   difficulty of getting any considerable work printed in this infant
   country hitherto, have proved sufficient obstacles to the execution of
   such a proposal. The first of these obstacles made me doubt, for a
   considerable time after these manuscripts came into my hands, whether I
   could, consistently with that regard which I owe to the honour of so
   worthy a parent, suffer any of them to appear in the world. However,
   being diffident of my own sentiments, and doubtful whether I were not
   over-jealous in this matter, I determined to submit to the opinion of
   gentlemen, who are friends both to the character of Mr. Edwards and to
   the cause of truth. The consequence was, that they gave their advice
   for publishing them.

   The other obstacle was removed by a gentleman in the church of
   Scotland, who was formerly a correspondent of Mr. Edwards. He engaged a
   bookseller to undertake the work, and also signified his desire that
   these following discourses in particular might be made public.

   Mr. Edwards had planned a body of divinity, in a new method, and in the
   form of a history; in which he was first to show how the most
   remarkable events, in all ages from the fall to the present times,
   recorded in sacred and profane history, were adapted to promote the
   work of redemption; and then to trace, by the light of scripture
   prophecy, how the same work should be yet further carried on even to
   the end of the world. His heart was so much set on executing this plan,
   that he was considerably averse to accept the presidentship of
   Prince-town college, lest the duties of that office should put it out
   of his power.

   The outlines of that work are now offered to the public, as contained
   in a series of sermons, preached at Northampton in 1739, [609] without
   any view to publication. On that account, the reader cannot reasonably
   expect all that from them, which he might justly have expected, had
   they been written with such a view, and prepared by the author's own
   hand for the press.

   As to elegance of composition, which is now esteemed so essential to
   all publications, it is well known, that the author did not make that
   his chief study. However, his other writings, though destitute of the
   ornaments of fine language, have it seems that solid merit, which has
   procured both to themselves and to him a considerable reputation in the
   world, and with many, a high esteem. It is hoped that the reader will
   find in these discourses many traces of plain good sense, sound
   reasoning, and thorough knowledge of the sacred oracles, and real
   unfeigned piety: and that, as the plan is new, and many of the
   sentiments uncommon, they may afford entertainment and improvement to
   the ingenious, the inquisitive, and the pious reader; may confirm their
   faith in God's government of the world, in our holy christian religion
   in general, and in many of its peculiar doctrines; may assist in
   studying with greater pleasure and advantage the historical and
   prophetical books of Scripture; and may excite to a conversation
   becoming the gospel.

   That this volume may produce these happy effects in all who shall
   peruse it, is the hearty desire and prayer of

   The reader's most humble servant,

   Newhaven, Feb. 25, 1773.

   jonathan edwards.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [609] This is necessary to be remembered by the reader, in order to
   understand some chronological observations in the following work.
     __________________________________________________________________

   ADVERTISEMENT.

   They who have a relish for the study of the Scriptures, and have access
   to peruse the following sheets, will, I am persuaded, deem themselves
   indebted to the Rev. Mr. Edwards of Newhaven, for consenting to publish
   them. Though the acute philosopher and deep divine appears in them, yet
   they are in the general better calculated for the instruction and
   improvement of ordinary Christians, than those of President Edwards's
   writings, where the abstruse nature of the subject, or the subtle
   objections of opposers of the truth, led him to more abstract and
   metaphysical reasonings. The manuscript being intrusted to my care, I
   have not presumed to make any change in the sentiments or composition.
   I have, however, taken the liberty to reduce it from the form of
   sermons, which it originally bore, to that of a continued treatise; and
   I have so altered and diversified the marks of the several divisions
   and subdivisions, that each class of heads might be easily
   distinguished.

   JOHN ERSKINE.

   Edinburgh, April 29, 1774.

  A HISTORY

        OF THE

      WORK OF REDEMPTION.
     __________________________________________________________________

  GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

   Isaiah li. 8.

   For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat
   them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my
   salvation from generation to generation.

   The design of this chapter is to comfort the church under her
   sufferings, and the persecutions of her enemies; and the argument of
   consolation insisted on, is the constancy and perpetuity of God's mercy
   and faithfulness towards her, which shall be manifest in continuing to
   work salvation for her, protecting her against all assaults of her
   enemies, and carrying her safely through all the changes of the world,
   and finally, crowning her with victory and deliverance.

   In the text, this happiness of the church of God is set forth by
   comparing it with the contrary fate of her enemies that oppress her.
   And therein we may observe,

   I. How short-lived the power and prosperity of the church's enemies is:
   "The moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
   like wool;" [610] i. e. however great their prosperity is, and however
   great their present glory, they shall by degrees consume and vanish
   away by a secret curse of God, till they come to nothing; and all their
   power and glory, and so their persecutions, eternally cease, and they
   be finally and irrecoverably ruined: as the finest and most glorious
   apparel will in time wear away, and be consumed by moths and
   rottenness. We learn who those are that shall thus consume away, by the
   foregoing verse, viz. those that are the enemies of God's people:
   "Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart
   is my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of
   their revilings.

   II. The contrary happy lot and portion of God's church; expressed in
   these words, "My righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from
   generation to generation." [611] Who shall have the benefit of this, we
   also learn by the preceding verse, viz. They that know righteousness,
   and the people in whose heart is God's law; or, in one word, the church
   of God. And concerning their happiness, we may observe, wherein it
   consists; in its continuance.

   1. Wherein it consists, viz. In God's righteousness and salvation
   towards them. By God's righteousness here, is meant his faithfulness in
   fulfilling his covenant promises to his church, or his faithfulness
   towards his church and people, in bestowing the benefits of the
   covenant of grace upon them. Though these benefits are bestowed of free
   and sovereign grace, as being altogether undeserved; yet as God has
   been pleased, by the promises of the covenant of grace, to bind himself
   to bestow them, they are bestowed in the exercise of God's
   righteousness or justice. And therefore the apostle says, Heb. vi. 10.
   "God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labour of love." And 1
   John i. 9. "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
   us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." So the word
   righteousness is very often used in Scripture for God's covenant
   faithfulness; as in Nehem. ix. 8. "Thou hast performed thy words, for
   thou art righteous." So we are often to understand righteousness and
   covenant mercy for the same thing; as Psal. xxiv. 5. "He shall receive
   the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his
   salvation." Psal. xxxvi. 10. "Continue thy loving-kindness to them that
   know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart." And Psal.
   li. 14. "Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my
   salvation; and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness." Dan.
   ix 16. "O Lord, according to thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let
   thine anger and thy fury be turned away."--And so in innumerable other
   places.

   The other word here used is salvation. Of these two. God's
   righteousness and his salvation, the one is the cause, of which the
   other is the effect. God's righteousness, or covenant mercy, is the
   root, of which his salvation is the fruit. Both of them relate to the
   covenant of grace. The one is God's covenant mercy and faithfulness,
   the other intends that work of God by which this covenant mercy is
   accomplished in the fruits of it. For salvation is the sum of all those
   works of God by which the benefits that are by the covenant of grace
   are procured and bestowed.

   2. We may observe its continuance, signified here by two expressions;
   for ever, and from generation to generation. The latter seems to be
   explanatory of the former. The phrase for ever, is variously used in
   Scripture. Sometimes thereby is meant as long as a man lives. It is
   said, that the servant who had his ear bored through with an awl to the
   door of his master should be his for ever. Sometimes thereby is meant
   during the continuance of the Jewish state. Of many of the ceremonial
   and Levitical laws it is said, that they should be statutes for ever.
   Sometimes it means as long as the world shall stand, or to the end of
   the generations of men. Thus, Eccles. i. 4. "One generation passeth
   away, and another cometh; but the earth abideth for ever." Sometimes
   thereby is meant to all eternity. So it is said, "God is blessed for
   ever," Rom. i. 25. And so it is said, John vi. 51. "If any man eat of
   this bread, he shall live for ever."--And which of these senses is here
   to be understood, the next words determine, viz. to the end of the
   world, or to the end of the generations of men. It is said in the next
   words, "and my salvation from generation to generation." [612] Indeed
   the fruits of God's salvation shall remain after the end of the world,
   as appears in "Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the
   earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
   earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall
   die in like manner, but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
   righteousness shall not be abolished." [613] But the work of salvation
   itself toward the church shall continue to be wrought till then: till
   the end of the world God will go on to accomplish deliverance and
   salvation for the church, from all her enemies; for that is what the
   prophet is here speaking of. Till the end of the world; till her
   enemies cease to be, as to any power to molest the church. And this
   expression from generation to generation, may deter mine us as to the
   time which God continues to carry on the work of salvation for his
   church, both with respect to the beginning and end. It is from
   generation to generation, i. e. throughout all generations; beginning
   with the generations of men on the earth, and not ending till these
   generations end.--And therefore we deduce from these words this

      DOCTRINE.

   The work of redemption is a work that God carries on from the fall of
   man to the end of the world.

   The generations of mankind on the earth which began after the fall, by
   ordinary generation, are partakers of the corruption of nature that
   followed from it; and these generations, by which the human race is
   propagated, shall continue to the end of the world. These two are the
   limits of the generations of men on the earth; the fall of man, and the
   end of the world, or the day of judgment. The same are the limits of
   the work of redemption, as to those progressive works of God, by which
   that redemption is brought about and accomplished, though not as to the
   fruits of it; for they shall be to eternity.

   The work of redemption and the work of salvation are the same thing.
   What is sometimes in Scripture called God's saving his people, is in
   other places called his redeeming them. So Christ is called both the
   Saviour and the Redeemer of his people.

   Before entering on the proposed History of the Work of Redemption, I
   would explain the terms made use of in the doctrine;--and show what
   those things are that are designed to be accomplished by this great
   work of God.

   First. I would show in what sense the terms of the doctrine are
   used;--particularly the word redemption;-- and, how this is a work of
   God, carried on from the fall of man to the end of the world.

   I. The use of the word redemption.--And here it may be observed, that
   the work of redemption is sometimes understood in a more limited sense,
   for the purchase of salvation; for the word strictly signifies, a
   purchase of deliverance. If we take the word in this restrained sense,
   the work of redemption was not so long in doing; but was begun and
   finished with Christ's humiliation. It was begun with Christ's
   incarnation, carried on through his life, and finished with the time of
   his remaining under the power of death, which ended in his
   resurrection. And so we say, that on the day of his resurrection Christ
   finished the work of redemption, i. e. then the purchase was finished,
   and the work itself, and all that appertained to it, was virtually done
   and finished, but not actually.

   But sometimes the work of redemption is taken more largely, as
   including all that God accomplishes tending to this end; not only the
   purchase itself, but also all God's works that were properly
   preparatory to the purchase, and accomplishing the success of it. So
   that the whole dispensation, as it includes the preparation and
   purchase, the application and success of Christ's redemption, is here
   called the work of redemption. All that Christ does in this great
   affair as Mediator, in any of his offices, either of prophet, priest,
   or king; either when he was in this world, in his human nature, or
   before, or since. And it includes not only what Christ the Mediator has
   done, but also what the Father, or the Holy Ghost, have done, as united
   or confederated in this design of redeeming sinful men; or, in one
   word, all that is wrought in execution of the external covenant of
   redemption. This is what I call the work of redemption in the doctrine;
   for it is all but one work, one design. The various dispensations or
   works that belong to it, are but the several parts of one scheme. It is
   but one design that is formed, to which all the offices of Christ
   directly tend, and in which all the persons of the Trinity conspire.
   All the various dispensations that belong to it are united; and the
   several wheels are one machine, to answer one end, and produce one
   effect.

   II. When I say, this work is carried on from the fall of man to the end
   of the world; in order to the full understanding of my meaning in it, I
   would desire two or three things to be observed.

   1. That it is not meant, that nothing was done in order to it before
   the fall of man. Some things were done before the world was created,
   yea from eternity. The persons of the Trinity were, as it were,
   confederated in a design, and a covenant of redemption. In this
   covenant the Father had appointed the Son, and the Son had undertaken
   the work; and all things to be accomplished in the work were stipulated
   and agreed. There were things done at the creation of the world, in
   order to that work; for the world itself seems to have been created in
   order to it. The work of creation was in order to God's works of
   providence. So that if it be inquired, which are greatest, the works of
   creation or those of providence? I answer, the works of providence;
   because those of providence are the end of his works of creation; as
   the building of a house, or the forming of a machine, is for its use.
   But God's main work of providence is this of redemption, as will more
   fully appear hereafter.

   The creation of heaven was in order to the work of redemption; as a
   habitation for the redeemed; Matt. xxv. 34. "Then shall the King say
   unto them on his right, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." Even the
   angels were created to be employed in this work. And therefore the
   apostle calls them, "ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
   them who shall be heirs of salvation," Heb. i. 14. As to this lower
   world, it was doubtless created to be a stage upon which this great and
   wonderful work of redemption should be transacted: and therefore, as
   might be shown, in many respects this lower world is wisely fitted, in
   its formation, for such a state of man as he is in since the fall,
   under a possibility of redemption. So that when it is said, that the
   work of redemption is carried on from the fall of man to the end of the
   world, it is not meant, that all that ever was done in order to
   redemption has been done since the fall. Nor,

   2. Is it meant that there will be no remaining fruits of this work
   after the end of the world. That glory and blessedness that will be the
   sum of all the fruits, will remain to all the saints for ever. The work
   of redemption is not a work always doing and never accomplished. The
   fruits of it are eternal, but the work has an issue. In the issue the
   end will be obtained; which end will last for ever. As those things
   which were in order to this work--God's electing love, and the covenant
   of redemption--never had a beginning; so the fruits of this work never
   will have an end. And therefore,

   3. When it is said in the doctrine, that this is a work that God is
   carrying on from the fall of man to the end of the world, what I mean
   is, that those things which belong to this work itself, and are parts
   of the scheme, are all this while accomplishing. There were some things
   done preparatory to its beginning, and the fruits of it will remain
   after it is finished. But the work itself was begun immediately upon
   the fall, and will continue to the end of the world. The various
   dispensations of God during this space, belong to the same work, and to
   the same design, and have all one issue; and therefore are all to be
   reckoned but as several successive motions of one machine, to bring
   about in the conclusion one great event.

   And here also we must distinguish between the parts of redemption
   itself, and the parts of the work by which that redemption is wrought
   out. There is a difference between the parts of the benefits, and the
   parts of the work of God by which those benefits were procured and
   bestowed. For example, the redemption of Israel out of Egypt,
   considered as the benefit which they enjoyed, consisted of two parts,
   viz. their deliverance from their former Egyptian bondage and misery,
   and their being brought into a more happy state, as the servants of
   God, and heirs of Canaan. But there are many more things which are
   parts of that work. To this belongs his calling of Moses, his sending
   him to Pharaoh, and all the signs and wonders he wrought in Egypt, and
   his bringing such terrible judgments on the Egyptians, and many other
   things.

   Such is this work by which God effects redemption, and it is carried on
   from the fall of man to the end of the world, in two respects.

   1. With respect to the effect wrought on the souls of the redeemed;
   which is common to all ages. This effect is the application of
   redemption with respect to the souls of particular persons, in
   converting, justifying, sanctifying and glorifying them. By these
   things they are actually redeemed, and receive the benefit of the work
   in its effects. And in this sense the work of redemption is carried on
   in all ages, from the fall of man to the end of the world. The work of
   God in converting souls, opening blind eyes, unstopping deaf ears,
   raising dead souls to life, and rescuing the miserable captives out of
   the hands of Satan, was begun soon after the fall of man, has been
   carried on in the world ever since to this day, and will be to the end
   of the world. God has always had such a church in the world. Though
   oftentimes it has been reduced to a very narrow compass, and to low
   circumstances; yet it has never wholly failed.

   And as God carries on the work of converting the souls of fallen men
   through all ages, so he goes on to justify them, to blot out all their
   sins, and to accept them as righteous in his sight, through the
   righteousness of Christ. He goes on to adopt and receive them from
   being the children of Satan, to be his own children; to carry on the
   work of his grace which he has begun in them, to comfort them with the
   consolations of his Spirit, and to bestow upon them, when their bodies
   die, that eternal glory which is the fruit of Christ's purchase. What
   is said, Rom. viii. 30. "Whom he did predestinate, them he also called;
   and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them
   he also glorified:" is applicable to all ages, from the fall to the end
   of the world.

   And the way of effecting this, is carried on by repeating continually
   the same work over again, though in different persons, from age to age.
   But,

   2. The work of redemption with respect to the grand design in general,
   as it respects the universal subject and end, is carried on--not merely
   by repeating or renewing the same effect in the different subjects of
   it, but--by many successive works and dispensations of God, all tending
   to one great effect, united as the several parts of a scheme, and all
   together making up one great work. Like a temple that is building;
   first, the workmen are sent forth, then the materials are gathered, the
   ground is fitted, and the foundation laid; then the superstructure is
   erected, one part after another, till at length the top-stone is laid,
   and all is finished. Now the work of redemption in this large sense,
   may be compared to such a building. God began it immediately after the
   fall, and will proceed to the end of the world. Then shall the
   top-stone be brought forth, and all will appear complete and glorious.

   This work is carried on in the former respect, as being an effect
   common to all ages; and in the latter respect--the grand design in
   general--not only by that which is common to all ages, but by
   successive works wrought in different ages. All are parts of one great
   scheme, whereby one work is brought about by various steps, one step in
   one age, and another in another. It is this last that I shall chiefly
   insist upon, though not excluding the former; for one necessarily
   supposes the other.

   Having thus explained what I mean by the terms of the doctrine; I now
   proceed,

   Secondly, to show what is the design of this great work, or what things
   are designed to be accomplished by it. In order to see how any design
   is carried on, we must first know what it is. To know for instance, how
   a workman proceeds, and to understand the various steps he takes in
   order to accomplish a piece of work, we need to be informed what he
   intends to accomplish; otherwise we may stand by, seeing him do one
   thing after another, and be quite puzzled, because we see nothing of
   his scheme. Suppose an architect, with a great number of hands, were
   building some great palace; and one that was a stranger to such things
   should stand by, and see some men digging in the earth, others bringing
   timber, others hewing stones, and the like, he might see that there was
   a great deal done; but if he knew not the design, it would all appear
   to him confusion. And therefore, that the great works and dispensations
   of God which belong to this great affair of redemption may not appear
   like confusion to you, I would set before you briefly the main things
   designed to be accomplished.

   I. It is to put all God's enemies under his feet, and that his goodness
   may finally appear triumphant over all evil.

   Soon after the world was created, evil entered into the world in the
   fall of the angels and man. Presently after God had made rational
   creatures, there were enemies who rose up against him from among them;
   and in the fall of man evil entered into this lower world; where also
   God's enemies rose up against him. Satan endeavoured to frustrate his
   design in the creation of this lower world, to destroy his workmanship,
   to wrest the government of it out of his hands, to usurp the throne,
   and set up himself as the God of this world, instead of him who made
   it. To these ends he introduced sin into the world; and having made man
   God's enemy, he introduced guilt, and death, and the most dreadful
   misery.

   Now one great design of God, in the affair of redemption, was to subdue
   those enemies: 1 Cor. xv. 25. "He must reign till he hath put all
   enemies under his feet." Things were originally so planned, that he
   might disappoint, confound, and triumph over Satan; and that he might
   be bruised under Christ's feet. Gen. iii. 15. The promise was given,
   that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head. It was a
   part of God's original design in this work, to destroy the works of the
   devil, and confound him in all his purposes: 1 John iii. 8. "For this
   purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works
   of the devil." It was a part of his design, to triumph over sin, and
   over the corruptions of men, and to root them out of the hearts of his
   people, by conforming them to himself. He designed also, that his grace
   should triumph over man's guilt, and sin's infinite demerit. Again, it
   was a part of his design, to triumph over death; and however this is
   the last enemy that shall be destroyed, yet that shall finally be
   vanquished and destroyed. Thus God appears glorious above all evil, and
   triumphant over all his enemies by the work of redemption.

   II. God's design was perfectly to restore all the ruins of the fall, so
   far as concerns the elect part of the world, by his Son; and therefore
   we read of the restitution of all things. Acts iii. 21. "Whom the
   heaven must receive, until the times of the restitution of all things;
   and of the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord Jesus."
   Acts iii. 19. "Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may
   be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
   presence of the Lord."

   Man's soul was ruined by the fall; the image of God was defaced; man's
   nature was corrupted, and he became dead in sin. The design of God was,
   to restore the soul of man to life and the divine image in conversion,
   to carry on the change in sanctification, and to perfect it in glory.
   Man's body was ruined; by the fall it became subject to death. The
   design of God was, to restore it from this ruin, and not only to
   deliver it from death in the resurrection, but to deliver it from
   mortality itself, in making it like unto Christ's glorious body. The
   world was ruined, as to man, as effectually as if it had been reduced
   to chaos again; all heaven and earth were overthrown. But the design of
   God was, to restore all, and as it were to create a new heaven and a
   new earth: Isa. lxv. 17. "Behold, I create new heavens, and a new
   earth; and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind." 2
   Pet. iii. 13. "Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
   heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."

   The work by which this was to be done, was begun immediately after the
   fall, and so is carried on till all is finished, when the whole world,
   heaven and earth, shall be restored. There shall be, as it were, new
   heavens, and a new earth, in a spiritual sense, at the end of the
   world. Thus it is represented, Rev. xxi. 1. "And I saw a new heaven,
   and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed
   away."

   III. Another great design of God in the work of redemption, was to
   gather together in one all things in Christ, in heaven and in earth, i.
   e. all elect creatures; to bring all elect creatures, in heaven and in
   earth, to an union one to another in one body, under one head, and to
   unite all together in one body to God the Father. This was begun soon
   after the fall, and is carried on through all ages, and shall be
   finished at the end of the world.

   IV. God designed by this work to perfect and complete the glory of all
   the elect by Christ--glory, "such as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
   nor has ever entered into the heart of man." [614] He intended to bring
   them to perfect excellency and beauty in his holy image, which is the
   proper beauty of spiritual beings; and to advance them to a glorious
   degree of honour, and raise them to an ineffable height of pleasure and
   joy. Thus he designed to glorify the whole church of elect men in soul
   and body, and with them to bring the glory of the elect angels to its
   highest elevation under one head.

   V. In all this God designed to accomplish the glory of the blessed
   Trinity in an eminent degree. God had a design of glorifying himself
   from eternity; yea, to glorify each person in the Godhead. The end must
   be considered as first in order of nature, and then the means; and
   therefore we must conceive, that God having professed this end, had
   then as it were the means to choose; and the principal mean that he
   adopted was this great work of redemption. It was his design in this
   work to glorify his only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ; and by the Son to
   glorify the Father: John xiii. 31, 32. "Now is the Son of man
   glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God
   also shall glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him."
   It was his design that the Son should thus be glorified, and should
   glorify the Father by what should be accomplished by the Spirit to the
   glory of the Spirit, that the whole Trinity, conjunctly, and each
   person singly, might be exceedingly glorified. The work that was the
   appointed means of this, was begun immediately after the fall, and is
   carried on till, and finished at, the end of the world, when all this
   intended glory shall be fully accomplished in all things.

   Having thus explained the terms in the doctrine, and shown what things
   are to be accomplished by this great work of God. I proceed now to the
   proposed history; that is, to show how what was designed by the work of
   redemption has been accomplished, in the various steps of this work,
   from the fall of man to the end of the world.

   In order to this, I would divide this whole space of time into three
   periods:--the

   1st, reaching from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ;--the

   2d, from Christ's incarnation till his resurrection; or the whole time
   of Christ's humiliation;--the

   3d, from thence to the end of the world.

   Some may be ready to think this a very unequal division; and so indeed
   it is in some respects, because the second period, although so much
   shorter than either of the other--being but between thirty and forty
   years, whereas both the other contain thousands--in this affair is more
   than both the others.--I would therefore proceed to show distinctly how
   the work of redemption is carried on through each of these periods in
   their order, under three propositions.

   I. That from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ, God was
   doing those things which were preparatory to his coming, as forerunners
   and earnests of it.

   II. That the time from Christ's incarnation to his resurrection, was
   spent in procuring and purchasing redemption.

   III. That the space of time from the resurrection of Christ to the end
   of the world, is all taken up in bringing about or accomplishing the
   great effect or success of that purpose.

   In a particular consideration of these three propositions, the great
   truth taught in the doctrine may perhaps appear in a clear light.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [610] Isa li. 8.

   [611] Isa li. 8

   [612] Isa li. 8.

   [613] Isa li. 6.

   [614] 1 Cor ii. 9
     __________________________________________________________________

      PERIOD I.

   FROM THE FALL TO THE INCARNATION.

   the great works of God in the world during this whole space of time,
   were all preparatory. There were many great changes and revolutions in
   the world, and they were all only the turning of the wheels of
   providence to make way for the coming of Christ, and what he was to do
   in the world. Hither tended especially all God's great works towards
   his church. The church was under various dispensations of providence,
   and in very various circumstances, before Christ came; but all these
   dispensations were to prepare the way for his coming. God wrought
   salvation for the souls of men through all that space of time, though
   the number was very small to what it was afterwards; and all this was
   by way of anticipation. All the souls that were saved before Christ
   came, were only the earnests of the future harvest.

   God wrought many deliverances for his church and people before Christ
   came; but these were only so many images and forerunners of the great
   salvation. The church during that space of time enjoyed the light of
   divine revelation. They had in a degree the light of the gospel. But
   all these revelations were only so many earnests of the great light
   that he should bring who came to be the light of the world. That whole
   space of time was the time of night, wherein the church of God was not
   indeed wholly without light; but it was like the light of the moon and
   stars; a dim light in comparison of the light of the sun, and mixed
   with a great deal of darkness. It had no glory by reason of the glory
   that excelleth, 2 Cor. iii. 10. The church had indeed the light of the
   sun, but it was only as reflected from the moon and stars. The church
   all that while was a minor. Gal. iv. 1-3. "Now I say, that the heir as
   long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be
   lord of all; but is under tutors and governors, until the time
   appointed of the Father. Even so we, when we were children, were in
   bondage under the elements of the world."

   But here, for the greater clearness and distinctness, shall subdivide
   this period into parts:

   1st, From the fall to the flood.

   2d, From thence to the calling of Abraham.

   3d, From thence to Moses.

   4th, From thence to David.

   5th, From David to the captivity in Babylon.

   6th, From thence to the incarnation of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   FROM THE FALL TO THE FLOOD

   though this period was the most distant from Christ's incarnation; yet
   then was this glorious building begun.

   I. As soon as man fell, Christ entered on his mediatorial work. Then it
   was that he began to execute the work and office of a mediator. He had
   undertaken it before the world was made. He stood engaged with the
   Father to appear as man's mediator, and to take on that office when
   there should be occasion, from all eternity. But now the time was come.
   Christ the eternal Son of God clothed himself with the mediatorial
   character, and therein presented himself before the Father. He
   immediately stepped in between a holy, infinite, offended Majesty, and
   offending mankind. He was accepted in his interposition; and so wrath
   was prevented from going forth in the full execution of that amazing
   curse that man had brought on himself.

   It is manifest that Christ began to exercise the office of mediator
   between God and man as soon as ever man fell, because mercy began to he
   exercised towards man immediately There was mercy in the forbearance of
   God, that he did not destroy him, as he did the angels when they fell.
   But there is no mercy exercised toward fallen man but through a
   mediator. If God had not in mercy restrained Satan, he would
   immediately have seized on his prey. Christ began to do the part of an
   intercessor for man as soon as he fell; for there is no mercy exercised
   towards man but what is obtained through Christ's intercession. From
   that day Christ took on him the care of the church, in the exercise of
   all his offices. He undertook to teach mankind in the exercise of his
   prophetical office; to intercede for fallen man in his priestly office;
   and to govern the church and the world as a king. He from that time
   took upon him the care of defending his elect church from all their
   enemies. When Satan, the grand enemy, had conquered and overthrown man,
   the business of resisting and conquering him was committed to Christ.
   He thenceforward undertook to manage that subtle powerful adversary. He
   was then appointed the Captain of the Lord's hosts, the Captain of
   their salvation. Henceforward this lower world, with all its concerns,
   devolved upon the Son of God: for when man had sinned, God the Father
   would have no more to do immediately with this world of mankind, that
   had apostatized from and rebelled against him. He would henceforward
   act only through a mediator, either in teaching men, or in governing,
   or bestowing any benefits on them.

   And therefore, when we read in sacred history what God did, from time
   to time, towards his church and people, and how he revealed himself to
   them, we are to understand it especially of the second person of the
   Trinity. When we read of God appearing after the fall, in some visible
   form or outward symbol of his presence, we are ordinarily, if not
   universally, to understand it of the second person of the Trinity. John
   i. 18. "No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which
   is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him." He is therefore
   called "the image of the invisible God," Col. i. 15. intimating, that
   though God the Father be invisible, yet Christ is his image or
   representation, by which he is seen.

   Yea, not only this lower world devolved on Christ, that he might have
   the care and government of it, and order it agreeably to his design of
   redemption, but also in some respect the whole universe. The angels
   from that time are subject to him in his mediatorial office, as is
   manifest by the scripture history, wherein we have accounts of their
   acting as ministering spirits in the affairs of the church.

   And therefore we may suppose, that immediately on the fall of Adam, it
   was made known in heaven among the angels, that God had a design of
   redemption with respect to fallen man; that Christ had now taken upon
   him the office and work of a mediator between God and man; and that
   they were to be subservient to him in this office. And as Christ, in
   this office, has been solemnly installed the King of heaven, and is
   thenceforward, as God-man, the Light, the Sun of heaven, (agreeable to
   Rev. xxi. 23.) so this revelation made in heaven among the angels, was
   as it were the first dawning of this light there. When Christ ascended
   into heaven after his passion, and was solemnly enthroned, then this
   Sun rose in heaven, even the Lamb that is the light of the New
   Jerusalem.

   II. Presently upon this the gospel was first revealed on earth, in
   these words, Gen. iii. 15. "And I will put enmity between thee and the
   woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and
   thou shalt bruise his heel." We must suppose, that God's intention of
   redeeming fallen man was first signified in heaven, before it was
   signified on earth, because the business of the angels as ministering
   spirits of the Mediator required it; for as soon as ever Christ had
   taken on him the work of a mediator, it was requisite that the angels
   should be ready immediately to be subservient to him in that office: so
   that the light first dawned in heaven; but very soon after the same was
   signified on earth. In those words of God there was an intimation of
   another surety to be appointed for man, after the first surety had
   failed. This was the first revelation of the covenant of grace; the
   first dawning of the light of the gospel on earth.

   This lower world before the fall enjoyed noon-day light; the light of
   the knowledge of God, the light of his glory, and the light of his
   favour. But when man fell, all this light was at once extinguished, and
   the world reduced back again to total darkness; a worse darkness than
   that which was in the beginning of the world, (Gen. i. 2.) Darkness was
   upon the face of the deep, a darkness a thousand times more remediless
   than that. Neither men nor angels could find out any way whereby this
   darkness might be scattered. It appeared in its blackness when Adam and
   his wife saw that they were naked, and sewed fig-leaves; when they
   heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden, and hid
   themselves among the trees. When God first called them to an account,
   and said to Adam, "What is this that thou hast done? Hast thou eaten of
   the tree, whereof I commanded thee, that thou shouldst not eat?" Then
   we may suppose that their hearts were filled with shame and terror. But
   these words of God, (Gen. iii. 15.) were the first dawning of gospel
   light, after this dismal darkness. Before this there was not one
   glimpse of light, any beam of comfort, or the least hope. It was an
   obscure yet comprehensive revelation of the gospel; not indeed made to
   Adam or Eve directly, but contained in what God said to the serpent.

   Here was a certain intimation of a merciful design by "the seed of the
   woman," which was like the first glimmerings of the light in the east
   when the day first dawns. This intimation of mercy was given, even
   before sentence was pronounced on either Adam or Eve, from tenderness
   to them, lest they should be overborne with a sentence of condemnation,
   without having any thing held forth whence they could gather any hope.

   One of those great things that were intended to be done by the work of
   redemption, is more plainly intimated, viz. God subduing his enemies
   under the feet of his Son. God's design of this was now first declared.
   Satan probably had triumphed greatly in the fall of man, as though he
   had defeated the designs of God in his creation. But in these words God
   gives him a plain intimation, that he should not finally triumph, but
   that a complete victory and triumph should be obtained over him by the
   seed of the woman.

   This revelation of the gospel was the first thing that Christ did in
   his prophetical office. From the fall of man to the incarnation of
   Christ, God was doing those things that were preparatory to Christ's
   coming to effect redemption, and were forerunners and earnests of it.
   And one of those things was to foretell and promise it, as he did from
   age to age, till Christ came. This was the first promise given, the
   first prediction that ever was made of it.

   III. Soon after this, the custom of sacrificing was appointed, to be a
   standing type of the sacrifice of Christ, till he should come, and
   offer up himself a sacrifice to God. Sacrificing was not a custom first
   established by the Levitical law, for it had been a part of God's
   instituted worship from the beginning. We read of the patriarchs,
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, offering sacrifice, and before them Noah,
   and Abel. And this was by divine appointment; for it was part of God's
   worship in his church, which was offered up in faith, and which he
   accepted. This proves that it was by his institution; for sacrificing
   is no part of natural worship. The light of nature doth not teach men
   to offer up beasts in sacrifice to God; and seeing it was not enjoined
   by the law of nature, to be acceptable to God, it must be by some
   positive command or institution; for God has declared his abhorrence of
   such worship as is taught by the precept of men without his
   institution. (Isa. xxix. 13.) And such worship as hath not a warrant
   from divine institution, cannot be offered up in faith, because faith
   has no foundation where there is no divine appointment. Men have no
   warrant to hope for God's acceptance, in that which is not of his
   appointment, and in that to which he hath not promised his acceptance:
   and therefore it follows, that the custom of offering sacrifices to God
   was instituted soon after the fall; for the Scripture teaches us, that
   Abel offered "the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof,"
   Gen. iv. 4. and that he was accepted of God in this offering, Heb. xi.
   4. And there is nothing in the story intimating that the institution
   was first given when Abel offered up that sacrifice to God; but rather
   that Abel only complied with a custom already established.

   It is very probable that sacrifice was instituted immediately after God
   had revealed the covenant of grace, (Gen. iii. 15.) as the foundation
   on which the custom of sacrificing was built. That promise was the
   first stone laid towards this glorious building, the work of
   redemption; and the next stone, the institution of sacrifices, to be a
   type of the great sacrifice.

   The next thing that we have an account of, after God had pronounced
   sentence on the serpent, on the woman, and on the man, was, that God
   made them coats of skins, and clothed them; which, by the generality of
   divines, are thought to be the skins of beasts slain in sacrifice. For
   we have no account of any thing else that should be the occasion of
   man's slaying beasts, except to offer them in sacrifice, till after the
   flood. Men were not wont to eat the flesh of beasts as their common
   food till after the flood. The first food of man before the fall, was
   the fruit of the trees of paradise; and after the fall, his food was
   the produce of the field: Gen. iii. 18. "And thou shalt eat the herb of
   the field." The first grant that he had to eat flesh, as his common
   food, was after the flood: Gen. ix. 3. "Every moving thing that liveth
   shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all
   things." So that it is likely that these skins with which Adam and Eve
   were clothed, were the skins of their sacrifices. God's clothing them
   with these was a lively figure of their being clothed with the
   righteousness of Christ. It was God that gave them this clothing; for
   it is said, God made them coats of skins, and clothed them. The
   righteousness with which we are clothed, is of God. It is he only
   clothes the naked soul.

   Our first parents, who were naked, were clothed at the expense of life.
   Beasts were slain, in order to afford them clothing. So doth Christ, to
   afford clothing to our naked souls. The tabernacle in the wilderness,
   which signified the church, was covered with rams' skins died red, as
   though they were dipped in blood, to signify that Christ's
   righteousness was wrought out through the pains of death, under which
   he shed his precious blood.

   We observed before, that the light that the church enjoyed from the
   fall of man, till Christ came, was like the light which we enjoy in the
   night; not the light of the sun directly, but as reflected from the
   moon and other luminaries; which light prefigured Christ, the Sun of
   righteousness that was afterwards to arise. This light they had chiefly
   two ways; one was by predictions of Christ to come; the other was by
   types and shadows, whereby his coming and redemption were prefigured.
   The first thing that was done to prepare the way for Christ in the
   former of these ways, was in that promise noticed in the foregoing
   particular; and the first thing of the latter kind, was that
   institution of sacrifices that we are now upon. As that promise in Gen.
   iii. 15. was the first dawn of gospel-light after the fall in prophecy;
   so the institution of sacrifices was the first hint of it in types. The
   former was done in pursuance of Christ's prophetical office; in the
   latter, Christ exhibited himself in his priestly office.

   The institution of sacrifices was a great thing done towards preparing
   the way for Christ's coming, and working out redemption. For the
   sacrifices of the Old Testament were the main of all the Old-Testament
   types of Christ and his redemption; and it tended to establish in the
   minds of God's visible church the necessity of a propitiatory
   sacrifice, in order to the Deity's being satisfied for sin; and so
   prepared the way for the reception of the glorious gospel, that reveals
   the great sacrifice in the visible church, and not only so, but through
   the world of mankind. For from this institution of sacrifices all
   nations derived the custom of sacrificing to the gods, to atone for
   their sins. No nation, however barbarous, was found without it. This is
   a great evidence of the truth of the christian religion; for no nation
   except the Jews, could tell how they came by this custom, or to what
   purpose it was to offer sacrifices to their deities. The light of
   nature did not teach them any such thing. That did not teach them that
   the gods were hungry, and fed upon the flesh which they burnt in
   sacrifice; and yet they all had this custom; of which no other account
   can be given, but that they derived it from Noah, who had it from his
   ancestors, on whom God had enjoined it as a type of the great sacrifice
   of Christ. However, by this means all nations of the world had their
   minds possessed with this notion, that an atonement or sacrifice for
   sin was necessary; and a way was made for their more readily receiving
   the great doctrine of the gospel, the atonement and sacrifice of
   Christ.

   IV. God soon after the fall began actually to save the souls of men
   through Christ's redemption. In this, Christ, who had lately taken upon
   him the work of mediator between God and man, did first begin that
   work, wherein he appeared in the exercise of his kingly office, as in
   the sacrifices he was represented in his priestly office, and in the
   first prediction of redemption by Christ he had appeared in the
   exercise of his prophetical office. In that prediction the light of
   Christ's redemption first began to dawn in the prophecies of it; in the
   institution of sacrifices it first began to dawn in the types of it; in
   this, viz. his beginning actually to save men, it first began to dawn
   in the fruit of it.

   It is probable, therefore, that Adam and Eve were the first fruits of
   Christ's redemption; it is probable by God's manner of treating them,
   by his comforting them as he did, after their awakenings and terror.
   They were awakened, and ashamed with a sense of their guilt, after
   their eyes were opened, and they saw that they were naked, and sewed
   fig-leaves to cover their nakedness; as the sinner, under the first
   awakenings, is wont to endeavour to hide the nakedness of his soul, by
   a fancied righteousness of his own. Then they were further terrified
   and awakened, by hearing the voice of God as he was coming to condemn
   them. Their coverings of fig-leaves do not answer the purpose; but
   notwithstanding these, they ran to hide themselves among the trees of
   the garden, because they were naked, not daring to trust to their
   fig-leaves to hide their nakedness from God. Then they were further
   awakened by God's calling of them to a strict account. But while their
   terrors were raised to such a height, and they stood, as we may
   suppose, trembling and astonished before their Judge, without any
   expedient whence they could gather any hope, then God took care to hold
   forth some encouragement, to keep them from the dreadful effects of
   despair under their awakenings, by giving a hint of a design of mercy
   by a Saviour, even before he pronounced sentence against them. And when
   after this he proceeded to pronounce sentence, whereby we may suppose
   their terrors were further raised, God soon after took care to
   encourage them, and to let them see, that he had not wholly cast them
   off, by taking a fatherly care of them in their fallen, naked, and
   miserable state, by making them coats of skins and clothing them. Which
   also manifested an acceptance of those sacrifices that they offered to
   God, which were types of what God had promised, when he said, The seed
   of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. This promise, there is
   reason to think, they believed and embraced. Eve seems plainly to
   express her hope in and dependence on that promise, in what she says at
   the birth of Cain, Gen. iv. 1. "I have gotten a man from the Lord;" i.
   e. as God has promised, that my seed should bruise the serpent's head;
   so now has God given me this pledge and token of it, and I have a seed
   born. She plainly owns, that this child was from God, and hoped that
   her promised seed was to be of this, her eldest son; though she was
   mistaken, as Abraham was with respect to Ishmael, as Isaac was with
   respect to Esau, and as Samuel was with respect to the first-born of
   Jesse. And especially does what she said at the birth of Seth, express
   her hope and dependence on the promise of God; Gen. iv. 25. "For God
   hath appointed me another seed, instead of Abel, whom Cain slew."

   Thus it is exceeding probable, if not evident, that as Christ took on
   him the work of mediator as soon as man fell; so that he now
   immediately began his work of redemption in its effect, and that he
   immediately encountered his great enemy the devil, whom he had
   undertaken to conquer, and rescued those two first captives out of his
   hands; therein baffling him, soon after his triumph over them, whereby
   he had made them his captives. And though he seemed sure of them and
   all their posterity, Christ the Redeemer soon showed him, that he was
   mistaken. He let him see it, in delivering those first captives, and so
   soon gave him an instance of the fulfilment of that threatening, "The
   seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head;" and in this
   instance a presage of his subduing all his enemies under his feet.

   After this we have another instance of redemption in one of their
   children, righteous Abel, as the Scripture calls him; whose soul
   perhaps was the first that went to heaven through Christ's redemption.
   In him we have at least the first recorded instance of the death of a
   redeemed person. If he was the first, then as the redemption of Christ
   began to dawn before in the souls of men in their conversion and
   justification, in him it first began to dawn in glorification; and in
   him the angels began first to do the part of ministering spirits to
   Christ, in going forth to conduct to glory the souls of the redeemed.
   And in him the elect angels in heaven had the first opportunity to see
   so wonderful a thing as the soul of one of the fallen race of mankind,
   that had been sunk by the fall into such an abyss of sin and misery,
   brought to heaven, and in the enjoyment of heavenly glory, which was a
   much greater thing than if they had seen him returned to the earthly
   paradise. Thus they saw the glorious effect of Christ's redemption, in
   the great honour and happiness that was procured for sinful, miserable
   creatures.

   V. The next remarkable thing that God did in further carrying on this
   great redemption, was the first uncommon pouring out of the Spirit,
   through Christ, in the days of Enos. We read, Gen. iv. 26. "Then began
   men to call upon the name of the Lord." The meaning of those words has
   been considerably controverted among divines. We cannot suppose the
   meaning is, that then first men performed the duty of prayer. Prayer is
   a duty of natural religion, and a duty to which a spirit of piety does
   most naturally lead men. Prayer is the very breath of a spirit of
   piety; we cannot suppose therefore, that holy men before, for above two
   hundred years, had lived without prayer. Therefore some divines think,
   that the meaning is, that then men first began to perform public
   worship, or to call upon the name of the Lord in public assemblies.
   However, thus much must necessarily be understood by it, viz. that
   there was something new in the visible church of God with respect to
   calling upon the name of the Lord; that there was a great addition to
   the performance of this duty; and that in some respect or other it was
   carried far beyond what it ever had been before, which must be the
   consequence of a remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God.

   If it was now first that men were stirred up to meet in assemblies to
   assist one another in seeking God, so as they never had done before; it
   argues something extraordinary as the cause, and could be from nothing
   but the uncommon influences of God's Spirit. We see by experience, that
   a remarkable pouring out of God's Spirit is always attended with such
   an effect, viz. a great increase of the performance of the duty of
   prayer. When the Spirit of God begins a work on men's hearts, it
   immediately sets them to calling on the name of the Lord. As it was
   with Paul after the Spirit of God had arrested him; Behold, he prayeth!
   so it has been in all remarkable effusions of the Spirit of God
   recorded in Scripture; and so it is foretold it will be in the latter
   days. It is foretold, that the Holy Spirit will be poured out as a
   spirit of grace and supplication, Zech. xii. 10. See also Zeph. iii. 9.
   "For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
   call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent."

   And when it is said, "Then began men to call upon the name of the
   Lord," [615] no more can be intended by it, than that this was the
   first remarkable season of this nature that ever was. It was the
   beginning, or the first, of such a work of God. In this manner such an
   expression is commonly used in Scripture: so, 1 Sam. xiv. 35. "And Saul
   built an altar unto the Lord; the same was the first altar that he
   built unto the Lord." In the Hebrew it is, as you may see in the
   margin, that altar he began to build unto the Lord. Heb. ii. 3. "How
   shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which first began to
   be spoken by the Lord?"

   It may here be observed, that from the fall of man, to our day, the
   work of redemption in its effect has mainly been carried on by
   remarkable communications of the Spirit of God. Though there be a more
   constant influence of God's Spirit always in some degree attending his
   ordinances; yet the way in which the greatest things have been done
   towards carrying on this work, always have been by remarkable
   effusions, at special seasons of mercy, as may fully appear hereafter
   in our further prosecution of our subject. And this in the days of
   Enos, was the first remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God that
   ever was. There had been a saving work of God on the hearts of some
   before; but now God was pleased to bring in a harvest of souls to
   Christ; so that in this we see that great building, of which God laid
   the foundation immediately after the fall of man, carried on further,
   and built higher, than ever it had been before.

   VI. The next thing I shall notice, is the eminently holy life of Enoch,
   who, we have reason to think, was a saint of greater eminency than any
   that had been before him; so that in this respect the work of
   redemption was carried on to a still greater height. With respect to
   its effect in the visible church in general, we observed above how it
   was carried higher in the days of Enos than ever it had been before.
   Probably Enoch was one of the saints of that harvest; for he lived all
   the days that he did live on earth, in the days of Enos. And with
   respect to the degree to which this work was carried in the soul of a
   particular person, it was raised to a greater height in Enoch than ever
   before. His soul, built on Christ, was built up in holiness to a
   greater height than any preceding instance. He was a wonderful instance
   of Christ's redemption, and of the efficacy of his grace.

   VII. In Enoch's time, God more expressly revealed the coming of Christ
   than he had before done. Jude 14, 15. "And Enoch also, the seventh from
   Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten
   thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince
   all that are ungodly among them, of their ungodly deeds which they have
   ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners
   have spoken against him." Here Enoch prophesies of the coming of
   Christ. It does not seem to be confined to any particular coming of
   Christ; but it has respect in general to Christ's coming in his
   kingdom, and is fulfilled in a degree in both his first and second
   coming; and indeed in every remarkable manifestation Christ has made of
   himself in the world, for the saving of his people, and the destroying
   of his enemies. It is very parallel in this respect with many other
   prophecies of the Old Testament; and, in particular, with that great
   prophecy of Christ's coming in his kingdom, whence the Jews principally
   took their notion of the kingdom of heaven, Daniel vii. 10. "A fiery
   stream issued, and came forth from before him: thousand thousands
   ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
   him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened." And in Daniel
   vii. 13, 14. "I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son
   of man, came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of
   days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
   dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
   languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
   which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be
   destroyed." And though it is not unlikely that Enoch might have a more
   immediate respect in this prophecy to the approaching destruction of
   the old world by the flood, which was a remarkable resemblance of
   Christ's destruction of all his enemies at his second coming, yet it
   doubtless looked beyond the type to the antitype.

   And as this prophecy of Christ's coming is more express than any
   preceding it; so it is an instance of the increase of that gospel-light
   which began to dawn presently after the fall of man; and of that
   building which is the subject of our present discourse, being yet
   further carried on, and built up higher than it had been before.

   And here, by the way, I would observe, that the increase of
   gospel-light, and the progress of the work of redemption, as it
   respects the church in general, from its erection to the end of the
   world, is very similar to the progress of the same word and the same
   light, in a particular soul, from the time of its conversion, till it
   is perfected and crowned in glory. Sometimes the light shines brighter,
   and at other times more obscurely; sometimes grace prevails, at other
   times it seems to languish for a great while together; now corruption
   prevails, and then grace revives again. But in general grace is
   growing: from its first infusion, till it is perfected in glory, the
   kingdom of Christ is building up in the soul. So it is with respect to
   the great affair in general, as it relates to the universal subject of
   it, and as it is carried on from its first beginning, till it is
   perfected at the end of the world.

   VIII. The next remarkable thing towards carrying on this work, was the
   translation of Enoch into heaven. Gen. v. 24. "And Enoch walked with
   God, and he was not; for God took him." Moses, in giving an account of
   the genealogy of those that were of the line of Noah, does not say
   concerning Enoch, he lived so long and he died, as he does of the rest;
   but, he was not, for God took him; i. e. he translated him; in body and
   soul carried him to heaven without dying, as it is explained in Heb.
   xi. 5. "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death." By
   this wonderful work of God, the work of redemption was carried to a
   greater height, in several respects, than it had been before.

   When showing what God aimed at in the work of redemption, or what were
   the main things he intended to bring to pass; among other things I
   mentioned the perfect restoration of the ruins of the fall, with
   respect to the elect, both in soul and body. Now this translation of
   Enoch was the first instance of restoration with respect to the body.
   There had been many instances of restoring the soul of man by Christ's
   redemption, but none of redeeming and actually saving the body, till
   now. All the bodies of the elect are to be saved as well as their
   souls. At the end of the world, all their bodies shall actually be
   redeemed; those that then shall have been dead, by a resurrection; and
   others, that then shall be living, by causing them to undergo a
   glorious change. There was a number of the bodies of saints raised and
   glorified, at the resurrection of Christ; and before that there was an
   instance of a body glorified in Elijah. But the first instance of all
   was this of Enoch.

   By this, the work of redemption was carried on still further; as, this
   wonderful work of God afforded a great increase of gospel-light to the
   church, hereby it had a clearer manifestation of a future state, and of
   the glorious reward of the saints in heaven. We are told, 2 Tim. i. 10.
   "That life and immortality are brought to light by the gospel." What
   was said in the Old Testament of a future state, is very obscure, in
   comparison with the more full, plain, and abundant revelation given of
   it in the New. But yet even in those early days, the church of God, in
   this instance, was favoured with an instance of it set before their
   eyes, in that one of their brethren was actually taken up to heaven
   without dying; which we have all reason to think the church of God knew
   then, as they afterwards knew Elijah's translation. And as this was a
   clearer manifestation of a future state than the church had enjoyed
   before, so it was a pledge or earnest of that future glorification of
   all the saints which God intended through the redemption of Jesus
   Christ.

   IX. The next thing that I shall observe, was the upholding of the
   church of God in that family from which Christ was to proceed during
   that great and general defection which preceded the flood. The church
   of God, in all probability, was small, in comparison with the rest of
   the world, from the time that mankind began to multiply; or from the
   time, Gen. iv. 16. "When Cain went out from the presence of the Lord,
   and dwelt in the land of Nod;" which being interpreted, is the land of
   banishment. The church seems to have been kept up chiefly in the
   posterity of Seth: for this was the seed that God appointed instead of
   Abel whom Cain slew. But we cannot reasonably suppose that Seth's
   posterity were one fiftieth part of the world: "For Adam was one
   hundred and thirty years old when Seth was born." But Cain, who seems
   to have been the leader of those that were not of the church, was
   Adam's eldest child, and probably was born soon after the fall, which
   doubtless was soon after Adam's creation; so that there was time for
   Cain to have many sons before Seth was born; besides many other
   children, that probably Adam and Eve had before this time, agreeably to
   God's blessing, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth;"
   and many of these children might have children. The history of Cain
   before Seth was born, seems to imply, that there were great numbers of
   men on the earth: Gen. iv. 14, 15. "Behold, thou hast driven me out
   this day from the face of the earth: and from thy face shall I be hid,
   and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall
   come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me. And the
   Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall
   be taken on him seven-fold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any
   finding him should kill him." And all who existed when Seth was born,
   must be supposed to stand in equal capacity of multiplying their
   posterity with him; and therefore, Seth's posterity were but a small
   part of the inhabitants of the world.

   But after the days of Enos and Enoch, (for Enoch was translated before
   Enos died,) the church of God greatly diminished, in proportion as
   multitudes of the line of Seth, born in the church of God, fell away,
   and joined with the wicked world, principally by means of
   intermarriages with them: as Gen. vi. 1, 2, 4. "And it came to pass,
   when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were
   born unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that
   they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they
   chose.--There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after
   that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they
   bare children to them, the same became mighty men, which were of old
   men of renown." By the sons of God here, are doubtless meant the
   children of the church. It is a denomination often given them in
   Scripture. They intermarried with the wicked world, and so had their
   hearts led away from God: and there was a great and continual defection
   from the church. The church, that used to be a restraint on the wicked
   world, diminished exceedingly, and so wickedness went on without
   restraint. Satan, that old serpent the devil, that tempted our first
   parents, and set up himself as the God of this world, raged
   exceedingly; and every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was
   only evil continually, and the earth was filled with violence. It
   seemed to be deluged with wickedness then, as it was with water
   afterwards; and mankind in general were swallowed up in it. And now
   Satan made a most violent and potent attempt to devour the church of
   God; and had almost done it. But yet God restored it in the midst of
   all this flood of wickedness and violence. He kept it up in that line
   of which Christ was to proceed. He would not suffer it to be destroyed,
   for a blessing was in it. There was a particular family, a root whence
   the branch of righteousness was afterwards to shoot forth. And
   therefore, however the branches were lopped off, and the tree seemed to
   be destroyed; yet God, in the midst of all, kept alive this root, by
   his wonderful redeeming power and grace, so that the gates of hell
   could not prevail against it.

   Thus I have shown how God carried on the great affair of redemption;
   how the building went on during this first period, from the fall of
   man, till God brought the flood on the earth. And I would observe, that
   though the Mosaic history during that space be very short, yet it is
   exceedingly comprehensive and instructive. And it may also be
   profitable for us here to observe, the efficacy of that purchase of
   redemption which had such great effects so many ages before Christ
   actually appeared.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [615] Gen. iv. 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   FROM THE FLOOD TO THE CALLING OF ABRAHAM.

   I proceed now to show how the same work was carried on from the
   beginning of the flood till the calling of Abraham. For though that
   mighty, universal deluge overthrew the world: yet it did not overthrow
   this building of God, the work of redemption. This went on; and instead
   of being overthrown, continued to be built up, in order to a further
   preparation for the great Saviour's coming into the world, for the
   redemption for his people.

   I. The flood itself was a work of God that belonged to this great
   affair, and tended to promote it. All the mighty works of God from the
   fall of man to the end of the world, are reducible to this work; and if
   seen in a right view, will appear as parts of it; and so many steps for
   carrying it on; and doubtless so great a work, so remarkable and
   universal a catastrophe, as the deluge was, cannot be excepted. Thereby
   God removed out of the way the enemies and obstacles that were ready to
   overthrow it.

   Satan seems to have been in a dreadful rage just before the flood, and
   his rage then doubtless was, as it always has been, chiefly against the
   church of God to overthrow it; and he had filled the earth with
   violence and rage against it. He had drawn over almost all the world to
   be on his side, and they listed under his banner against Christ and his
   church. We read, that the earth was filled with violence; and doubtless
   that violence was chiefly against the church, in fulfilment of what was
   foretold, I will put enmity between thy seed and her seed. Their enmity
   and violence was so great, and the enemies of the church so numerous,
   the whole world being against it, that it was come to the last
   extremity. Noah's reproofs, and his preaching of righteousness, were
   utterly disregarded. God's Spirit had striven with them a hundred and
   twenty years, but all in vain; and the church was reduced to so narrow
   limits, as to be confined to one family. There was no prospect of any
   thing else but of their totally swallowing up the church, and that in a
   very little time; and so wholly destroying that small root that had the
   blessing in it, whence the Redeemer was to proceed.

   And therefore, God's destroying those enemies of the church by the
   flood belongs to this affair of redemption; for it was one thing that
   was done in fulfilment of the covenant of grace, as it was revealed to
   Adam: "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
   seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head." [616] This was only a
   destruction of the seed of the serpent in the midst of their most
   violent rage against the seed of the woman, when in the utmost peril by
   them.

   We read in Scripture of scarce any destruction of nations but that one
   main reason given for it is, their enmity and injuries against God s
   church; and doubtless this was one main reason of the destruction of
   all nations by the flood. The giants that were in those days, in all
   likelihood, got themselves renown by their great exploits against
   heaven, and against Christ and his church, the remaining sons of God
   that had not corrupted themselves.

   We read, that just before the world shall be destroyed by fire, "the
   nations that are in the four quarters of the earth, shall gather
   together against the church as the sand of the sea, and shall go up on
   the breadth of the earth, and compass the camp of the saints about, and
   the beloved city; and then fire shall come down from God out of heaven,
   and devour them," Rev. xx. 8, 9. And it seems there was that which was
   very parallel to it, just before the world was destroyed by water. And
   therefore their destruction was a work of God that did as much belong
   to the work of redemption, as the destruction of the Egyptians belonged
   to the redemption of the children of Israel out of Egypt, or as the
   destruction of Sennacherib's mighty army, that had compassed about
   Jerusalem to destroy it, belonged to God's redemption of that city from
   them.

   By means of this flood, all the enemies of God's church, against whom
   that little handful had no strength, were swept off at once. God took
   their part, appeared for them against their enemies, and drowned those
   of whom they had been afraid, in the flood of water, as he drowned the
   enemies of Israel that pursued them in the Red sea.

   Indeed God could have taken other methods to deliver his church: he
   could have converted all the world instead of drowning it; and so he
   could have taken another method than drowning the Egyptians in the Red
   sea. But that is no argument, that the method he did take, was not a
   method to show his redeeming mercy to them.

   By the deluge the enemies of God's people were dispossessed of the
   earth, and the whole earth was given to Noah and his family to possess
   it in quiet; as God made room for the Israelites in Canaan, by casting
   out their enemies from before them. And God thus taking the possession
   of the enemies of the church, and giving it all to his church, was
   agreeable to that promise of the covenant of grace: Ps. xxxvii. 9-11.
   "For evil-doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord,
   they shall inherit the earth. For yet a little while and the wicked
   shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it
   shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight
   themselves in the abundance of peace."

   II. Another thing belonging to the same work, was God's wonderfully
   preserving that family of which the Redeemer was to proceed, when all
   the rest of the world was drowned. God's drowning the world, and saving
   Noah and his family, were both reducible to this great work. The saving
   of Noah and his family belonged to it two ways, viz. as from that
   family the Redeemer was to proceed, and it was the mystical body of
   Christ that was there saved. The manner of saving those persons, when
   all the world besides was so overthrown, was very wonderful. It was a
   wonderful type of the redemption of Christ, of that redemption that is
   sealed by the baptism of water, and is so spoken of in the New
   Testament, as 1 Pet. iii. 20, 21. "Which sometimes were disobedient,
   when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while
   the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved
   by water. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, doth also now save
   us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of
   a good conscience towards God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ."
   That water which washed away the filth of the world, that cleared the
   world of wicked men, was a type of the blood of Christ, that takes away
   the sin of the world. That water which delivered Noah and his sons from
   their enemies, is a type of the blood that delivers God's church from
   their sins, their worst enemies. That water which was so plentiful and
   abundant, that it filled the world, and reached above the tops of the
   highest mountains, was a type of that blood, which is sufficient for
   the whole world; sufficient to bury the highest mountains of sin. The
   ark, that was the refuge and hiding-place of the church in this time of
   storm and flood, was a type of Christ, the true hiding-place of the
   church from the storms and floods of God's wrath.

   III. The next thing I would observe is, the new grant of the earth God
   made to Noah and his family immediately after the flood, as founded on
   the covenant of grace. The sacrifice of Christ was represented by
   Noah's building an altar to the Lord, and offering a sacrifice of every
   clean beast, and every clean fowl. And we have an account of God
   accepting this sacrifice: and thereupon he blessed Noah, and
   established his covenant with him, and with his seed, promising to
   destroy the earth in like manner no more; signifying that it is by the
   sacrifice of Christ, God's favour is obtained, and his people are in
   safety from destroying judgments, and obtain the blessing of the Lord.
   And God now, on occasion of this sacrifice that Noah offered, gives him
   and his posterity a new grant of the earth; a new power of dominion
   over the creatures, as founded on that sacrifice, and so founded on the
   covenant of grace. And so it is to be looked upon as a different grant
   from that which was made to Adam, Gen. i. 28. "And God blessed them,
   and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
   earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
   over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon
   the earth." That grant was not founded on the covenant of grace; for it
   was given to Adam while he was under the covenant of works, and
   therefore was antiquated when that covenant ceased. Hence it came to
   pass, that the earth was taken away from mankind by the flood: for the
   first grant was forfeited; and God had never made another after that,
   till after the flood. If the first covenant had not been broken, God
   never would have drowned the world, and so have taken it away from
   mankind; for then the first grant made to mankind would have stood
   good. But that being broken, God after a while destroyed the earth,
   when the wickedness of man was great.

   But after the flood, on Noah's offering a sacrifice that represented
   the sacrifice of Christ, God in smelling a sweet savour, or accepting
   the sacrifice--as it was a representation of the true sacrifice of
   Christ, which is a sweet savour indeed to God--gives Noah a new grant
   of the earth, founded on that covenant of grace which is by the
   sacrifice of Christ, with a promise annexed, that now the earth should
   no more be destroyed, till the consummation of all things; (Gen. viii.
   20-22; ix. 1-3, 7.) The reason why such a promise, that God would no
   more destroy the earth, was added to this grant made to Noah, and not
   to that made to Adam, was because this was founded on the covenant of
   grace, of which Christ was the surety, and therefore could not be
   broken. And therefore it comes to pass now, that though the wickedness
   of man has dreadfully raged, and the earth has been filled with
   violence and wickedness, one age after another, and much more dreadful
   and aggravated wickedness, being against so much greater light and
   mercy; especially in these days of the gospel: yet God's patience holds
   out; God does not destroy the earth: his mercy and forbearance abides
   according to his promise; and his grant established with Noah and his
   sons abides firm and good, being founded on the covenant of grace.

   IV. On this God renews with Noah and his sons the covenant of grace,
   Gen. ix. 9, 10. "And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and
   with your seed after you, and with every living creature that is with
   you," &c.; which was the covenant of grace; of which even the brute
   creation have this benefit, that it shall never be destroyed again
   until the consummation of all things. By this expression in Scripture,
   my covenant, is commonly to be understood the covenant of grace. The
   manner of expression, I will establish my covenant with you, and with
   your seed after you, shows plainly, that it was a covenant already in
   being, and that Noah would understand by that denomination the covenant
   of grace.

   V. God's disappointing the design of building the city and tower of
   Babel belongs to the great work of redemption. For that was undertaken
   in opposition of this great building of God of which we are speaking.
   Men's going about to build such a city and tower was an effect of the
   corruption into which mankind were now fallen. This city and tower was
   set up in opposition to the city of God, as the god to whom they built
   it, was their pride. Being sunk into a disposition to forsake the true
   God, the first idol they set up in his room, was their own fame. And as
   this city and tower had their foundation laid in the pride and vanity
   of men, and the haughtiness of their minds, so it was built on a
   foundation exceedingly contrary to the nature of the kingdom of Christ,
   and his redeemed city, which has its foundation laid in humility.

   Therefore God saw that it tended to frustrate the design of that great
   building which was founded in Christ's humiliation: and therefore the
   thing displeased the Lord, and he baffled and confounded the design.
   God will frustrate and confound all other designs, that are set up in
   opposition to the great work of redemption.

   Isaiah ii. representing God setting up the kingdom of Christ in the
   world, foretells how, in order to it, he will bring down the
   haughtiness of men, and how the day of the Lord shall be on every high
   tower, and upon every fenced wall, &c. Christ's kingdom is established,
   by bringing down every high thing to make way for it, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.
   "For the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God, to the pulling
   down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
   that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God." What is done in a
   particular soul, to make way for the setting up of Christ's kingdom, is
   to destroy Babel in that soul.

   They intended to have built Babel up to heaven. However, that building
   of which we speak shall reach to heaven indeed, the highest heavens, at
   the end of the world, when it shall be finished: and therefore God
   would not suffer the building of his enemies, in opposition to it, to
   prosper. If they had prospered in building that city and tower, it
   might have kept the world of wicked men, the enemies of the church,
   together, as that was their design. They might have remained united in
   one vast, powerful city; and so have been too powerful for the city of
   God.

   This Babel is the same with the city of Babylon; for Babylon in the
   original is Babel. But Babylon is always spoken of in Scripture as
   chiefly opposite to the city of God, as a powerful and terrible enemy,
   notwithstanding this great check put to the building of it in the
   beginning. But it probably would have been vastly more powerful, and
   able to vex if not to destroy the church of God, if it had not been
   thus checked.

   Thus it was in kindness to his church, and in prosecution of the great
   design of redemption, that God put a stop to the building of the city
   and tower of Babel.

   VI. The dispersing of the nations, and dividing the earth among its
   inhabitants, immediately after God had caused the building of Babel to
   cease. This was done so as most to suit the great design of redemption.
   And particularly, God therein had an eye to the future propagation of
   the gospel among the nations. They were so placed, their habitation so
   limited, round about the land of Canaan, as most suited that design.
   Deut. xxxii. 8. "When the Most High divided to the nations their
   inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of
   the people according to the number of the children of Israel." Acts
   xvii. 26, 27. "And hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to
   dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times
   before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should
   seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him." The
   land of Canaan was the most conveniently situated of any place in the
   world, for the purpose of spreading revealed light among the nations in
   general. The Roman empire, the chief part of the civilized world, in
   the apostolic age, was in the countries round about Jerusalem. The
   devil seeing the advantage of this situation of the nations for
   promoting the great work of redemption, and the disadvantage of it with
   respect to the interests of his kingdom, afterward led away many
   nations into the remotest parts of the world, to get them out of the
   way of the gospel. Thus he led some into America; and others into
   northern cold regions, that are almost inaccessible.

   VII. Another thing I would mention in this period, was God's preserving
   the true religion in that line from which Christ was to proceed, when
   the world in general apostatized to idolatry, and the church was in
   imminent danger of being swallowed in the general corruption. Although
   God had lately wrought so wonderfully for the deliverance of his
   church, and had shown so great mercy towards it, as for its sake even
   to destroy all the rest of the world; and although he had lately
   renewed and established his covenant of grace with Noah and his sons;
   yet so prone is the corrupt heart of man to depart from God, and to
   sink into the depths of wickedness, darkness, and delusion, that the
   world soon after the flood fell into gross idolatry; so that before
   Abraham the distemper was become almost universal. The earth was become
   very corrupt at the time of the building of Babel; even God's people
   themselves, that line of which Christ was to come. Josh. xxiv. 2. "Your
   fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah
   the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and they served other
   gods." The other side of the flood means beyond the river Euphrates,
   where the ancestors of Abraham lived.

   We are not to understand, that they were wholly drawn off to idolatry,
   to forsake the true God. For God is said to be the God of Nahor: Gen.
   xxxi. 53. "The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their
   father, judge betwixt us." But they partook in some measure of the
   general and almost universal corruption of the times; as Solomon was in
   a measure infected with idolatrous corruption; and as the children of
   Israel in Egypt are said to serve other gods, though there was the true
   church of God among them; and as there were images kept for a
   considerable time in the family of Jacob, the corruption being brought
   from Padan-Aram, whence he fetched his wives.

   This was the second time that the church was almost brought to nothing
   by the corruption and general defection of the world from true
   religion. But still the true religion was kept up in the family from
   which Christ was to proceed. Which is another instance of God's
   remarkably preserving his church in a time of a general deluge of
   wickedness; and wherein, although the god of this world raged, and had
   almost swallowed up God's church, yet he did not suffer the gates of
   hell to prevail against it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [616] Gen. iii. 15.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   FROM THE CALLING OF ABRAHAM TO MOSES.

   I proceed now to show how the work of redemption was carried on from
   the calling of Abraham to Moses. And,

   I. It pleased God now to separate that person of whom Christ was to
   come, from the rest of the world, that his church might be upheld in
   his family and posterity till that time. He called Abraham out of his
   own country, and from his kindred, to go into a distant country, that
   God should show him; and brought him first out of Ur of the Chaldees to
   Charran, and then to the land of Canaan.

   It was before observed, that the idolatrous corruption of the world was
   now become general; mankind were almost wholly overrun with idolatry.
   God therefore saw it necessary, in order to uphold true religion in the
   world, that there should be a family separated from all others. It
   proved to be high time to take this course, lest the church of Christ
   should wholly be carried away with the apostacy. For Abraham's own
   country and kindred had most of them fallen off; and without some
   extraordinary interposition of Providence, in all likelihood, in a
   generation or two more, the true religion in this line would have been
   extinct. And therefore God called Abraham, the person in whose family
   he intended to uphold the true religion, out of his own country, and
   from his kindred, to a far distant country, that his posterity might
   there remain a people separate from all the rest of the world; that so
   the true religion might be upheld there, while all mankind besides were
   swallowed up in heathenism.

   The land of the Chaldees, whence Abraham was called, was the country
   about Babel. Babel, or Babylon, was the chief city of Chaldea. Learned
   men suppose by what they gather from the most ancient accounts of
   things, that it was in this land idolatry first began; that Babel and
   Chaldea were the original and chief seats of the worship of idols,
   whence it spread into other nations. And therefore the land of the
   Chaldeans, the country of Babylon, is in Scripture called the land of
   graven images; Jer. l. 35, 38. "A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith
   the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes,
   and upon her wise men.--A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be
   dried up; for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon
   their idols." God calls Abraham out of this idolatrous country, to a
   great distance from it. And when he came there, he gave him no
   inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on; but he
   remained a stranger and a sojourner, that he and his family might be
   kept separate from all the world.

   This was a new thing: God had never taken such a method before. His
   church had not in this manner been separated from the rest of the world
   till now; but were wont to dwell with them, without any bar or fence to
   keep them separate; the mischievous consequence of which had been found
   once and again. Before the flood, the effect of God's people living
   intermingled with the wicked world, without any remarkable wall of
   separation, was, that the sons of the church joined in marriage with
   others, and thereby almost all soon became infected, and the church was
   almost brought to nothing. The method that God then took to fence the
   church was, to drown the wicked world, and save the church in the ark.
   Before Abraham was called, the world was become corrupt again. But now
   God took another method; he did not destroy the wicked world, and save
   Abraham, and his wife, and Lot, but calls these persons to go and live
   separate from the rest of the world.

   This was a new and great thing, that God did toward the work of
   redemption. It was about the middle of the space of time between the
   fall of man and the coming of Christ; about two thousand years before
   the great Redeemer was to appear. But by this calling of Abraham, the
   ancestor of Christ, a foundation was laid for upholding the church in
   the world, till Christ should come. For the world having become
   idolatrous, there was a necessity in order to this, that the seed of
   the woman should be thus separated from it.

   And then it was needful that there should be a particular nation
   separated from the rest of the world, to receive the types and
   prophecies that were to be given of Christ, to prepare the way for his
   coming; that to them might be committed the oracles of God; that by
   them the history of God's great works of creation and providence might
   be preserved; that Christ might be born of this nation; and that from
   hence the light of the gospel might shine forth to the rest of the
   world. These ends could not well be obtained, if God's people, through
   all these two thousand years, had lived intermixed with the heathen
   world. So that the calling of Abraham may be looked upon as a kind of
   new foundation laid for the visible church of God, in a more distinct
   and regular state. Abraham, being the person in whom this foundation is
   laid, is represented in Scripture as though he were the father of all
   the church, the father of all them that believe; a root whence the
   visible church rose as a tree, distinct from all other plants. Of this
   tree Christ was the branch of righteousness; and from it, after Christ
   came, the natural branches were broken off, and the Gentiles were
   grafted in. So that Abraham still remains the father, the root of the
   church. It is the same tree which, from that small beginning in
   Abraham's time, has in these days of the gospel spread its branches
   over a great part of the earth, and will fill the whole in due time,
   and at the end of the world shall be transplanted from an earthly soil
   into the paradise of God.

   II. There accompanied this a more particular and full revelation and
   confirmation of the covenant of grace than ever before. There had been
   before this two particular and solemn editions or confirmations of this
   covenant; one, to our first parents, soon after the fall; the other, to
   Noah and his family, soon after the flood. And now there is a third, at
   and after the calling of Abraham. It is now revealed to Abraham, not
   only that Christ should come; but that he should be his seed; and
   promised, that all the families of the earth should be blessed in him.
   And God repeated the promises of this to Abraham. The first promise was
   when he first called him, Gen. xii. 2. "And I will make of thee a great
   nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt
   be a blessing." The same promise was renewed after he came into the
   land of Canaan, (Gen. xiii. 14-17.) Again after Abraham had returned
   from the slaughter of the kings, (Gen. xv. 5, 6.) And a fourth time,
   after his offering up Isaac, (Gen. xxii. 16-18.)

   In this renewal of the covenant of grace with Abraham, several
   particulars concerning it were revealed more fully than before; not
   only that Christ was to be of Abraham's seed, but also, the calling of
   the Gentiles, that all nations should be brought into the church, all
   the families of the earth made blessed. And then the great condition of
   the covenant of grace, which is faith, was now more fully made known.
   Gen. xv. 5, 6. "And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And Abraham
   believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness." Which is
   much noticed in the New Testament, as that for which Abraham was called
   the father of believers.

   And as there was now a further revelation of the covenant of grace, so
   there was a further confirmation of it by seals and pledges;
   particularly, circumcision, which was a seal of the covenant of grace,
   as appears by the first institution of it, Gen. xvii. It there appears
   to be a seal of that covenant by which God promised to make Abraham a
   father of many nations, (Gen. xvii. 5, 9, 10.) And we are expressly
   taught, that it was a seal of righteousness of faith, Rom. iv. 11.
   Speaking of Abraham, the apostle says, he received the sign of
   circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith.

   Abraham's family and posterity must be kept separate from the rest of
   the world, till Christ should come; and this sacrament was the
   principal wall of separation. Besides, God gave Abraham a remarkable
   pledge of the fulfilment of the promise he had made him, in his victory
   over Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him. Chedorlaomer seems
   to have been a great emperor, who reigned over a great part of the
   world at that day; and though he had his seat at Elam, which was not
   much, if any thing, short of a thousand miles distant from the land of
   Canaan, yet he extended his empire so as to reign over many parts of
   the land of Canaan, as appears by Gen. xiv. 4-7. It is supposed by
   learned men, that he was a king of the Assyrian empire at that day,
   which had been before begun by Nimrod at Babel. And as it was the
   honour of kings in those days to build cities for the seat of their
   empire, (Gen. x. 10-12.) so it is conjectured, that he had gone forth
   and built him a city in Elam, and made that his seat; and that those
   other kings who came with him, were his deputies in the several cities
   and countries where they reigned. But yet as mighty an empire as he
   had, and as great an army as he came with, Abraham, only with his
   trained servants, that were born in his house, conquered and subdued
   this mighty emperor, the kings that came with him, and all their army.
   This he received of God as a pledge of what he had promised, viz. the
   victory that Christ his seed should obtain over the nations of the
   earth, whereby he should possess the gates of his enemies. It is
   plainly spoken of as such in the 41st of Isaiah. In that chapter is
   foretold the future glorious victory the church shall obtain over the
   nations of the world, (Isa. xli. 1, 10, 15.) This victory of Abraham
   over such a great emperor and his mighty forces, is spoken of as a
   pledge and earnest of victory to the church, Isa. xli. 2, 3. "Who
   raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave
   the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? He gave them as
   the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. He pursued
   them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his
   feet."

   Another remarkable confirmation Abraham received of the covenant of
   grace, was when he returned from the slaughter of the kings; when
   Melchisedec the king of Salem, the priest of the most high God, that
   great type of Christ, met him, and blessed him, and brought forth bread
   and wine. The bread and wine signified the same blessings of the
   covenant of grace, that the bread and wine does in the sacrament of the
   Lord's supper. As Abraham had a seal of the covenant in circumcision
   that was equivalent to baptism, so now he had a seal of it equivalent
   to the Lord's supper. And Melchisedec's coming to meet him with such a
   seal of the covenant of grace, on the occasion of this victory,
   evinces, that it was a pledge of God's fulfilment of the same covenant.
   (Gen. xiv. 19, 20.)

   Another confirmation of the covenant of grace, was the vision he had,
   in the deep sleep that fell upon him, of the smoking furnace, and
   burning lamp, that passed between the parts of the sacrifice, (Gen.
   xv.) The sacrifice signified that of Christ. The smoking furnace that
   passed through the midst of that sacrifice first, signified the
   sufferings of Christ. But the burning lamp that followed, which shone
   with a clear bright light, signifies the glory that followed Christ's
   sufferings, and was procured by them.

   Another remarkable pledge that God gave Abraham of the fulfilment of
   the covenant of grace, was his giving of that child of whom Christ was
   to come, in his old age, (Heb. xi. 11, 12. and Rom. iv. 18-25.) and his
   delivering Isaac, after he was laid upon the wood of the sacrifice to
   be slain. This was a confirmation of Abraham's faith in the promise
   that God had made of Christ, that he should be of Isaac's posterity;
   and was a representation of the resurrection of Christ. (Heb. xi.
   17-19.) And because this was given as a confirmation of the covenant of
   grace, therefore God renewed that covenant with Abraham on this
   occasion, (Gen. xxii. 15-18.)

   Thus you see how much more fully the covenant of grace was revealed and
   confirmed in Abraham's time than ever it had been before; by means of
   which Abraham seems to have had a clear view of Christ the great
   Redeemer, and the future things that were to be accomplished by him.
   And therefore Christ informs us, that "Abraham rejoiced to see his day,
   and he saw it. and was glad," John viii. 56. So great an advance did it
   please God now to make in this building, which he had been carrying on
   from the beginning of the world.

   III. The next thing is God's preserving the patriarchs for so long a
   time in the midst of the wicked inhabitants of Canaan, and from all
   other enemies. The patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were those of
   whom Christ was to proceed; and they were now separated from the world,
   that in them his church might be upheld. Therefore, in preserving them,
   the great design of redemption was carried on. He preserved them, and
   kept the inhabitants of the land where they sojourned from destroying
   them; which was a remarkable dispensation of providence. For the
   inhabitants of the land were at that day very wicked, though they grew
   more wicked afterwards. This appears by Gen. xv. 16. "In the fourth
   generation they shall come hither again; for the iniquity of the
   Canaanites is not yet full:" as much as to say, though it be very
   great, yet it is not yet full. And their great wickedness also appears
   by Abraham and Isaac's aversion to their children marrying any of the
   daughters of the land. Abraham, when he was old, could not be content
   till he had made his servant swear that he would not take a wife for
   his son of the daughters of the land. And Isaac and Rebecca were
   content to send away Jacob to so great a distance as Padan-Aram, to
   take him a wife thence. And when Esau married some of the daughters of
   the land, we are told, that they were a grief of mind to Isaac and
   Rebecca.

   Another argument of their great wickedness, was the instances we have
   in Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which were some of the cities
   of Canaan, though they were probably most notoriously wicked; and
   likely to have the most bitter enmity against these holy men; agreeable
   to what was declared at first, "I will put enmity between thee and the
   woman, and between thy seed and her seed." [617] Their holy lives were
   a continual condemnation of their wickedness. Besides, it could not be
   otherwise, but that they must be much in reproving their wickedness, as
   we find Lot was in Sodom; who, we are told, vexed his righteous soul
   with their unlawful deeds, and was to them a preacher of righteousness.

   And they were the more exposed to them, being strangers and sojourners
   in the land, and having as yet no inheritance there. Men are more apt
   to find fault with strangers, and to be irritated by any thing in them
   that offends, as they were with Lot in Sodom. He very gently reproved
   their wickedness; and they say upon it, "This fellow came in to
   sojourn, and he will needs be a ruler and a judge;" and threatened what
   they would do to him.

   But God wonderfully preserved Abraham and Lot, Isaac and Jacob, and
   their families, amongst them, though they were few in number, and they
   might quickly have destroyed them; which is taken notice of as a
   wonderful instance of God's preserving mercy towards his church, Psal.
   cv. 12-15. "When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
   strangers in it. When they went from one nation to another, from one
   kingdom to another people. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he
   reproved kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do
   my prophets no harm."

   This preservation was, in some instances especially, very remarkable;
   when the people of the land were greatly irritated and provoked; as
   they were by Simeon and Levi's treatment of the Shechemites, in Gen.
   xxxiv. 30, 31. God then strangely preserved Jacob and his family,
   restraining the provoked people by an unusual terror on their minds.
   Gen. xxxv. 5. "And the terror of God was upon the cities that were
   round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob."

   And God preserved them, not only from the Canaanites, but from all
   others that intended mischief to them. He preserved Jacob and his
   company, when pursued by Laban, full of rage, and a disposition to
   overtake, him as an enemy. God met him, rebuked him, and said to him,
   "Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad." How
   wonderfully did he also preserve him from Esau his brother, when he
   came forth with an army, with a full design to cut him off! How did
   God, in answer to his prayer, when Jacob wrestled with Christ at
   Penuel, wonderfully turn Esau's heart, and make him, instead of meeting
   him as an enemy with slaughter and destruction, to meet him as a friend
   and brother, doing him no harm!

   And thus was this handful, this little root that had the blessing of
   the Redeemer in it, preserved in the midst of enemies and dangers:
   which was not unlike to preserving the ark in the midst of the
   tempestuous deluge.

   IV. The next thing I would mention is, the awful destruction of Sodom
   and Gomorrah, and the neighbouring cities. This tended to promote the
   great work designed two ways: First, as it tended powerfully to
   restrain the inhabitants of the land from injuring those holy strangers
   that God had brought to sojourn amongst them. Lot was one of those
   strangers; he came into the land with Abraham; and Sodom was destroyed
   for their abusive disregard of Lot, the preacher of righteousness. And
   their destruction came upon their committing a most injurious and
   abominable insult on Lot, and the strangers that were come into his
   house, even those angels, whom they probably took to be some of Lot's
   former acquaintance come to visit him. They in a most outrageous manner
   beset Lot's house, intending a monstrous abuse and act of violence on
   those strangers, and threatening to serve Lot worse than them.

   But in the midst of this God smote them with blindness; and the next
   morning the city and the country about it was overthrown in a most
   terrible storm of fire and brimstone; which dreadful destruction, as it
   was in the sight of the rest of the inhabitants of the land, and
   therefore greatly tended to restrain them from hurting those holy
   strangers any more; it doubtless struck a dread and terror on their
   minds, and made them afraid to hurt them, and probably was one
   principal means to restrain them, and preserve the patriarchs. And when
   that reason is given, why the inhabitants of the land did not pursue
   after Jacob, when they were so provoked by the destruction of the
   Shechemites, viz. that the terror of the Lord was upon them; it is very
   probable, that this was the terror which was set home upon them. They
   remembered the amazing destruction of Sodom, and the cities of the
   plain, that came upon them for their abusive treatment of Lot, and so
   durst not hurt Jacob and his family, though they were so much provoked
   to it.

   Another way that this awful destruction tended to promote this great
   affair of redemption, was, that hereby God remarkably exhibited the
   terrors of his law, to make men sensible of their need of redeeming
   mercy. The work of redemption never was carried on without this. The
   law, from the beginning, is made use of as a schoolmaster to bring men
   to Christ.

   But under the Old Testament there was much more need of some
   extraordinary, visible, and sensible manifestation of God's wrath
   against sin, than in the days of the gospel; since a future state, and
   the eternal misery of hell, is more clearly revealed, and since the
   awful justice of God against the sins of men has been so wonderfully
   displayed in the sufferings of Christ. And therefore the revelation
   that God gave of himself in those days, used to be accompanied with
   much more terror than it is in these days of the gospel. So when God
   appeared at mount Sinai to give the law, it was with thunders and
   lightnings, and a thick cloud, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding
   loud. Some external, awful manifestations of God's wrath against sin
   were on some accounts especially necessary before the giving of the
   law: and therefore, before the flood, the terrors of the law handed
   down by tradition from Adam served for that purpose. Adam lived nine
   hundred and thirty years himself, to proclaim God's awful threatenings
   denounced in the covenant made with him, and how dreadful the
   consequences of the fall were; and others, that conversed with Adam,
   lived till the flood. And the destruction of the world by the flood
   served to exhibit the terrors of the law, and manifested the wrath of
   God against sin; in order to make men sensible of the absolute
   necessity of redeeming mercy. And some that saw the flood were alive in
   Abraham's time.

   But this was now in a great measure forgotten; therefore God was
   pleased again, in a most amazing manner, to show his wrath against sin,
   in the destruction of these cities; which was the liveliest image of
   hell of any thing that ever had been; and therefore the apostle Jude
   says, "They suffer the vengeance of eternal fire," Jude 7. God rained
   storms of fire and brimstone upon them; probably by thick flashes of
   lightning. The streams of brimstone burnt up all these cities; so that
   they perished in the flames of divine wrath. By this might be seen the
   dreadful wrath of God against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of
   men; which tended to show the necessity of redemption, and so to
   promote that great work.

   V. God again renewed and confirmed the covenant of grace to Isaac and
   Jacob. To Isaac in these words; Gen. xxvi. 3, 4. "And I will perform
   the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father; and I will make thy
   seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
   all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
   be blessed." And afterwards to Jacob; first, in Isaac blessing him and
   his seed, wherein he acted and spoke by extraordinary divine direction,
   Gen. xxvii. 29. "Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee;
   be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee:
   Cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth
   thee." And therefore Esau, not included in this blessing, missed of
   being blessed as an heir of the benefits of the covenant of grace.

   This covenant was again renewed and confirmed to Jacob at Bethel, in
   his vision of the ladder that reached to heaven; which was a symbol of
   the way of salvation by Christ. The stone that Jacob rested on was a
   type of Christ, the stone of Israel, which the spiritual Israel rests
   upon; as is evident, because it was anointed, and made use of as an
   altar. But we know that Christ is the anointed of God, and is the only
   true altar. While Jacob was resting on this stone, and saw this ladder,
   God appears to him as his covenant God, and renews the covenant of
   grace with him; as in Gen. xxviii. 14. "And thy seed shall be as the
   dust of the earth; and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the
   east, and to the north, and to the south; and in thee and in thy seed
   shall all the families of the earth be blessed."

   Jacob had another remarkable confirmation of this covenant at Penuel,
   where he wrestled with God, and prevailed; where Christ appeared to him
   in the form of that nature which he was afterwards to receive in a
   personal union with his divine nature.--And God renewed his covenant
   with him again, after he left Padan-Aram, and was come up to Bethel,
   and where he had the vision of the ladder; as you may see in Gen. xxxv.
   10-15.

   Thus the covenant of grace was now renewed much oftener than it had
   been before. The light of the gospel now began to shine much brighter,
   as the time of Christ's appearing drew nearer.

   VI. The next thing I would observe, is God's remarkably preserving the
   family of which Christ was to proceed from perishing by famine, by the
   instrumentality of Joseph. When there was a seven-years famine
   approaching, God was pleased, by a wonderful providence, to send Joseph
   into Egypt, there to provide for Jacob and his family, and to keep the
   holy seed alive, which otherwise would have perished. Joseph was sent
   into Egypt for that end, as he observes, Gen. l. 20. "But as for you,
   ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to save much
   people alive." How often had this holy root, that had in it the future
   branch of righteousness, the glorious Redeemer, been in danger of being
   destroyed! But God wonderfully preserved it.

   This salvation of the house of Israel, by the hand of Joseph, was upon
   some accounts very much a resemblance of the salvation of Christ. The
   children of Israel were saved by Joseph their kinsman and brother, from
   perishing by famine; as he that saves the souls of the spiritual Israel
   from spiritual famine is their near kinsman, and one that is not
   ashamed to call them brethren. Joseph was a brother they had hated,
   sold, and as it were killed; for they had designed to kill him. So
   Christ is one that we naturally hate, and by our wicked lives, have
   sold for the vain things of the world, and by our sins have slain.
   Joseph was first in a state of humiliation; he was a servant, as Christ
   appeared in the form of a servant; and then was cast into a dungeon, as
   Christ descended into the grave. When he rose out of the dungeon, he
   was in a state of great exaltation, at the king's right hand as his
   deputy, to reign over all his kingdom, to provide food, to preserve
   life; and being in this state of exaltation, he dispenses food to his
   brethren, and so gives them life. So Christ was exalted at God's right
   hand to be a Prince and Saviour to his brethren, received gifts for
   men, even for the rebellious, them that had hated and sold him.

   VII. After this there was a prophecy of Christ, on some accounts more
   particular than any before, in Jacob's blessing his son Judah. This was
   more particular as it showed of whose posterity he was to be. When God
   called Abraham, it was revealed that he was to be of Abraham's
   posterity. Before, we have no account of any revelation concerning
   Christ's pedigree confined to narrower limits than the posterity of
   Noah: after this it was confined to still narrower limits; for though
   Abraham had many sons, yet it was revealed, that Christ was to be of
   Isaac's posterity. And then it was limited still more; for when Isaac
   had two sons, it was revealed that Christ was to be of Israel's
   posterity. And now, though Israel had twelve sons, yet it is revealed
   that Christ should be of Judah's posterity. Christ is the lion of the
   tribe of Judah. Respect is chiefly had to his great acts, when it is
   said here. Gen. xlix. 8. "Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall
   praise; thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's
   children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a lion's whelp; from the
   prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion,
   and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?" And then this prediction
   is more particular concerning the time of Christ's coming, as in Gen.
   xlix. 10. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
   between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering
   of the people be." The prophecy here, of the calling of the Gentiles
   consequent on Christ's coming, seems to be more plain than any had been
   before, in the expression, "to him shall the gathering of the people
   be." [618] Thus you see how that gospel-light which dawned immediately
   after the fall of man, gradually increases.

   VIII. The work of redemption was carried on in this period, in God's
   wonderfully preserving the children of Israel in Egypt, when the power
   of Egypt was engaged utterly to destroy them. They seemed to be wholly
   in the hands of the Egyptians; they were their servants, and were
   subject to the power of Pharaoh: and Pharaoh set himself to weaken them
   with hard bondage. And when he saw that did not do, he set himself to
   extirpate their race, by commanding that every male child should be
   drowned. But after all that Pharaoh could do, God wonderfully preserved
   them; and not only so, but increased them exceedingly; so that, instead
   of being extirpated, they greatly multiplied.

   IX. Here is to be observed, not only the preservation of the nation,
   but God's wonderfully preserving and upholding his invisible church in
   that nation, when in danger of being overwhelmed in the idolatry of
   Egypt. The children of Israel being long among the Egyptians, and
   servants under them, and so not having advantages to keep God's
   ordinances among themselves, and maintain any public worship or
   instruction, whereby the true religion might be upheld, and there being
   now no written word, they by degrees, in a great measure, lost the true
   religion, and borrowed the idolatry of Egypt; and the greater part of
   the people fell away to the worship of their gods. This we learn by
   Ezek. xx. 6, 7, 8; xxiii. 8.

   This now was the third time that God's church was almost swallowed up
   and carried away with the wickedness of the world; once before the
   flood; the other time, before the calling of Abraham; and now, the
   third time, in Egypt. But yet God did not suffer his church to be quite
   overwhelmed: he still saved it, like the ark in the flood, and as he
   saved Moses in the midst of the waters, in an ark of bulrushes, where
   he was in the utmost danger of being swallowed up. The true religion
   was still kept up with some; and God had still a people among them,
   even in this miserable, corrupt, and dark time. The parents of Moses
   were true servants of God, as we may team by Heb. xi. 23. "By faith
   Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because
   they saw that he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the
   king's commandment."

   I have now shown how the work of redemption was carried on from the
   calling of Abraham to Moses; in which we have seen many great things
   done towards this work, and a great advancement of this building,
   beyond what had preceded.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [617] Gen. iii. 15.

   [618] Genesis 49:10
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART IV.

   FROM MOSES TO DAVID.

   I proceed to the time which reaches from Moses to David.

   I. The first thing that offers itself is the redemption of the church
   of God out of Egypt; the most remarkable of all in the Old Testament,
   the greatest pledge and forerunner of the future redemption by Christ,
   and much more insisted on in Scripture than any other of those
   redemptions. And indeed it was the greatest type of Christ's redemption
   of any providential event whatsoever. This was by Jesus Christ, for it
   was wrought by him who appeared to Moses in the bush; the person that
   sent Moses to redeem that people. But that was Christ, as is evident,
   because he is called the angel of the Lord, Exod. iii. 2, 3. The bush
   represented the human nature of Christ, who is called the brunch. This
   bush grew on mount Sinai or Horeb, a word that signifies a dry place,
   as the human nature of Christ was a root out of a dry ground. The bush
   burning with fire, represented the sufferings of Christ, in the fire of
   God's wrath. It burned, and was not consumed; so Christ, though he
   suffered extremely, yet perished not; but overcame at last, and rose
   from his sufferings. Because this great mystery of the incarnation and
   sufferings of Christ was here represented, therefore Moses says, I will
   turn aside, and behold this great sight. A great sight he might well
   call it, when there was represented, God manifest in the flesh ,
   suffering a dreadful death, and rising from the dead.

   This was the glorious Redeemer who redeemed the church out of Egypt,
   from under the hand of Pharaoh; as Christ, by his death and sufferings,
   redeemed his people from Satan, the spiritual Pharaoh. He redeemed them
   from hard service and cruel drudgery; so Christ redeems his people from
   the cruel slavery of sin and Satan. He redeemed them, as it is said,
   from the iron furnace; so Christ redeems his church from a furnace of
   fire and everlasting burnings.--He redeemed them with a strong hand and
   outstretched arm, and great and terrible judgments on their enemies; so
   Christ with mighty power triumphs over principalities and powers, and
   executes terrible judgments on his church's enemies, bruising the
   serpent's head. He saved them, when others were destroyed, by the
   sprinkling of the blood of the paschal lamb; so God's church is saved
   from death by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, when the rest of
   the world is destroyed. God brought forth the people sorely against the
   will of the Egyptians, when they could not bear to let them go; so
   Christ rescues his people out of the hands of the devil, sorely against
   his will, when his proud heart cannot bear to be overcome.

   In that redemption, Christ did not only redeem the people from the
   Egyptians, but he redeemed them from the devils, the gods of Egypt; for
   before, they had been in a state of servitude to the gods of Egypt, as
   well as to the men. And Christ, the seed of the woman, did now, in a
   very remarkable manner, fulfil the curse on the serpent, in bruising
   his head: Exod. xii. 12. "For I will pass through the land of Egypt
   this night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt,
   both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt will I execute
   judgment." Hell was as much, nay more engaged in that affair, than
   Egypt was. The pride and cruelty of Satan, that old serpent, was more
   concerned in it than Pharaoh's. He did his utmost against the people,
   and to his utmost opposed their redemption. But it is said, that when
   God redeemed his people out of Egypt, he "broke the heads of the
   dragons in the waters, and broke the head of leviathan in pieces, and
   gave him to be meat for the people inhabiting the wilderness," Ps.
   lxxiv. 12-14. God forced their enemies to let them go, that they might
   serve him; as Zacharias observes with respect to the church under the
   gospel, Luke i. 74, 75.

   The people of Israel went out with a high hand, and Christ went before
   them in a pillar of cloud and fire. There was a glorious triumph over
   earth and hell in that deliverance. When Pharaoh and his hosts, and
   Satan by them, pursued the people, Christ overthrew them in the Red
   sea; the Lord triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider he cast
   into the sea, and there they slept their sleep, and never followed the
   children of Israel any more. The Red sea represented Christ's blood,
   because the apostle compares the children of Israel's passage through
   the Red sea to baptism, 1 Cor. x. 1, 2.--But we all know that the water
   of baptism represents Christ's blood.

   Thus Christ, the angel of God's presence, in his love and his pity,
   redeemed his people, and carried them in the days of old as on eagles'
   wings, so that none of their proud and spiteful enemies, neither
   Egyptians nor devils, could touch them.

   This was quite a new thing that God did towards this great work of
   redemption. God never had done any thing like it before; Deut. iv. 32,
   34. This was a great advancement of the work, that had been begun and
   carried on from the fall of man; a great step taken in Divine
   Providence towards a preparation for Christ's coming into the world,
   and working out his great and eternal redemption: for this was the
   people of whom Christ was to come. And now we may see how that plant
   flourished which God had planted in Abraham. Though the family of which
   Christ was to come, had been in a degree separated from the rest of the
   world before, in the calling of Abraham; yet that separation appeared
   not to be sufficient. For though by that separation, they were kept, as
   strangers and sojourners, from being united with other people in the
   same political societies; yet they remained mixed among them, by which
   means they had been in danger of wholly losing the true religion, and
   of being overrun with the idolatry of their neighbours. God now,
   therefore, by this redemption, separated them as a nation from all
   others, to subsist by themselves in their own political and
   ecclesiastical state, without having any concern with the heathen
   nations, that the church of Christ might be upheld, and might keep the
   oracles of God; that in them might be kept up those types and
   prophecies of Christ, and those histories and other divine previous
   instructions, which were necessary to prepare the way for Christ's
   coming.

   II. As this people were separated to be God's peculiar people, so all
   other people upon the face of the whole earth were wholly rejected and
   given over to heathenism. This was one thing that God ordered in his
   providence to prepare the way for Christ's coming, and the great
   salvation he was to accomplish; for it was only to prepare the way for
   the more glorious and signal victory and triumph of Christ's power and
   grace over the wicked and miserable world, and that Christ's salvation
   of mankind might become the more sensible. This is the account the
   Scripture itself gives us of the matter, Rom. xi. 30, 32. The apostle,
   speaking to the Gentiles that had formerly been heathens, says, [619]
   "As ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy
   through their unbelief; even so have these also now not believed, that
   through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. For God hath concluded
   them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all:" i. e. It was
   the will of God, that the whole world, Jews and Gentiles, should be
   concluded in visible and professed unbelief, that so God's mercy and
   Christ's salvation towards them all might be visible. For the apostle
   is not speaking only of that unbelief that is natural to all God's
   professing people as well as others, but that which appears, and is
   visible; such as the Jews fell into, when they openly rejected Christ,
   and ceased to be a professing people. The apostle observes, how that
   first the Gentiles, even the Gentile nations, were included in at
   professed unbelief and open opposition to the true religion, before
   Christ came, to prepare the way for the calling of the Gentiles, which
   was soon after Christ came, in order that God's mercy might be the more
   visible to them; and that the Jews were rejected, and apostatized from
   the visible church, to prepare the way for the calling of the Jews,
   which shall be in the latter days. So that it may be seen concerning
   all nations, Jews and Gentiles, that are redeemed by Christ, from being
   visibly aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, without hope, and
   without God in the world.

   We cannot certainly determine precisely at what time the apostacy of
   the Gentile nations from the true God, or their being concluded in
   visible unbelief, became universal. Their falling away was a gradual
   thing, as we observed before. It was general in Abraham's time, but not
   universal: for then we find Melchizedec, one of the kings of Canaan,
   was priest of the most high God. And after this the true religion was
   kept up for a while among some of the rest of Abraham's posterity,
   besides the family of Jacob; and also in some of the posterity of
   Nahor, as we have instances in Job, and his three friends, and Elihu.
   The land of Uz, where Job lived, was possessed by the posterity of Uz,
   or Huz, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother, of whom we read, Gen.
   xxii. 21. Bildad the Shuhite was of the offspring of Shuah, Abraham's
   son by Keturah, Gen. xxv. 1, 2. and Elihu the Buzite, was of Buz the
   son of Nahor, the brother of Abraham. So the true religion lasted among
   some other people, besides the Israelites, a while after Abraham. But
   it did not last long: and it is probable that their total rejection,
   and giving up to idolatry, was about the time when God separated the
   children of Israel from Egypt to serve him. For they are often put in
   mind on that occasion, that God had now separated them to be his
   peculiar people; or to be distinguished from all other people upon
   earth, to be his people alone; to be his portion, when others were
   rejected. This seems to imply, that God now chose them in such a
   manner, as was accompanied with a visible rejection of all other
   nations in the world; that God visibly came, and took up his residence
   with them, forsaking all other nations. As the first calling of the
   Gentiles, after Christ came, was accompanied with a rejection of the
   Jews; so the first calling of the Jews to be God's people, when they
   left Egypt, was accompanied with a rejection of the Gentiles.

   Thus all the nations in the world, except the Israelites, and those who
   embodied themselves with them, were given up to idolatry; and so
   continued till Christ came, which was about fifteen hundred years. They
   were concluded so long a time in unbelief, that there might be a
   thorough proof of the necessity of a Saviour; that it might appear by
   so long a trial, past all contradiction, that mankind were utterly
   insufficient to deliver themselves from that gross darkness and misery,
   and subjection to the devil; that all the wisdom of the heathen
   philosophers could not deliver them from their darkness, for the
   greater glory to Jesus Christ, who, when he came, enlightened and
   delivered them by his glorious gospel. Herein the wonderful wisdom of
   God appeared, in thus preparing the way for Christ's redemption. This
   the Scripture teaches us, 1 Cor. i. 21. "For after that, in the wisdom
   of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
   foolishness of preaching to save them that believe."

   III. The next thing done towards the work of redemption, is God's
   giving the moral law in so awful a manner at mount Sinai. This was
   another new step taken in this great affair. Deut. iv. 33. "Did ever
   people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as
   thou hast heard, and live?" And it was a great thing, whether we
   consider it as a new exhibition of the covenant of works, or given as a
   rule of life.

   The covenant of works was here exhibited as a schoolmaster to lead to
   Christ, not only for the use of that nation, under the Old Testament,
   but for the use of God's church throughout all ages of the world. It is
   an instrument that the great Redeemer makes use of to convince men of
   their sin, misery, and helpless state, and of God's awful and
   tremendous majesty and justice as a lawgiver, in order to make men
   sensible of the necessity of Christ as a Saviour. This work of
   redemption, in its saving effect on men's souls, in all its progress,
   is not carried on without the use of this law delivered at Sinai.

   It was given in an awful manner, with a terrible voice, exceedingly
   loud and awful, so that all the people in the camp trembled; and even
   Moses himself, though so intimate a friend of God, said, "I exceedingly
   fear and quake. [620] " The voice was accompanied with thunders and
   lightnings, the mountain burning with fire to the midst of heaven, and
   the earth itself shaking and trembling. This was done in order to make
   all sensible how great that authority, power, and justice were, that
   stood engaged to exact the fulfilment of this law, and to see it fully
   executed. Here might he understood, how strictly God would require the
   fulfilment; and how terrible his wrath would be against every
   transgressor. Men, being sensible of these things, might thoroughly
   prove their own hearts, and know how impossible it is for them to
   obtain salvation by the works of the law, and be assured of their
   absolute need of a mediator.

   If we regard the law given at mount Sinai--not as a covenant of works,
   but--as a rule of life, it is employed by the Redeemer, from that time
   to the end of the world, as a directory to his people, to show them the
   way in which they must walk, as they would go to heaven: for a way of
   sincere and universal obedience to this law is the narrow way that
   leads to life.

   IV. The next thing observable in this period, was God's giving the
   typical law, those precepts that did not properly belong to the moral
   law. Not only those laws which are commonly called ceremonial, which
   prescribe the ceremonies and circumstances of the Jewish worship, and
   their ecclesiastical state; but also those that were political, for
   regulating the Jewish commonwealth, commonly called judicial laws, were
   many of them typical. The giving this typical law was another great
   thing that God did in this period, tending to build up the glorious
   structure of redemption. There had been many typical events of
   providence before, that represented Christ and his redemption, and some
   typical ordinances, as particularly those two of sacrifices and
   circumcision: but now, instead of representing the great Redeemer in a
   few institutions, God enacts a law full of typical representations of
   good things to come. By these, that nation were directed every year,
   month, and day, in their religious actions, and in their conduct, in
   all that appertained to their ecclesiastical and civil state, to
   something of Christ; one observance exhibiting one doctrine, or one
   benefit; another, another; so that the whole nation by this law was, as
   it were, constituted in a typical state. Thus the gospel was abundantly
   held forth to that nation; so that there is scarce any doctrine of it,
   but is particularly taught and exhibited by some observance of this
   law; though it was in shadows, and under a vail, as Moses put a vail on
   his face when it shone--To this typical law belong all the precepts
   which relate to building the tabernacle, set up in the wilderness, and
   all its form, circumstances, and utensils.

   V. About this time was given to the church the first written word of
   God. This was another great thing done towards the affair of
   redemption, a new and glorious advancement of the building; which God
   has given for the regulation of faith, worship, and practice to the end
   of the world. This rule grew, and was added to from that time, for many
   ages, till it was finished, and the canon of Scripture completed by the
   apostle John. It is not very material, whether the first written word
   was the ten commandments, written on the tables of stone with the
   finger of God, or the book of Job; and whether the book of Job was
   written by Moses, as some suppose, or by Elihu, as others. If it was
   written by Elihu, it must have been before this period; but yet could
   not be far from it, as appears by considering whose posterity the
   persons spoken of in it were, together with Job's great age, before it
   was written.

   The written word of God is the main instrument employed by Christ, m
   order to carry on his work of redemption in all ages. There was a
   necessity now of the word of God being committed to writing, for a
   steady rule to God's church. Before this, the church had the word by
   tradition, either by immediate tradition from eminent men inspired,
   that were living, or else by tradition from former generations, which
   might be had with tolerable certainty in ages preceding this, by reason
   of men's long lives. Noah might converse with Adam, and receive
   traditions from him; and Noah lived till about Abraham's time: and the
   sons of Jacob lived a considerable time to deliver the revelations made
   to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to their posterity in Egypt. But the
   distance from the beginning of things was become now so great, and the
   lives of men become so short--being brought down to the present
   standard about the time of Moses--and God having now separated a nation
   to be a peculiar people, to be the keepers of the oracles of God; God
   saw it to be a convenient time now to commit his word to writing, to
   remain henceforward for a steady rule throughout all ages. And
   therefore, besides the book of Job, Christ wrote the ten commandments
   on tables of stone, with his own finger. After this, the whole law, as
   containing the substance of the five books of Moses, was by God's
   special command committed to writing, which was called "the book of the
   law," and was laid up in the tabernacle, to be kept there for the use
   of the church, Deut. xxxi. 24-26.

   VI. God was pleased now wonderfully to represent the progress of his
   redeemed church through the world to their eternal inheritance, by the
   journey of the children of Israel through the wilderness, from Egypt to
   Canaan. Here all the various steps of the redemption of the church by
   Christ were represented, from the beginning to its consummation in
   glory. The state they are redeemed from is represented by Egypt, and
   their bondage there, which they left. The purchase of their redemption
   was represented by the sacrifice of the paschal lamb, which was offered
   up that night in which God slew all the first-born of Egypt. The
   beginning of the application of the redemption of Christ's church in
   their conversion, was represented by Israel's going out of Egypt, and
   passing through the Red sea in so extraordinary and miraculous a
   manner. The travel of the church through this evil world, and the
   various changes through which me church passes, was represented by the
   journey of the Israelites through the wilderness. The manner of their
   being conducted by Christ, was represented by the Israelites being led
   by the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night. The
   manner of the church's being supported in their progress, supplied with
   spiritual food, and daily communications from God, was represented by
   his supplying the children of Israel with manna from heaven, and water
   out of the rock. The dangers that the saints must meet with in their
   course through the world, were represented by the fiery flying serpents
   in the wilderness. The conflicts the church has with her enemies, were
   represented by their battle with the Amalekites and others. And
   innumerable other particulars might be mentioned, which were lively
   images of what the church and saints meet with in all ages of the
   world. That these things were typical, is manifest from 1 Cor. x. 11.
   "Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they were
   written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come."
   Here the apostle is speaking of those very things which we have now
   mentioned, and he says expressly, that they happened unto them for
   types; so it is in the original.

   VII. Another thing here must not be omitted, which was a great and
   remarkable dispensation of Providence, respecting the whole world of
   mankind, in this period; viz. the shortening of man's life. It was now
   brought down from being between nine hundred and a thousand years, to
   about seventy or eighty. The life of man began to be shortened
   immediately after the flood. It was brought down the first generation
   to six hundred years, and the next to between four and five hundred
   years. So the life of man gradually grew shorter and shorter, till
   about the time of the great mortality which was in the congregation of
   Israel, after they had murmured at the report of the spies, and their
   carcasses fell in the wilderness, whereby all the men of war died. Then
   the life of man was reduced to its present standard, as Moses observes
   in that psalm which he wrote on occasion of that mortality: Psal. xc.
   10. "The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by
   reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength
   labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away."

   Man's life being cut so very short, tended to prepare the way for poor,
   short-lived men, the more joyfully to entertain the glad tidings of
   everlasting life, brought to light by the gospel; and more readily to
   embrace a Saviour, that purchases and offers such a blessing. If men's
   lives were still commonly about nine hundred years, how much less would
   be the inducement to regard the proffers of a future life; how much
   greater the temptation to rest in the things of this world, and to
   neglect any other life but this! This probably contributed greatly to
   the wickedness of the antediluvians. But now how much greater motives
   have men to seek redemption, and a better life than this, by the great
   Redeemer, since the life of man is not one twelfth part of what it used
   to be, and men now universally die at the age when formerly they used
   to be but setting out in the world.

   VIII. The same work was carried on in preserving that people, of whom
   Christ was to come, from totally perishing in the wilderness, by a
   constant miracle of forty years' continuance. I observed before how God
   preserved those of whom the Redeemer was to proceed in a very wonderful
   manner; as Noah and his family from the flood; Abraham, Isaac, and
   Jacob, with their families, from the wicked inhabitants of Canaan; and
   Jacob and his family from perishing by the famine, by Joseph in Egypt.
   But this preservation of Israel in the wilderness, was on some accounts
   more remarkable than any of them; for it was by a continual miracle of
   so long duration. There was, as may be fairly computed, at first two
   millions of souls in that congregation. But if miraculous support had
   been withheld, they must all have perished, in less than a month's
   time, so that there would not have been one of them left. But yet this
   vast multitude subsisted for forty years together, in a dry barren
   wilderness, without sowing, reaping, or tillage. Their bread was daily
   rained down to them out of heaven, and they were furnished with water
   out of a rock; and the same clothes with which they came out of Egypt,
   lasted all that time. Never was any instance like this, of a nation
   being so upheld for so long a time together. Thus God upheld his church
   by a continual miracle, and kept alive that people in whom was the
   blessing, the great Redeemer of the world.

   IX. God was pleased, during this time, to give a further revelation of
   Christ the Redeemer in the predictions of him. Three prophecies deserve
   particular notice. The first is that of Balaam, Numb. xxiv. 17-19. "I
   shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh: there
   shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel,
   and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of
   Sheth. And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession
   for his enemies, and Israel shall do valiantly. Out of Jacob shall come
   he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of
   the city." This is a plainer prophecy of Christ, especially with regard
   to his kingly office, than any former one. But we have another, that
   God gave by Moses, plainer still, especially with regard to his
   prophetical office, in Deut. xviii. 18, &c. "I will raise up a prophet
   from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his
   month, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him," &c. This
   is a plainer prophecy of Christ than any before. All the preceding
   prophecies were in figurative, mystical language. The first prophecy
   was so, That the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head.
   The promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, That in their seed all
   the families of the earth should be blessed, were also mystical; and
   not so particular, because the expression, thy seed, is general, and
   not plainly limited to any particular person. The prophecy of Jacob in
   blessing Judah, Gen. xlix. 8. is in mystical language; and so is that
   of Balaam, which speaks of Christ under the figurative expression of a
   star. But this is a plain prophecy, without being veiled at all in any
   mystical language.

   There are several things contained in this prophecy of Christ. Here is
   his mediatorial office in general, Gen. xlix. 16. Here it is revealed
   how he should be a person to stand between them and God, a being of
   such awful majesty, holiness, and justice, that they could not have
   come to him, and have intercourse with him immediately, without a
   mediator to stand between them; because, if they came to such a
   sin-revenging God immediately, they should die; God would prove a
   consuming fire to them. And here is a particular revelation of Christ
   with respect to his prophetical office: "I will raise them up a prophet
   from among their brethren, like unto thee," [621] &c. And further, it
   is revealed what kind of a prophet he should be; a prophet like unto
   Moses, who was the head and leader of all the people, and who, under
   God, had been their redeemer, to bring them out of the house of
   bondage. He was their shepherd, by whom God led them through the Red
   sea and the wilderness, was an intercessor for them with God, and was
   both a prophet and a king in the congregation; for Moses had the power
   of a king among them. It is said of him, Deut. xxxiii. 5. that he was
   king in Jeshurun, was the prophet by whom God built up his church, and
   delivered his instructions of worship. Thus Christ was to be a prophet
   like unto Moses; so that this is both the plainest and fullest prophecy
   of Christ that ever had been from the beginning of the world to this
   time.

   The next prophecy respects the calling of the Gentiles, which should be
   after Christ's coming, Deut. xxxii. 21. Here is a very plain prophecy
   of the rejection of the Jews and calling the Gentiles. As they moved
   God to jealousy, by that which was not God, by casting him off, and
   taking others, that were no gods, in his room; so God declares that he
   will move them to jealousy in like manner, by casting them off, and
   taking others, who had not been his people, in their room. The apostle
   Paul takes notice of this prophecy, as foretelling the calling of the
   Gentiles, in Rom. x. 19, 20. "But I say, Did not Israel know? First,
   Moses saith, I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people,
   and by a foolish nation I will anger you. But Esaias is very bold, and
   saith, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest to
   them that asked not after me."

   Thus you see how the light of the gospel, which first began to dawn and
   glimmer immediately after the fall, gradually increases the nearer we
   come to Christ's time.

   X. Another thing by which God carried on this work in this time, was a
   remarkable pouring out of his Spirit on the young generation in the
   wilderness. The generation that was grown up when they came out of
   Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, was a very froward and
   perverse generation. They were tainted with the idolatry and wickedness
   of Egypt, and were not weaned from it. Ezek. xx. 6-8. Hence they made
   the golden calf in imitation of the idolatry of Egypt, that was wont to
   worship a bull or an ox; and therefore cattle are called the
   abomination of the Egyptians, i. e. their idol. With this generation
   God was exceeding angry, and swore in his wrath, that they should not
   enter into his rest. But the younger generation, who were under twenty
   years old when they came out of Egypt, were not so, Numb. xiv. 31. "But
   your little ones, whom ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in;
   and they shall know the land that ye have despised." This was the
   generation with whom the covenant was renewed, as we have an account in
   Deuteronomy, and that entered into the land of Canaan. This generation
   God was pleased to make a people to his praise, and they were eminent
   for piety; as appears by many things said about them; particularly,
   Jer. ii. 2, 3. "I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of
   thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a
   land that was not sown. Israel was holiness to the Lord, and the
   first-fruits of his increase." Here the generation that went after God
   in the wilderness, is spoken of with very high commendations, as
   eminent for holiness. Their love to God is distinguished like the love
   of a bride at her espousals, when they followed him through that
   dreadful wilderness, after they went back from Kadesh-Barnea, Deut.
   viii. 15. "Who led thee through the great and terrible wilderness,
   wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there
   was no water." Though this generation had a much greater trial, than
   the generation of their fathers had before they came to Kadesh-Barnea,
   yet they never murmured against God, as their fathers had done: but
   their trials had a contrary effect upon them, to awaken, convince, and
   humble them, and fit them for great mercy. They were awakened by those
   awful judgments of God inflicted on their fathers, whereby their
   carcasses fell in the wilderness. God poured out his Spirit with those
   awakening providences, and their own travel in the wilderness, and the
   word preached to them by Moses; whereby they were humbled, and at
   length multitudes of them were savingly converted; as Deut. viii. 2, 3.
   "And thou shalt remember the way which the Lord thy God led thee these
   forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to
   know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldst keep his
   commandments, or no. And he humbled thee," &c. And Deut. viii. 15. "Who
   led thee through that great and terrible wilderness,--that he might
   humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
   latter end." And therefore it is said, Hos. xiii. 5. "I did know thee
   in the wilderness, in the land of great drought." God allured them, and
   brought them into that wilderness, and spake comfortably to them, as it
   was foretold that he would do afterwards, Hos. ii. 14.

   Those terrible judgments that were executed in the congregation after
   their turning back from Kadesh-Barnea, in the matter of Korah, and the
   matter of Peor, were chiefly on the old generation, whom God consumed
   in the wilderness. Those rebellions were chiefly among the elders of
   the congregation, who were given up to their hearts' lust; and they
   walked in their own counsels, and God was grieved with their manners
   forty years in the wilderness.

   That this younger congregation were eminent for piety, appears by all
   their history. The former generation were wicked, and were followed
   with curses; but this was holy, and wonderful blessings followed them.
   God did great things for them; he fought for them, and gave them the
   possession of Canaan. And it is God's manner, when he hath very great
   mercies to bestow on a visible people, first, to fit them for such
   mercies, and then to confer them. So it was here: they believed in God,
   and by faith overcame Sihon and Og, and the giants of Canaan; and are
   commended for cleaving to the Lord: Josh. xxiii. 8. Joshua says unto
   them, "Cleave unto the Lord, as ye have done unto this day. [622] " But
   when Joshua and all that generation were dead, there arose another that
   knew not the Lord. This pious generation showed a laudable and fervent
   zeal for God on several occasions; as on occasion of Achan's sin; but
   especially when they suspected the two tribes and a half had set up an
   altar in opposition to the altar of burnt-offering. There never was any
   generation of Israel of which so much good and so little evil is
   mentioned. It is further observable, that in the time of this
   generation was the second general circumcision, whereby the reproach of
   Israel was fully rolled away, and they became pure; and when afterwards
   they were polluted by Achan, they purged themselves again.

   The men of the former generation being dead, and God having sanctified
   this to himself, he solemnly renewed his covenant with them, as we have
   a particular account in Deut. xxix. We find that such solemn
   renovations of the covenant commonly accompanied any remarkable pouring
   out of the Spirit, causing a general reformation: so we find it was in
   Hezekiah's and Josiah's times. It is questionable whether there ever
   was a time of so great a flourishing of religion in the Israelitish
   church, as in that generation; and as, in the christian church,
   religion was in its most flourishing circumstances in the day of its
   espousals, in the apostles' days, so it seems to have been with the
   Jewish church in the days of its first establishment in the times of
   Moses and Joshua.

   Thus God, at this time, gloriously advanced the work of redemption,
   both by his word and Spirit. Hereby the work of redemption was
   promoted, not only as it was in itself a glorious instance of
   redemption in its application, but as this was what God used for the
   orderly establishment of the Israelitish church, when it was first
   settled in the regular observance of God's ordinances in Canaan: even
   as the pouring out of the Spirit, in the beginning of the christian
   church, was a great means for establishing the christian church in all
   succeeding ages.

   XI. The next thing I would observe, was God's bringing the people of
   Israel by Joshua, and settling them in that land where Christ was to be
   born, and which was the great type of the heavenly Canaan, which Christ
   has purchased. Joshua was of Joseph's posterity, and was an eminent
   type of Christ, and is therefore called the shepherd, the stone of
   Israel. Gen. xlix. 24. Being such a type, he bore the name of Christ.
   Joshua and Jesus are the same name, the one Hebrew, the other Greek:
   and therefore, in the New Testament, originally written in Greek,
   Joshua is called Jesus, Acts vii. 45. "Which also our fathers brought
   in with Jesus," i. e. Joshua; Heb. iv. 8. "If Jesus had given them
   rest, he would not have spoken of another day;" i. e. if Joshua had
   given them rest.

   God wonderfully gave his people possession of this land, conquering its
   former inhabitants, and the mighty giants, as Christ conquered the
   devil. He first conquered the great kings on the eastern side of
   Jordan, Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan; and then
   divided the river Jordan, as before he had done the Red sea; causing
   the walls of Jericho to fall down at the sound of the trumpets of the
   priests. That sound typified the sound of the gospel by the preaching
   of gospel ministers, the walls of the accursed city Jericho, signifying
   the walls of Satan's kingdom. After this he wonderfully destroyed the
   mighty host of the Amorites under the five kings, causing the sun and
   moon to stand still, to help the people against their enemies, at the
   prayer of the typical Jesus; plainly intimating, that God would make
   the whole course of nature to be subservient to the affair of
   redemption; and that every thing should give place to the welfare of
   God's redeemed people.

   Thus did Christ show his great love to his elect, that he would make
   the course of nature to give place to their happiness and prosperity;
   and showed that the sun and moon, and all things visible and invisible,
   were theirs by his purchase. At the same time, Christ fought as the
   captain of their host, and cast down great hailstones upon their
   enemies, by which more were slain than by the sword of Israel. And
   after this Christ gave the people a mighty victory over a yet greater
   army in the northern part of the land, gathered together at the waters
   of Merom, as the sand of the sea-shore, Josh. xi. 4.

   Thus God gave the people whence Christ was to proceed, the land where
   he was to be born; where he was to live, preach, and work miracles; to
   die, and rise again; and whence he was to ascend into heaven, as the
   land which was a great type of heaven.

   XII. Another thing that God did towards carrying on this affair, was
   his actually setting up his stated worship among the people, as it had
   been before instituted in the wilderness. This worship was appointed at
   mount Sinai; it was to make way for the coming of Christ; and the
   innumerable ceremonial observances of it were typical of him and his
   redemption. But there were many parts of their instituted worship that
   could not be observed in the wilderness, by reason of their unsettled
   state there. And there were many precepts that respected the land of
   Canaan, and their places of habitation there; which therefore could not
   be put in practice, till they came into that land. But now, when this
   was brought to pass, God set up his tabernacle in the midst of his
   people, as he had before promised them, Lev. xxvi. 11. "I will set my
   tabernacle amongst you." The tabernacle was set up at Shiloh, Josh.
   xviii. 1. and the priests and the Levites had their offices appointed
   them, and the cities of refuge, and now the people were in a condition
   to observe their feasts of the first-fruits, and their feasts of
   ingathering, and to bring all their tithes and appointed offerings to
   the Lord; and most parts of God's worship were set up, though there
   were some things that were not observed till afterwards.

   XIII. The next thing was God's wonderfully preserving that people, from
   this time forward, when all the males went up, three times in the year,
   to the place where God's ark was. The people of Israel were generally
   surrounded with enemies, who sought all opportunities to destroy them,
   and dispossess them of their land. Till David's time, there were great
   numbers in the land of the remains of the Canaanites, and the other
   former inhabitants of the land, who were bitter enemies to the people
   of Israel: and these had, three times in the year, a fair opportunity
   of overrunning their country, and getting possession of their cities,
   when only the women, and those who were not able to go up, were left
   behind. And yet they were remarkably preserved throughout all
   generations at such seasons, agreeably to the promise, Exod. xxxiv. 24.
   "Neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear
   before the Lord thy God thrice in the year." So wonderfully did God
   order affairs, and influence the hearts of their enemies. They were
   full of enmity against Israel, desired to dispossess them of their
   land, and often had so fair an opportunity, that the whole country was
   left naked and empty of all that could resist them. It would have been
   only for them to go and take possession; and yet we never read, in all
   their history, of any of their enemies taking these opportunities
   against them; which could be no less than a continual miracle, which
   God, for the preservation of his church, kept up for so many
   generations. It was surely a wonderful dispensation of Divine
   Providence to maintain and promote God's great design of redemption.

   XIV. God's preserving his church and the true religion from being
   wholly extinct in the frequent apostacies of the Israelites in the time
   of the judges. How prone was that people to forsake the true God, who
   had done such wonderful things for them, and to fall into idolatry! and
   how did the land, from time to time, seem to be almost overrun with it!
   But yet God never suffered his true worship to be totally rooted out:
   his tabernacle stood, the ark was preserved, the book of the law was
   kept from being destroyed, God's priesthood was upheld, and he still
   had a church among the people. Time after time, when religion seemed to
   be almost gone, then God granted a revival, and sent some angel, or
   raised up some eminent person, to be an instrument of their
   reformation.

   XV. God's preserving that nation from being destroyed, although they
   were so often subdued and brought under the dominion of their enemies.
   It was a wonder, not only that the true religion was not wholly rooted
   out, and so the church destroyed that way; but also that the very
   nation in which that church was, was not utterly destroyed; they were
   so often brought under the power of their enemies. One while they were
   subdued by Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia, another while they
   were brought under the Moabites; now they were sold into the hand of
   Jabin king of Canaan; then they were under the dominion of the
   Midianites; now they were sorely distressed by the children of Ammon;
   and then by the Philistines. But yet God, in all these dangers,
   preserved them, and kept them from being wholly overthrown. From time
   to time, when it was come to extremity, and God saw that they were upon
   the very brink of ruin, then he raised up a deliverer, agreeable to
   Deut. xxxii. 36. "For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent
   himself for his servants; when he seeth their power is gone, and there
   is none shut up or left."--Those remarkable dispensations of Providence
   are very elegantly set forth by the psalmist, Psal. cvi. 34, &c.--These
   deliverers were all types of Christ, the great redeemer and deliverer
   of his church; and some of them very remarkably so; as, Barak,
   Jephthah, Gideon, and Samson, in very many particulars; and above all
   in the acts of Samson, as might be shown, were it not that this would
   take up too much time.

   XVI. It is observable, that when Christ appeared to manage the affairs
   of his church in this period, he often appeared in the form of that
   nature which he took upon him in his incarnation. So he seems to have
   appeared repeatedly to Moses, and particularly at that time when God
   spake to him face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend, and he
   beheld the similitude of the Lord, (Numb. xii. 8.) after he had
   besought him to show him his glory; which was the most remarkable
   vision that ever he had of Christ. There was a twofold discovery that
   Moses had of Christ: one was spiritual, made to his mind, by the word
   that was proclaimed, "The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
   long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
   thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will
   by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
   the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to
   the fourth generation," Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7." Another was external; which
   was that which Moses saw, when Christ passed by, and put him in a cleft
   of the rock. What he saw was doubtless a glorious human form, in which
   Christ appeared to him, and in all likelihood the form of his glorified
   human nature, in which he should afterwards appear. He saw not his
   face; for it is not to be supposed that any man could subsist under a
   sight of the glory of Christ's human nature as it now appears.

   So it was a human form in which Christ appeared to the seventy elders,
   of which we have an account, Exod. xxiv. 9, 11. "Then went up Moses and
   Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel. And they
   saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet, as it were a paved
   work of sapphire-stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his
   clearness. And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not
   his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink." So Christ appeared
   afterwards to Joshua in the form of the human nature, Josh. v. 13, 14.
   "And it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, he lift up his eyes,
   and looked, and behold, there stood a man over against him, with his
   sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him,
   Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay, but as
   captain of the host of the Lord am I now come." And so he appeared to
   Gideon, Judg. vi. 11, &c. and so also to Manoah, Judg. xiii. 17-21.
   Here Christ appeared to Manoah in a representation both of his
   incarnation and death; of his incarnation, in that he appeared in a
   human form; and of his death and sufferings, represented by the
   sacrifice of a kid, and by his ascending up in the flame of the
   sacrifice; intimating, that it was he that was the great sacrifice,
   that must be offered up to God for a sweet savour, in the fire of his
   wrath, as that kid was burned and ascended up in the flame. Thus Christ
   appeared, time after time, in the form of that nature he was afterwards
   to assume; because he now appeared on the same design and to carry on
   the same work.

   XVII. Another thing I would mention, done in this period towards the
   work of redemption, is the beginning of a succession of prophets, and
   erecting a school of the prophets, in Samuel's time. There was
   something of this spirit of prophecy in Israel after Moses, before
   Samuel. Joshua and many of the judges had a degree of it. Deborah was a
   prophetess; and some of the high-priests were inspired with this
   spirit; particularly Eli. That space of time was not wholly without
   instances of those that were set apart of God especially to this
   office, and so were called prophets. Such an one we read of Judg. vi.
   8. "The Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said
   unto them," &c. Such an one he seems to have been of whom we read, 1
   Sam. ii. 27. "And there came a man of God to Eli," &c.

   But there was no such order of men upheld in Israel, for any constancy,
   before Samuel; the want of it is taken notice of in 1 Sam. iii. 1. "And
   the word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open
   vision." But in Samuel there was begun succession of prophets,
   maintained continually from that time, at least with very little
   interruption, till the spirit of prophecy ceased, about Malachi's time:
   and therefore Samuel is spoken of in the New Testament as the beginning
   of this succession of prophets, Acts iii. 24. "And all the prophets
   from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have
   foretold of these days." After Samuel was Nathan, and Gad, Iddo, and
   Heman, Asaph, and others. And afterwards, in the latter end of
   Solomon's reign, we read of Ahijah; and in Jeroboam and Rehoboam's time
   we read of prophets; and so continually one prophet succeeded another
   till the captivity. In the writings of those prophets who are inserted
   in the canon of Scripture, we read of prophets as being a constant
   order of men upheld in the land. And even during the captivity there
   were prophets still, as Ezekiel and Daniel; and after the captivity, as
   Zechariah, Haggai, and Malachi.

   And because God intended a constant succession of prophets from
   Samuel's time, therefore in his time was begun a school of the
   prophets; that is, a school of young men, trained up under some great
   prophet, who was their master and teacher in the study of divine
   things, and the practice of holiness, to fit them for this office as
   God should call them to it. Those young men were called the sons of the
   prophets; and oftentimes they are termed prophets. These at first were
   under the tuition of Samuel. Thus we read of Samuel's being appointed
   over them, 1 Sam. xix. 20. "And when they saw the company of the
   prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them." The
   company of prophets of whom we read 1 Sam. x. 5. were the same.
   Afterwards we read of their being under Elijah. Elisha was one of these
   sons; but he desired to have a double portion of his spirit, as his
   successor, as the eldest son was wont to have a double portion of the
   estate of his father; and therefore the sons of the prophets, when they
   perceived that the spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha, submitted
   themselves to him, and owned him for their master, as they had done
   Elijah before him, 2 Kings ii. 15. "And when the sons of the prophets
   which were to view at Jericho, saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah
   doth rest on Elisha. And they bowed themselves to the ground before
   him." Elisha being their master, or teacher, he had the care of them;
   as you may see, 2 Kings iv. 38. "And Elisha came unto Gilgal, and there
   was a dearth in the land, and the sons of the prophets were sitting
   before him: and he said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and
   seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets." In Elijah's and Elisha's
   time, there were several places where there resided companies of these
   sons of the prophets; as at Bethel, at Jericho, and at Gilgal, unless
   that at Gilgal and Jericho were the same: and possibly that which is
   called the college, where the prophetess Huldah resided, was another at
   Jerusalem; see 2 Kings xxii. 14. It is there said of Huldah the
   prophetess, that she dwelt in Jerusalem, in the college. They had
   houses built, where they used to dwell together; and therefore those at
   Jericho being multiplied, and finding their house too little for them,
   desired leave of their master and teacher Elisha, that they might go
   and hew timber to build a bigger; as you may see, 2 Kings vi. 1, 2. At
   some times there were numbers of these sons of the prophets in Israel;
   for when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, it is said, that
   Obadiah took a hundred of them, and hid them by fifty in a cave, 1
   Kings xviii. 4.

   These schools of the prophets being set up by Samuel, and afterwards
   kept up by such as Elijah and Elisha, must be of divine appointment;
   and accordingly we find, that those sons of the prophets were often
   favoured with a degree of inspiration, while they continued under
   tuition: and God commonly when he called any prophet to the constant
   exercise of the prophetical office, and to some extraordinary service,
   took them out of these schools; though not universally. Hence the
   prophet Amos, speaking of his being called to the prophetical office,
   says, that he had not been educated in the schools of the prophets, and
   was not one of the sons of the prophets, Amos vii. 14, 15. But Amos
   taking notice of it as remarkable, that he should be so called, shows
   that it was God's ordinary manner to take his prophets out of these
   schools; for therein he did but bless his own institution.

   Now this remarkable dispensation of Providence--God beginning a
   constant succession of prophets in Samuel's time, which was to last for
   many ages; and to that end establishing a school of the prophets under
   Samuel, thenceforward to be continued in Israel--was a step that God
   took in the great affair of redemption. For the main business of this
   succession of prophets was, to foreshow Christ, and the glorious
   redemption he was to accomplish, and so to prepare the way for his
   coming; as appears by that fore-mentioned place, Acts iii. 24. and Acts
   x. 43. "To him give all the prophets witness;" and Acts iii. 18. "But
   those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
   prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled."

   The Old-Testament church was not wholly without light, but had not the
   light of the sun directly, only as reflected. Now these prophets were
   the luminaries that reflected the light of the sun; and accordingly
   they spoke abundantly of Jesus Christ, as appears by what we have of
   their prophecies in writing. And they made it very much their business,
   when they studied in their schools or colleges, and elsewhere, to
   search out the work of redemption; agreeable to what the apostle Peter
   says of them, 1 Pet. i. 10, 11. "Of which salvation the prophets have
   inquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that
   should come unto you; searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit
   of Christ that was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand
   the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow." We are
   told, that the church of the Redeemer is built on the foundation of the
   prophets and apostles, the Redeemer himself being the chief
   corner-stone, Eph. ii. 20.

   This was the first thing of the nature that ever was done in the world;
   and it was a great thing that God did towards further advancing this
   great building of redemption. There had been before occasional
   prophecies of Christ, as was shown; but now the time drawing nearer
   when the Redeemer should come, it pleased God to appoint a certain
   order of men, in constant succession, whose main business it should be,
   to point out Christ and his redemption, and as his forerunners to
   prepare the way for his coming; and God established schools, wherein
   multitudes were instructed and trained up to that end, Rev. xix. 10. "I
   am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of
   Jesus; for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [619] Romans xi.30-32.

   [620] Hebrews xii. 21.

   [621] Deut. xviii. 18

   [622] Joshua xiii. 8
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART V

   FROM DAVID TO THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY.

   I come now to the fifth period of the times of the Old Testament,
   beginning with David, and extending to the Babylonish captivity; and
   would now proceed to show how the work of redemption was therein
   carried on.--And here,

   I. The first thing to be noticed is God's anointing that person who was
   to be the ancestor of Christ, to be king over his people. The
   dispensations of Providence through the last period, respect the people
   whence Christ was to proceed; but now the Scripture leads us to
   consider God's providence towards that particular person whence Christ
   was lo descend, viz. David. It pleased God at this time remarkably to
   select out this person, from all the thousands of Israel, and to put a
   most honourable mark of distinction upon him, by anointing him to be
   king over his people. It was only God that could find him out. His
   father's house is spoken of as being little in Israel, and he was the
   youngest of all the sons of his father, and was least expected by
   Samuel to be the man whom God had chosen. God had before, in the former
   ages of the world, remarkably distinguished the persons from whom
   Christ was to come; as Seth, and Noah, and Abraham, and Isaac, and
   Jacob. But the last that we have any account of God's marking out in
   any notable manner, the very person of whom Christ was to come, was in
   Jacob's blessing, his son Judah; unless we reckon Nahshon's advancement
   in the wilderness to be the head of the tribe of Judah. But this
   distinction of the person of whom Christ was to come, in David, was
   very honourable; for it was God's anointing him to be king over his
   people. And there was something further denoted by David's anointing,
   than was in the anointing of Saul. God anointed Saul to be king
   personally; but God intended something further by sending Samuel to
   anoint David, viz. to establish the crown of Israel in him and his
   family, as long as Israel continued to be a kingdom: and not only so,
   but what was infinitely more still, establishing the crown of his
   universal church, his spiritual Israel, in his seed, to the end of the
   world, and through eternity.

   This was a great dispensation of God, and a great step taken towards a
   further advancing of the work of redemption, according as the time drew
   near wherein Christ was to come. David, as he was the ancestor of
   Christ, so he was the greatest personal type of Christ of all under the
   Old Testament. The types of Christ were of three sorts; instituted,
   providential, and personal. The ordinance of sacrificing was the
   greatest of the instituted types; the redemption out of Egypt was the
   greatest of the providential; and David the greatest of the personal
   ones. Hence Christ is often called David in the prophecies of
   Scripture; as Ezek. xxxiv. 23, 24. "And I will set up one shepherd over
   them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David;--My servant David
   a prince among them;" and so in many other places. He is very often
   spoken of as the seed and the son of David.

   David being the ancestor and great type of Christ, his being solemnly
   anointed by God to be king over his people, that the kingdom of his
   church might be continued in his family for ever, may in some respects
   be looked on as an anointing of Christ himself. Christ was as it were
   anointed in him; and therefore Christ's anointing and David's anointing
   are spoken of under one scripture, Psal. lxxxix. 20."I have found David
   my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him. And David's throne
   and Christ's are spoken of as one: Luke i. 32. "And the Lord shall give
   him the throne of his father David." Acts ii. 30. "David--knowing that
   God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins,
   according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne."

   Thus God beginning the kingdom of his church in the house of David,
   was, as it were, a new establishing of the kingdom of Christ; the
   beginning of it in a state of such visibility as it thenceforward
   continued in. It was planting the root, whence that branch of
   righteousness was afterwards to spring up, the everlasting king of his
   church; and therefore this everlasting king is called the branch from
   the stem of Jesse. Isa. xi. 1. "And there shall come forth a rod out of
   the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots." Jer.
   xxiii. 5. "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise up
   unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and prosper." So
   Jer. xxxiii. 15. "In those days, and at that time, I will cause the
   branch of righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute
   judgment and righteousness in the land." So Christ, in the New
   Testament, is called the root and offspring of David, Rev. xxii. 16.

   It is observable, that God anointed David after Saul to reign in his
   room. He took away the crown from him and his family, who was higher in
   stature than any of his people, and was in their eyes fittest to bear
   rule; to give it to David, who was low of stature, and in comparison of
   despicable appearance. So God was pleased to show how Christ, who
   appeared despicable, without form or comeliness, and was despised and
   rejected of men, should take the kingdom from the great ones of the
   earth. And also it is observable, that David was the youngest of
   Jesse's sons, as Jacob the younger brother supplanted Esau, and got the
   birthright and blessing from him; and as Pharez, brother of Christ's
   ancestor, supplanted Zarah in the birth; and as Isaac, another of the
   ancestors of Christ, cast out his elder brother Ishmael: thus was that
   frequent saying of Christ fulfilled," The last shall be first, and the
   first last."

   II. The next thing I would observe, is God's preserving David's life,
   by a series of wonderful providences, till Saul's death. I before took
   notice of the wonderful preservation of other particular persons who
   were the ancestors of Christ; as Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; and have
   observed how, in their preservation, the work of redemption itself may
   be looked upon as preserved from being defeated, and the whole church,
   which is redeemed through him, from being overthrown. But the
   preservation of David was no less remarkable than that of any others
   already noticed. How often was there but a step between him and death.
   The first instance of it we have in his encountering a lion and a bear,
   when they had caught a lamb out of his flock, which, without miraculous
   assistance, could at once have rent this young stripling in pieces, as
   easily as they could the lamb that he delivered from them. So the root
   and offspring of David was preserved from the roaring lion that goes
   about seeking whom he may devour, and conquered him, and rescued the
   souls of men, that were as lambs in the mouth of this lion. Another
   remarkable instance was, in preserving him from that mighty giant
   Goliath, who was strong enough to have torn him to pieces, and given
   his flesh to the beasts of the field, and to the fowls of the air, as
   he threatened. But God preserved him, and gave him the victory over
   Goliath, so that he cut off his head with his own sword, and thus was
   made the deliverer of Israel. So Christ slew the spiritual Goliath with
   his own weapon, the cross, and delivered his represented people. And
   how remarkably did God preserve David from being slain by Saul, when he
   first sought his life! He gave him his daughter to be a snare to him,
   that the hand of the Philistines might be upon him, requiring of him a
   hundred foreskins of the Philistines, that so his life might be exposed
   to them. The same divine care was evident in preserving him afterwards,
   when Saul spake to Jonathan, and to all his servants, to kill David;
   and in inclining Jonathan, instead of his killing him, as his father
   commanded, to love him as his own soul, and to be a great instrument of
   his preservation, even so as to expose his own life to preserve David;
   though one would have thought that none would have been more willing to
   have David killed than Jonathan, seeing that he was competitor with him
   for the crown. Again, Saul threw a javelin at him, to smite him even to
   the wall; and sent messengers to his house, to watch, and to kill him,
   when Michal, Saul's daughter, let him down through a window. He
   afterwards sent messengers once and again, to Naioth in Ramah, to take
   him, and they were remarkably prevented by miraculous impressions of
   the Spirit of God; and afterwards, when Saul, being resolute in the
   affair, went himself, he also was among the prophets. How wonderfully
   was David's life preserved at Gath among the Philistines, when he went
   to Achish the king of Gath, and was there in the hands of the
   Philistines, who, one would have thought, would have despatched him at
   once, he having so much provoked them by his exploits against them. He
   was again wonderfully preserved at Keilah, when he had entered into a
   fenced town, where Saul thought he was sure of him. And how wonderfully
   was he preserved from Saul, when he pursued and hunted him in the
   mountains! How remarkably did God deliver him in the wilderness of
   Maon, when Saul and his army were compassing David about! How was he
   delivered in the cave of Engedi, when, instead of Saul's killing David,
   God delivered Saul into his hands in the cave! David cut off his skirt,
   and might as easily have cut off his head. He was delivered in like
   manner in the wilderness of Ziph; and afterwards preserved in the land
   of the Philistines, though David had fought against the Philistines,
   and conquered them at Keilah, since he was last among them. This, one
   would think, would have been sufficient warning to them not to trust
   him, or let him escape a second time, if ever they had him in their
   hands again; but yet now, when they had a second opportunity, God
   wonderfully turned their hearts to befriend and protect, instead of
   destroying him.

   Thus was the precious seed that virtually contained the Redeemer, and
   all the blessings of his redemption, wonderfully preserved, when hell
   and earth were conspired to destroy it. How often does David himself
   take notice of this, with praise and admiration, in the book of Psalms!

   III. About this time, the written word of God, or the canon of
   Scripture, was augmented by Samuel. I have before observed, that the
   canon of Scripture was begun and the first written rule of faith and
   manners was given to the church, about the time of Moses. Joshua
   probably enlarged it, and wrote the last chapter of Deuteronomy, and
   most of the book of Joshua. Others think that Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and
   part of the first book of Samuel, were written by Samuel. However that
   was, of this we have good evidence, that Samuel made an addition to the
   canon of Scripture; for Samuel is manifestly mentioned in the New
   Testament, as one of the prophets whose writings we have in Scripture,
   Acts iii. 24. "Yea and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that
   follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these
   days." By that expression, "as many as have spoken," is meant, as many
   as have spoken by writing.

   And the way that Samuel spoke of these times of Christ and the gospel,
   was by giving the history of those things that typified, and pointed to
   them, particularly what he wrote concerning David. The Spirit of God
   moved him to commit those things to writing, chiefly because they
   pointed to Christ, and the times of the gospel; and, as was said
   before, this was the main business of all that succession of prophets
   that began in Samuel. That Samuel added to the canon of the Scriptures
   seems further to appear from 1 Chron. xxix. 29. "Now the acts of David
   the king, first and last, behold they are written in the book of Samuel
   the seer."

   Whether the book of Joshua was written by Samuel or not, yet it is the
   general opinion of divines, that the books of Judges and Ruth, and part
   of the first book of Samuel, were penned by him. The book of Ruth was
   penned for this reason, that though it seemed to treat of private
   affairs, yet the persons chiefly spoken of were of the family whence
   David and Christ proceeded, and so pointed to what the apostle Peter
   observed of Samuel and the other prophets, in the third chapter of
   Acts. These additions to the canon of the Scripture, the great and main
   instrument of the application of redemption, are to be considered as a
   further continuation of that work, and an addition made to that great
   building.

   IV. Another thing God did towards this work, at that time, was his
   inspiring David to show forth Christ and his redemption, in divine
   songs, which should be for the use of the church, in public worship,
   throughout all ages. David was himself endued with the spirit of
   prophecy. He is called a prophet, Acts ii. 29, 30."Let me freely speak
   to you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his
   sepulchre is with us unto this day; therefore being a prophet, and
   knowing that God had sworn with an oath," &c. So that herein he was a
   type of Christ, that he was both a prophet and a king.

   The oil that was used in anointing David was a type of the Spirit of
   God; and the type and the antetype were given both together; as we are
   told, 1 Sam. xvi. 13. "Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed
   him in the midst of his brethren; and the Spirit of the Lord came upon
   David from that day forward:" and it is probable, that it now came upon
   him in its prophetical influences. One way that this Spirit influenced
   him was by inspiring him to show forth Christ, and the glorious things
   of his redemption, in divine songs, sweetly expressing the breathings
   of a pious soul, full of admiration of the glorious things of the
   Redeemer, inflamed with divine love and elevated praise; and therefore
   he is called the sweet psalmist of Israel,2 Sam. xxiii. 1. The main
   subjects of these songs were the glorious things of the gospel; as is
   evident by the interpretation that is often put upon them, and the use
   that is made of them in the New Testament: for there is no one book of
   the Old Testament that is so often quoted in the New, as the book of
   Psalms. Joyfully did this holy man sing of those great things of
   Christ's redemption, that had been the hope and expectation of God's
   church and people from the beginning; and joyfully did others follow
   him in it, as Asaph, Heman, Ethan, and others; for the book of Psalms
   was not all penned by David, though the greater part of it was. Hereby
   the canon of the Scripture was further enlarged by an excellent portion
   of divine writ.

   This was a great advancement that God made in this building; and the
   light of the gospel, which had been gradually growing, was exceedingly
   increased by it: for whereas before there was but here and there a
   prophecy given of Christ in a great many ages, here Christ is spoken of
   by his ancestor David abundantly, in multitudes of songs, speaking of
   his incarnation, life, death, resurrection, ascension into heaven, his
   satisfaction, intercession; his prophetical, kingly, and priestly
   office; his glorious benefits in this life and that which is to come;
   his union with the church, and the blessedness of the church in him;
   the calling of the Gentiles, the future glory of the church near the
   end of the world, and Christ's coming to the final judgment. All these
   things, and many more, concerning Christ and his redemption, are
   abundantly spoken of in the book of Psalms.

   This was also a glorious advancement of the affair of redemption, as
   God hereby gave his church a book of divine songs for their use in that
   part of their public worship, viz. singing his praises, throughout all
   ages to the end of the world. It is manifest the book of Psalms was
   given of God for this end. It was used in the church of Israel by God's
   appointment: this is manifest by the title of many of the Psalms, in
   which they are inscribed to the chief musician, i.e. to the man that
   was appointed to be the leader of divine songs in the temple, in the
   public worship of Israel. So David is called the sweet psalmist of
   Israel, because he penned psalms for the use of the church of Israel;
   and accordingly we have an account that they were actually made use of
   in the church of Israel for that end, even ages after David was dead;
   as 2 Chron. xxix. 30. "Moreover, Hezekiah the king, and the princes,
   commanded the Levites to sing praises unto the Lord, with the words of
   David, and of Asaph the seer." And we find that the same are appointed
   in the New Testament to be made use of in the christian church, in
   their worship: Eph. v. 19. "Speaking to yourselves in psalms, hymns,
   and spiritual songs." Col. iii. 16. "Admonishing one another in psalms,
   hymns, and spiritual songs." So they have been, and will, to the end of
   the world, be made use of in the church to celebrate the praises of
   God. The people of God were wont sometimes to worship God by singing
   songs to his praise before; as they did at the Red sea; and they had
   Moses's prophetical song, in the 32d chapter of Deuteronomy, committed
   to them for that end; and Deborah, Barak, and Hannah sung praises to
   God: but now first did God commit to his church a book of divine songs
   for their constant use.

   V. The next thing I would notice, is God's actually exalting David to
   the throne of Israel, notwithstanding all the opposition made to it.
   God was determined to do it, and he made every thing give place that
   stood in its way. He removed Saul and his sons out of the way; and
   first set David over the tribe of Judah; then, having removed
   Ishbosheth, set him over all Israel. Thus did God fulfil his word to
   David. He took him from the sheep-cote, and made him king over his
   people Israel, Psal. lxxviii. 70, 71. And now the throne of Israel was
   established in that family in which it was to continue for ever.

   VI. Now first it was that God proceeded to choose a particular city out
   of all the tribes of Israel to place his name. There is several times
   mention made in the law of Moses, of the children of Israel bringing
   their oblations to the place which God should choose; as Deut. xii.
   5-7. and other places; but God had never proceeded to do it till now.
   The tabernacle and ark were never fixed, but sometimes in one place,
   and sometimes in another; but now God proceeded to choose Jerusalem.
   The city of Jerusalem was never thoroughly conquered, or taken out of
   the hands of the Jebusites, till David's time. It is said in Joshua xv.
   63. "As for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children
   of Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the
   children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day." But now David wholly
   subdued it, as we have an account in 2 Sam. v. And now God proceeded to
   choose that city to place his name there, as appears by David's
   bringing up the ark thither soon after; and therefore this is mentioned
   afterwards as the first time God proceeded to choose a city to that
   end. 2 Chron. vi. 5, 6. xii. 13.Afterwards God proceeded to show David
   the very place where he would have his temple built, viz. in the
   threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.

   This city of Jerusalem is therefore called the holy city; and it was
   the greatest type of the church of Christ in all the Old Testament. It
   was redeemed by David, the captain of the hosts of Israel, out of the
   hands of the Jebusites, to be God's city, the holy place of his rest
   for ever, where he would dwell. So Christ, the Captain of his people's
   salvation, redeems his church out of the hands of devils, to be his
   holy and beloved city. And therefore how often does the Scripture, when
   speaking of Christ's redemption of his church, call it by the names of
   Zion and Jerusalem! This was the city that God had appointed to be the
   place of the first gathering and erecting of the christian church after
   Christ s resurrection, of that remarkable effusion of the Spirit of God
   on the apostles and primitive Christians, and the place whence the
   gospel was to sound forth into all the world; the place of the first
   christian church, that was to be, as it were, the mother of all other
   churches through the world; agreeable to that prophecy, Isa. ii. 3, 4.
   "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
   Jerusalem: and he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
   people," &c. Thus God chose mount Zion whence the gospel was to be
   sounded forth, as the law had been from mount Sinai.

   VII. The next thing to be observed here, is God's solemnly renewing the
   covenant of grace with David, and promising that the Messiah should be
   of his seed. We have an account of it in the 7th chapter of the second
   book of Samuel. It was done on occasion of the thoughts David
   entertained of building God a house. On this occasion God sends Nathan
   the prophet to him, with the glorious promises of the covenant of
   grace. It is especially contained in these words, 2 Sam vii. 16. "And
   thy house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee;
   thy throne shall be established for ever." Which promise has respect to
   Christ, the seed of David, and is fulfilled in him only: for the
   kingdom of David has long since ceased, any otherwise than as it is
   upheld in Christ.

   That this covenant, now established with David by Nathan the prophet,
   was the covenant of grace, is evident by the plain testimony of
   Scripture, Isa. lv. 1-3. There we have Christ inviting sinners to come
   to the waters, &c. And in "Isa. lv. 3. he says, "Incline your ear, and
   come unto me; hear and your souls shall live; and I will make with you
   an everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of David." Here Christ
   offers to poor sinners, if they will come to him, to give them an
   interest in the same everlasting covenant that he had made with David,
   conveying to them the same sure mercies. But what is that covenant, in
   which sinners obtain an interest when they come to Christ, but the
   covenant of grace?

   This was the fifth solemn establishment of the covenant of grace with
   the church after the fall. The covenant of grace was revealed and
   established all along. But there had been particular seasons, wherein
   God had in a very solemn manner renewed this covenant with his church,
   giving forth a new edition and establishment of it, revealing it in a
   new manner. The first was with Adam; the second with Noah; the third
   with the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the fourth was in the
   wilderness by Moses; and now the fifth is made to David.

   This establishment of the covenant of grace, David always esteemed the
   greatest smile of God upon him, the greatest honour put upon him; he
   prized it, and rejoiced in it above all the other blessings of his
   reign. You may see how joyfully and thankfully he received it, when
   Nathan came to him with the glorious message, 2 Sam. vii. 18., &c. And
   so David, in his last words, declares this to be all his salvation, and
   all his desire; "He hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered
   in all things and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my
   desire."

   VIII. It was by David that God first gave his people Israel the
   possession of the whole promised land. I have before shown, how God
   giving possession of the promised land belonged to the covenant of
   grace. This was done in a great measure by Joshua, but not fully.
   Joshua did not wholly subdue that part of the promised land that was
   strictly called the land of Canaan, and that was divided by lot to the
   several tribes; but there were great numbers of the old inhabitants
   left unsubdued, as we read in the books of Joshua and Judges; and there
   were many left to prove Israel, and to be as thorns in their sides.
   There were the Jebusites in Jerusalem, and many of the Canaanites, and
   the whole nation of the Philistines, who all dwelt in that part of the
   land that was divided by lot, and chiefly in that which belonged to the
   tribes of Judah and Ephraim.

   And thus these remains of the old inhabitants of Canaan continued
   unsubdued till David's time; but he wholly subdued them all. Which is
   agreeable to what St. Stephen observes, Acts vii. 45. "Which also our
   fathers brought in with Jesus (i. e. Joshua) into the possession of the
   Gentiles, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, unto the
   days of David." They were till the days of David in driving them out,
   before they had wholly subdued them. But David entirely brought them
   under. He subdued the Jebusite, the whole nation of the Philistines,
   and all the rest of the remains of the seven nations of Canaan; 1
   Chron. xviii. 1. "Now after this it came to pass, that David smote the
   Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and her towns out of the
   hands of the Philistines."

   After this, all the remains of the former inhabitants of Canaan were
   made bond-servants to the Israelites. The posterity of the Gibeonites
   became servants before, hewers of wood, and drawers of water, for the
   house of God. But Solomon, David's son and successor, put all the other
   remains of the seven nations of Canaan to bond-service; at least made
   them pay a tribute of bond-service, 1 Kings ix. 20-22. And hence we
   read of the children of Solomon's servants, after the return from the
   Babylonish captivity, Ezra ii. 55. and Neh. xi. 3. They were the
   children or posterity of the seven nations of Canaan, that Solomon had
   subjected to bond-service.

   Thus David subdued the whole land of Canaan, strictly so called. But
   then that was not one half, nor quarter, of the land God had promised
   to their fathers. The land often promised to their fathers, included
   all the countries from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates. These
   were the bounds of the land promised to Abraham, Gen. xv. 19. "In that
   same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying. Unto thy seed
   have I given this land, from the river of Egypt, unto the great river,
   the river Euphrates." So again God promised at mount Sinai, Exod.
   xxiii. 31. "And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the
   sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will
   deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
   drive them out before thee." So again, Deut. xi. 24. "Every place
   whereon the soles of your feet shall tread, shall be yours: from the
   wilderness, and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto
   the uttermost sea, shall your coast be." Again, the same promise is
   made to Joshua: Josh. i. 3, 4. "Every place that the sole of your feet
   shall tread upon, have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses; from the
   wilderness and this Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river
   Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea,
   towards the going down of the sun, shall be your coast." But the land
   of which Joshua gave the people possession, was but a little part of
   this land. And the people never had possession of it, till now when God
   gave it them by David.

   This large country did not only include that Canaan which was divided
   by lot to those who came in with Joshua, but the land of the Moabites
   and Ammonites, the land of the Amalekites, and the rest of the
   Edomites, and the country of Zobah. All these nations were subdued and
   brought under the children of Israel by David. And he put garrisons in
   the several countries, and they became David's servants, as we have a
   particular account in the 8th chapter of 2d Samuel: and David extended
   their border to the river Euphrates, as was promised; see the 3d verse:
   2 Sam. viii. 3. "And David smote also Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king
   of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates." And
   accordingly we read, that Solomon his son reigned over all the region
   on this side the river, 1 Kings iv. 24. "For he had dominion over all
   the region on this side the river, from Tiphsah even unto Azzah, over
   all the kings on this side the river." This Artaxerxes king of Persia
   lakes notice of long after: Ezra iv. 20. "There have been mighty kings
   also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all countries beyond the
   river; and toll, tribute, and custom was paid unto them."

   So that Joshua, that eminent type of Christ, did but begin the work of
   giving Israel the possession of the promised land; but left it to be
   finished by that much greater type and ancestor of Christ, even David,
   who subdued far more of that land than ever Joshua had done. And in
   this extent of his and Solomon's dominion was some resemblance of the
   great extent of Christ's kingdom; which is set forth by this very
   thing, Psal. Ixxii. 8. "He shall have dominion also from sea to sea,
   and from the river unto the ends of the earth." See also 1 Kings viii.
   56.

   IX. God by David perfected the Jewish worship, and added to it several
   new institutions. The law was given by Moses, but yet all the
   institutions of the Jewish worship were not given by Moses; some were
   added by divine direction. So this greatest of all personal types of
   Christ did not only perfect Joshua's work, in giving Israel the
   possession of the promised land, but he also finished Moses's work, in
   perfecting the instituted worship of Israel. Thus there must be a
   number of typical prophets, priests, and princes, to complete one
   figure or shadow of Christ the antetype, he being the substance of all
   the types and shadows. Of so much more glory was Christ accounted
   worthy, than Moses, Joshua, David, and Solomon, and all the great
   prophets, priests, and princes, judges, and saviours of the Old
   Testament put together.

   The ordinances of David are mentioned as of parallel validity with
   those of Moses, 2 Chron. xxiii. 18. "Also Jehoiada appointed the
   offices of the house of the Lord by the hand of the priests the
   Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the Lord, to offer
   the burnt-offerings of the Lord, as it is written in the law of Moses,
   with rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David." The
   worship of Israel was perfected by David, by the addition he made to
   the ceremonial law, (1 Chron. xxiii. &c.) consisting in the several
   orders and courses into which the Levites were divided, and the work
   and business to which he appointed them, different from what Moses had
   appointed them to; and also in the divisions of the priests, the sons
   of Aaron, into four and twenty courses, assigning to every course their
   business in the house of the Lord, and their particular stated times of
   attendance there. He also appointed some of the Levites to a new
   office, that of singers, particularly ordering and regulating them in
   that office, ( 1 Chron. xxv. ) Others of the Levites he appointed by
   law to the several services of porters, treasurers, officers, and
   judges: and these ordinances of David were kept up thenceforth in the
   church of Israel, as long as the Jewish church lasted. Thus we find the
   several orders of priests, and the Levites, the porters, and singers,
   after the captivity. And we find the courses of the priests appointed
   by David still continuing in the New Testament; Zacharias the father of
   John the Baptist was a priest of the course of Abia; which is the same
   with the course of Abijah appointed by David, 1 Chron. xxiv. 10.

   Thus David as well as Moses was made like to Christ the Son of David,
   in this respect, that by him God gave, in a manner, a new
   ecclesiastical establishment, and new institutions of worship. David
   did not only add to the institutions of Moses, but by those additions
   he abolished some of the old institutions that had been in force till
   that time; particularly those laws which appointed the business of the
   Levites, which we have in the 3d and 4th chapters of Numbers, which
   very much consisted in their charge of the several parts and utensils
   of the tabernacle. But those laws were now abolished; and they were no
   more to carry those things, as they had been used to do. But David
   appointed them to other work instead of it; 1 Chron. xxiii. 26. "And
   also unto the Levites, they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any
   vessels of it for the service thereof:" a sure evidence that the
   ceremonial law given by Moses is not perpetual, as the Jews suppose;
   but might be wholly abolished by Christ: for if David, a type of the
   Messiah, might abolish the law of Moses in part, much more might the
   Messiah himself abolish the whole.

   David, by God's appointment, abolished all use of the tabernacle built
   by Moses, and of which he had the pattern, from God: for God now
   revealed it to David to be his will, that a temple should be built
   instead of the tabernacle. This was a great presage of what Christ, the
   Son of David, would do when he should come, viz. abolish the whole
   Jewish ecclesiastical constitution, which was but as a movable
   tabernacle, to set up the spiritual gospel-temple, which was to be far
   more glorious, of greater extent, and was to last for ever. David had
   the pattern of all things pertaining to the temple showed him, even in
   like manner as Moses had the pattern of the tabernacle: and Solomon
   built the temple according to that pattern which he had from his father
   David, which he received from God. 1 Chron. xxviii. 11, 12. "Then David
   gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses
   thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers
   thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the
   mercy-seat, and the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the
   courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about,
   of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the
   dedicated things." And, ver. 19. "All this, said David, the Lord made
   me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of
   this pattern."

   X. The canon of Scripture seems at or after the close of David's reign
   to be added to by the prophets Nathan and Gad. It appears probable by
   the Scriptures, that they carried on the history of the two books of
   Samuel from the place where Samuel left it, and finished them. These
   seem to be called the book of Samuel the seer, and Nathan the prophet,
   and God the seer, 1 Chron. xxix. 29. "Now the acts of David the king,
   first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the
   seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the
   seer."

   XI. The next thing I would notice, is God's wonderfully continuing the
   kingdom of his visible people in the line of Christ's legal ancestors,
   as long as they remained an independent kingdom. Thus it was without
   any interruption worth notice. Indeed the kingdom of all the tribes of
   Israel was not kept in that line; but the dominion of that part in
   which the true worship of God was upheld, who were God's visible
   people, was always kept in the family of David, as long as there was
   any such thing as an independent king of Israel; according to his
   promise to David; and not only in the family of David, but always in
   that part of David's posterity whence Christ was legally descended. So
   that Christ's legal ancestor was always on the throne, excepting
   Jehoahaz, who reigned three months, and Zedekiah; as you may see in
   Matthew's genealogy of Christ.

   Christ was legally descended from the kings of Judah, though not
   naturally. He was both legally and naturally descended from David He
   was naturally descended from Nathan the son of David; for Mary his
   mother was one of the posterity of David by Nathan, as you may see in
   Luke's genealogy: but Joseph, the reputed and legal father of Christ,
   was naturally descended of Solomon and his successors, as we have an
   account in Matthew's genealogy. Jesus Christ, though he was not the
   natural son of Joseph, yet by the law and constitution of the Jews, was
   Joseph's heir; because he was the lawful son of Joseph's lawful life,
   conceived while she was his legally espoused wife. The Holy Ghost
   raised up seed to him. A person, by the law of Moses, might be the
   legal son and heir of another, whose natural son he was not; as
   sometimes a man raised up seed to his brother. a brother, in some
   cases, was to build up a brother's house; so the Holy Ghost built up
   Joseph's house. Joseph being in the direct line of the kings of Judah,
   of the house of David, he was in this respect the legal heir of the
   crown of David; and Christ being legally his first-born son, he was his
   heir; and so Christ, by the law, was the proper heir of the crown of
   David, and is therefore said to sit upon the throne of his father
   David.

   The crown of God's people was wonderfully kept in the line of Christ's
   legal ancestors. When David was old, and not able any longer to manage
   the affairs of the kingdom, Adonijah, one of his sons, set up to be
   king, and seemed to have obtained his purpose. All things for a while
   seemed fair on his side, and he thought himself strong. But Adonijah
   was not the ancestor of Joseph, the legal father of Christ; and
   therefore how wonderfully did Providence work here! what a strange and
   sudden revolution! All Adonijah's kingdom and glory vanished away as
   soon as it was begun; and Solomon, the legal ancestor of Christ, was
   established in the throne.

   And after Solomon's death, when Jeroboam had conspired against the
   family, and Rehoboam carried himself in such a manner that it was a
   wonder all Israel was not provoked to forsake him, (as ten tribes
   actually did,) and set up Jeroboam in opposition to him; and though he
   was a wicked man, and deserved to have been rejected altogether from
   being king; yet he being the legal ancestor of Christ, God kept the
   kingdom of the two tribes, in which the true religion was upheld, in
   his possession. And though his son Abijam was another wicked prince;
   yet God still continued the crown in the family, and gave it to
   Abijam's son, Asa. And afterwards, though many of the kings of Judah
   were very wicked men, and horribly provoked God, as particularly
   Jehoram, Ahaziah, Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon; yet God did not take away
   the crown from their family, but gave it to their sons, because they
   were the ancestors of Christ. God's remembering his covenant
   established with David, is given as the reason why God did thus,
   notwithstanding their wicked lives; 1 Kings xv. 4. speaking of Abijam's
   wickedness, it is said, 1 Kings xv. 4. "Nevertheless, for David's sake
   did the Lord his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son
   after him, and to establish Jerusalem:" so, speaking of Jehoram's great
   wickedness, it is said, 2 Chron. xxi. 7. "Howbeit the Lord would not
   destroy the house of David, because of the covenant he had made with
   David, and as he promised to give a light unto him, and to his sons for
   ever."

   The crown of the ten tribes was changed from one family to another
   continually. First, Jeroboam took it; but the crown descended only to
   his son Nadab. Then Baasha, who was of another family, took it; and it
   remained in his posterity but one generation after his death. And then
   Zimri, who was his servant, and not of his posterity, took it; from
   whom Omri, who was of another family, took it. The crown continued in
   his family for three successions: and then Jehu, who was of another
   family, took it. The crown continued in his family for three or four
   successions; and then Shallum, that was of another family, took it. The
   crown did not descend at all to his posterity; but Menahem, who was of
   another family, took it; and it remained in his family but one
   generation after him. Then Pekah, who was of another family, took it:
   and after him Hoshea, that was still of another family, took it. So
   great a difference was there between the crown of Israel and the crown
   of Judah; the one was continued evermore in the same family, and with
   very little interruption, in one right line; the other was continually
   tossed about from one family to another, as if it were the sport of
   fortune. The reason was not, because the kings of Judah, at least many
   of them, were better than the kings of Israel; but the one had the
   blessing in them; they were the ancestors of Christ, whose right it was
   to sit on the throne of Israel. But with the kings of Israel it was not
   so; and therefore Divine Providence exercised a continual care, through
   all the changes that happened through so many generations, and such a
   long space of time, to keep the crown of Judah in one direct line, in
   fulfilment of the everlasting covenant he had made with David, the
   mercies of which covenant were sure mercies; but in the other case
   there was no such covenant, and so no such interposing care of
   Providence.

   And here it must not he omitted, that there was once a very strong
   conspiracy of the kings of Syria and Israel, in the time of that wicked
   king of Judah, Ahaz, to dispossess him and his family of the throne of
   Judah, and to set one of another family, even the son of Tabeal, on it;
   as Isa. vii. 6. "Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us
   make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even
   the son of Tabeal." And they seemed very likely to accomplish their
   purpose. There seemed to be so great a likelihood of it, that the
   hearts of the people sunk within them; they gave up the cause. It is
   said, "The heart of Ahaz and his people was moved as the trees of the
   wood are moved with the wind." [623] And on this occasion God sent the
   prophet Isaiah to encourage the people, and tell them that it should
   not come to pass. And because it looked so much like a lost cause to
   Ahaz and the people, therefore God directs the prophet to give them
   this sign of it, viz. that Christ should be born of the legal seed of
   Ahaz, as Isa. vii. 14. "Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a
   sign: behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call
   his name Immanuel." This was a good sign, and a great confirmation of
   the truth of what God promised by Isaiah, viz. that the kings of Syria
   and Israel should never accomplish their purpose of dispossessing the
   family of Ahaz of the crown of Judah, and setting up the son of Tabeal;
   for Christ the Immanuel was to be of them.

   XII. The building of the temple was a great type of three things, viz.
   of Christ, especially his human nature; of the church; and of heaven.
   The tabernacle seemed rather to represent the church in its movable,
   changeable state, in this world. But that beautiful, glorious, costly
   structure, the temple, that succeeded the tabernacle, seems especially
   to represent the church in its glorified state in heaven. This temple
   was built according to the direction and the pattern shown by the Holy
   Ghost to David, in the place where was the threshing-floor of Oman the
   Jebusite, in mount Moriah, 2 Chron. iii. 1. ; the same mountain (and
   probably in the very same place) where Abraham offered up his son
   Isaac; for that is said to be in the land of Moriah, Gen. xxii. 2. and
   was called the mountain of the Lord, as this of the temple was, Gen.
   xxii. 14. "And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh; as
   it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen."
   This was the house where Christ dwelt, till he came to dwell in human
   nature. That his body was the antetype of this temple, appears from
   what he says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
   up," speaking of the temple of his body. This continued to be the house
   of God, the place of worship for his church, till Christ came; the
   place that God chose, where all their sacrifices were offered up, till
   the great sacrifice came. Into this temple the Lord came, even the
   messenger of the covenant. Here he often delivered his heavenly
   doctrine, and wrought miracles; here his church was gathered by the
   pouring out of the Spirit, after his ascension. Luke xxiv. 53. "And
   they were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God." And
   respecting the multitudes that were converted by that great effusion of
   the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, it is said, Acts ii. 46. "And they
   continued daily with one accord in the temple." And the sacred
   historian, speaking of the apostles, says, Acts v. 42. "And daily in
   the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach
   Jesus Christ!" And thence the sound of the gospel went forth, and the
   church was spread into all the world.

   XIII. It is here worthy to be observed, that in Solomon's reign, after
   the temple was finished, the Jewish church was risen to its highest
   external glory. The Jewish church, as to its ordinances and
   constitution, is compared to the moon, Rev. xii. 1. "And there appeared
   a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon
   under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars." This church
   was like the moon in many other respects, but especially that it waxed
   and waned like the moon. From its first formation, which was in the
   covenant made with Abraham, when this moon began to appear, it had been
   gradually increasing in its glory. This time, wherein the temple was
   finished and dedicated, was about the middle between the calling of
   Abraham and the coming of Christ, and now it was full moon. After this
   the glory of the Jewish church gradually decreased, till Christ came;
   as I shall have occasion to show more particularly.

   Now the church of Israel was in its highest external glory. Now Israel
   was multiplied exceedingly, so that they seemed to have become like the
   sand on the sea-shore, 1 Kings iv. 20. Now the kingdom of Israel was
   firmly established in the right family, the family of which Christ was
   to come. Now God had chosen the city where he would place his name; and
   had fully given his people the possession of the promised land.--They
   now possessed the dominion of it all, in quietness and peace, even from
   the river of Egypt, to the great river Euphrates; all those nations
   which had formerly been their enemies, quietly submitted to them; none
   pretended to rebel against them. Now the Jewish worship in all its
   ordinances was fully settled: instead of a movable tabernacle, they had
   a glorious temple; the most magnificent, beautiful, and costly
   structure, that ever had been, or has been since. Now the people
   enjoyed peace and plenty, and sat every man under his vine and
   fig-tree, eating and drinking and making merry, 1 Kings iv. 20. They
   were in the highest pitch of earthly prosperity, silver being as plenty
   as stones, and the land full of gold and precious stones, and other
   precious foreign commodities, which were brought by Solomon's ships
   from Ophir and other parts of the world. Now they had a king reigning
   over them who was the wisest of men, and probably the greatest earthly
   prince that ever was: their fame went abroad into all the earth, so
   that they came from the utmost parts of the earth to see their glory
   and their happiness.

   Thus God was pleased, in one of Messiah's ancestors, remarkably to
   shadow forth the kingdom of Christ and himself reigning in his glory.
   David, a man of war, a man who had shed much blood, and whose life was
   full of troubles and conflicts, was a more suitable representation of
   Christ in his state of humiliation, wherein he was conflicting with his
   enemies. But Solomon, a man of peace, was a representation more
   especially of Christ exalted, triumphing and reigning in his kingdom of
   peace. And the happy glorious state of the Jewish church at that time,
   remarkably represented two things:--1. A glorious state of the church
   on earth, in the latter ages of the world; those days of peace, when
   nation shall not lift sword against nation, nor learn war any more. 2.
   The future glorified state of the church in heaven. The earthly Canaan
   never was so lively a type of the heavenly Canaan as it was then, when
   the happy people of Israel indeed enjoyed it as a land flowing with
   milk and honey.

   XIV. After this the glory of the Jewish church gradually declined more
   and more till Christ came; yet the work of redemption went on. Whatever
   failed or declined, God still carried on this work from age to age;
   this building was advancing higher and higher. It went on, even during
   the decline of the Jewish church, towards a further preparation of
   things for the coming of Christ, as well as during its increase; for so
   wonderfully were things ordered by the infinitely wise Governor of the
   world, that whatever happened was ordered for good to this general
   design, and made a means of promoting it. When the Jews flourished, and
   were in prosperity, he made that to contribute to the promoting of this
   design; and when they were in adversity, God made this also contribute
   to the same. While the Jewish church was in its increasing state, the
   work of redemption was carried on by their increase; and when they came
   to their declining state, from Solomon's time till Christ, God carried
   on the work of redemption by that. The very decline itself, was one
   thing that God employed as a further preparation for Christ's coming.

   As the moon, from the time of its full, is approaching nearer and
   nearer to her conjunction with the sun; so her light is still more and
   more decreasing, till at length, when the conjunction comes, it is
   wholly swallowed up in the light of the sun. So it was with the Jewish
   church from the time of its highest glory in Solomon's time. In the
   latter end of Solomon's reign, the state of things began to darken, by
   his corrupting himself with idolatry, which much obscured the glory of
   this mighty and wise prince; and troubles also began to arise in his
   kingdom. After his death the kingdom was divided, and ten tribes
   revolted, and withdrew their subjection from the house of David,
   apostatizing also from the true worship of God in the temple at
   Jerusalem, and setting up the golden calves of Bethel and Dan. And
   presently after this the number of the ten tribes was greatly
   diminished in the battle of Jeroboam with Abijah, wherein there fell
   down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men; which loss the
   kingdom of Israel probably never in any measure recovered.

   The ten tribes finally apostatized from the true God under Jeroboam.
   The kingdom of Judah was greatly corrupted, and from that time forward
   more generally in a corrupt state than otherwise. In Ahab's time the
   kingdom of Israel did not only worship the calves of Bethel and Dan,
   but the worship of Baal was introduced. Before, they pretended to
   worship the true God by these images, the calves of Jeroboam; but now
   Ahab introduced gross idolatry, and the direct worship of false gods in
   the room of the true God; and soon after, the worship of Baal was
   introduced into the kingdom of Judah, viz. in Jehoram's reign, by his
   marrying Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab. After this God began to cut
   Israel short, by finally destroying and sending into captivity that
   part which was beyond Jordan, 2 Kings x. 32, &c. Then Tiglath-Pileser
   subdued and enslaved all the northern parts, 2 Kings xv. 29.; and at
   last all the ten tribes were subdued by Salmaneser, and they were
   finally carried away captive out of their own land. After this also the
   kingdom of Judah was carried captive into Babylon, and a great part of
   the nation never returned. Those who returned were but a small number,
   compared with what had been carried captive; and for the most part
   after this they were dependent on the power of other states. They were
   subject one while to the Kings of Persia, then to the monarchy of the
   Grecians, and then to the Romans. And before Christ's time, the Jewish
   church was become exceeding corrupt, overrun with superstition and
   self-righteousness. And how small a flock was the church of Christ in
   the days of his incarnation !

   God, by this gradual decline of the Jewish state and church from
   Solomon's time, prepared the way for the coming of Christ several ways.

   1. The decline of the glory of this legal dispensation, made way for
   the introduction of the more glorious dispensation of the gospel. The
   evangelical dispensation was so much more glorious, that the legal
   dispensation had no glory in comparison with it. The ancient
   dispensation, even as it was in Solomon's time, was but an inferior
   glory, compared with the spiritual glory of the dispensation introduced
   by Christ. The church, under the Old Testament, was a child under
   tutors and governors, and God dealt with it accordingly. Those pompous
   externals are called by the apostle, weak and beggarly elements. It was
   fit that those things should be diminished as Christ approached; as
   John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, speaking of Christ, says,
   John iii. 30. "He must increase, but I must decrease. It is fit that
   the twinkling stars should gradually withdraw their glory, when the sun
   is approaching towards his rising point. The glory of the Jewish
   dispensation must be gradually diminished, to prepare the way for the
   more joyful reception of the spiritual glory of the gospel. If the
   Jewish church, when Christ came, had been in the same external glory
   that it was in, in the reign of Solomon, men would have their eyes so
   dazzled with it, that they would not have been likely, joyfully to
   exchange such great external grandeur, for only the spiritual glory of
   the despised Jesus. Again,

   2. This gradual decline of the glory in the Jewish state, tended to
   make the glory of God's power, in the great effects of Christ's
   redemption, the more conspicuous. God's people being so diminished and
   weakened by one step after another, till Christ came, was very much
   like the diminishing of Gideon's army. God told Gideon, that the people
   with him were too many for the conquest of the Midianites, lest Israel
   should vaunt itself, saying, "My own hand hath saved me. [624] " And
   therefore all that were fearful were commanded to return; and there
   returned twenty and two thousand, and there remained ten thousand. But
   still they were too many; and then, by trying the people at the water,
   they were reduced to three hundred men. So the people in Solomon's time
   were too many, and mighty, and glorious for Christ; therefore he
   diminished them; first, by sending off the ten tribes; then he
   diminished them by the captivity into Babylon; and then they were
   further diminished by their great and general corruption when Christ
   came; so that Christ found very few godly persons among them. With a
   small handful of disciples, Christ conquered the world. Thus high
   things were brought down, that Christ might be exalted.

   3. This prepared the way for Christ's coming, as it made the salvation
   of those Jews who were saved by Christ to he more sensible and visible.
   Though the greater part of the Jewish nation was rejected, and the
   Gentiles called in their room; yet a great many thousands of the Jews
   were saved by Christ after his resurrection, Acts xxi. 20. They being
   taken from so low a state under temporal calamity in their bondage to
   the Romans, and from a state of so great superstition and wickedness,
   it made their redemption the more sensibly and visibly glorious.

   XV. I would here take notice of the additions which were made to the
   canon of Scripture in or soon after the reign of Solomon. There were
   considerable additions made by Solomon himself, who wrote the books of
   Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, probably near the close of his reign. His
   Song of Songs, as it is called, is wholly on the subject we are upon,
   viz. Christ and his redemption, representing the high and glorious
   relation, union, and love, that is between Christ and his redeemed
   church. And the sacred history seems, in Solomon's reign, and some of
   the next succeeding, to have been enlarged by the prophets Nathan and
   Ahijah, Shemaiah and Iddo. It is probable that part of the history
   which we have in the first of Kings, was written by them. (See 2 Chron.
   ix. 29. xii. 15. xiii. 22.)

   XVI. God wonderfully upheld his church and the true religion through
   this period. It was very wonderful, considering the many and great
   apostacies of that people to idolatry. When the ten tribes had
   generally and finally forsaken the true worship, God kept up the true
   religion in the kingdom of Judah; and when they corrupted themselves,
   as they very often did exceedingly, and idolatry was ready totally to
   swallow up all, yet God kept the lamp alive. When things seemed to be
   come to an extremity, and religion at its last gasp, he was often
   pleased to grant blessed revivals by remarkable outpourings of his
   Spirit, particularly in Hezekiah's and Josiah's time.

   XVII. God remarkably kept the book of the law from being lost in times
   of general and long-continued neglect of it. The most remarkable
   instance of this kind was its preservation in the time of the great
   apostacy, during the greatest part of the long reign of Manasseh, which
   lasted fifty-five years, and the reign of Amon his son. This while the
   law was so much neglected, and such a careless and profane management
   of the affairs of the temple prevailed, that the book which used to be
   laid up by the side of the ark in the Holy of Holies, was lost for a
   long time; and nobody knew where it was. But yet God preserved it from
   being finally lost. In Josiah's time, when they came to repair the
   temple, it was found buried in rubbish. It had been lost so long that
   Josiah himself seems to have been much a stranger to it. (See 2 Kings
   xxii. 8., &c.)

   XVIII. God remarkably preserved the tribe of which Christ was to
   proceed, from being mined through the many and great dangers of this
   period. The visible church of Christ from Solomon's reign was mainly in
   the tribe of Judah. The tribe of Benjamin, which was annexed to them,
   was but a very small tribe, and that of Judah exceeding large; and as
   Judah took Benjamin under his protection when he went into Egypt to
   bring corn, so the tribe of Benjamin seemed to be under the covert of
   Judah ever after. And though, on occasion of Jeroboam's setting up the
   calves at Bethel and Dan, the Levites resorted to Judah out of all the
   tribes of Israel, (2 Chron. xi. 13.) yet they were also small, and not
   reckoned among the tribes. Many of the ten tribes, it is true, on that
   occasion, for the sake of worshipping God in the temple, left their
   inheritances in their several tribes, and settled in Judah, and so were
   incorporated with them, as we have account in the chapter just quoted,
   (2 Chron. xi. 16.) yet the tribe of Judah was so much the prevailing
   part, that they were called by one name, Judah. Therefore God said to
   Solomon, 1 Kings xi. 13. "I will not rend away all the kingdom: but
   will give one tribe to thy son, for David my servant's sake, and for
   Jerusalem's sake, which I have chosen." So when the ten tribes were
   carried captive, it is said, there was none left but the tribe of
   Judah: 2 Kings xvii. 18. "Therefore the Lord was very wroth with
   Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but the
   tribe of Judah only." Whence they were all called Jews, a word derived
   from Judah.

   This was the tribe of which Christ was to come; and in this chiefly did
   God's visible church consist, from Solomon's time. This people, over
   whom the kings who were legal ancestors of Christ, and of the house of
   David, reigned, was wonderfully preserved from destruction during this
   period, when they often seemed to be upon the brink of ruin, and just
   ready to be swallowed up. So it was in Rehoboam s time, when Shishak
   king of Egypt came against Judah with a vast force. Of this we read in
   the beginning of 2 Chronicles xii. So it was again in Abijah's time,
   when Jeroboam set the battle in array against him with eight hundred
   thousand chosen men; a mighty army! 2 Chron. xiii. 3. Then God wrought
   deliverance to Judah, out of regard to the covenant of grace
   established with David, as is evident by 2 Chron. xiii. 4,5. and the
   victory they obtained was because the Lord was on their side, as you
   may see, 2 Chron. xiii. 12.. So it was again in Asa's time, when Zerah
   the Ethiopian came against him with a larger army of a thousand
   thousand and three hundred chariots, 2 Chron. xiv. 9. On this occasion
   Asa cried to the Lord, and trusted in him, being sensible that it was
   nothing with him to help those that had no power: 2 Chron. xiv. 11.
   "And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing
   with thee to help, whether with many, or with those that have no
   power." And accordingly God gave them a glorious victory over this
   mighty host.

   So again it was in Jehoshaphat's time, when the children of Moab, and
   the children of Ammon, and the inhabitants of mount Seir, combined
   together against Judah with a mighty army, a force vastly superior to
   any that Jehoshaphat could raise; and Jehoshaphat and his people were
   greatly afraid: yet they set themselves to seek God on this occasion,
   and trusted in him; and God told them by one of his prophets, that they
   need not fear them, nor should they have any occasion to fight in this
   battle, they should only stand still and see the salvation of the Lord.
   And according to his direction, they only stood still, and sang praises
   to God; and God made their enemies do the work themselves, by killing
   one another; and the children of Judah had nothing to do, but to gather
   the spoil, which was more than they could carry away. (2 Chron. xx.)

   So it was again in Ahaz's time, when Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah
   the son of Remaliah, the king of Israel, conspired against Judah, and
   seemed to be sure of their purpose; of which we have spoken already. So
   it was again in Hezekiah's time, when Sennacherib, that great king of
   Assyria, and head of the greatest monarchy then in the world, came up
   against all the fenced cities of Judah, after he had conquered most of
   the neighbouring countries. He sent Rabshakeh, the captain of his host,
   against Jerusalem, who in a very proud and scornful manner insulted
   Hezekiah and his people, as being sure of victory; and the people were
   trembling for fear, like lambs before a lion. Then God sent Isaiah the
   prophet to comfort them, and assure them that their enemies should not
   prevail; as a token of which he gave them this sign, viz. that the
   earth, for two years successively, should bring forth food of itself,
   from the roots of the old stalks, without their ploughing or sowing;
   and then the third year they should sow and reap, and plant vineyards,
   and eat the fruit of them, and live on the fruits of their labour, as
   they were wont to do before. (See 2 Kings xix. 29.) This is mentioned
   as a type of what is promised in 2 Kings xix. 30, 31. "And the remnant
   that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall yet again take root
   downward, and bear fruit upward. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
   remnant, and they that escape, out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord
   of hosts shall do this." The corn springing again after it had been cut
   off with the sickle, and bringing forth another crop from the roots,
   represents the church reviving again, and flourishing, like a plant
   after it had seemingly been cut down past recovery. When the enemies of
   the church have done their utmost, and seem to have gained their point;
   when they have overthrown the church, so that its being is scarcely
   visible, but is like a living root hid under ground; there is in it a
   secret life that will cause it to flourish again, and to take root
   downward, and bear fruit upward. This was now fulfilled. The king of
   Assyria had already carried captive the ten tribes; and Sennacherib had
   also taken all the fenced cities of Judah, and ranged the country round
   about, and Jerusalem only remained: and Rabshakeh had in his own
   imagination already swallowed that up, as he had also in the fearful
   apprehensions of the Jews themselves. But God wrought a wonderful
   deliverance; he sent an angel, that in one night smote a hundred
   fourscore and five thousand in the enemy's camp.

   XIX. In the reign of Uzziah, and the following reigns, God was pleased
   to raise up a set of eminent prophets, who should commit their
   prophecies to writing, and leave them for the use of his church in all
   ages. We before observed, how that God began a constant succession of
   prophets in Israel in Samuel's time, and many of these prophets wrote
   by divine inspiration, and so added to the canon of Scripture. But none
   of them are supposed to have written books of prophecies till now.
   Several of them wrote histories of the wonderful dispensations of God
   towards his church. This we have observed already of Samuel, who is
   supposed to have written Judges and Ruth, and part of the first of
   Samuel, if not the book of Joshua. And Nathan and Gad seem to have
   written the rest of the two books of Samuel: and Nathan, with Ahijah
   and Iddo, wrote the history of Solomon, which is probably that which we
   have in the first book of Kings. The history of Israel seems to have
   been further carried on by Iddo and Shemaiah: 2 Chron. xii. 15. "Now
   the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book
   of Shemaiah the prophet, and Iddo the seer, concerning genealogies ?"
   And after that the history seems to have been further carried on by the
   prophet Jehu, the son of Hanani: 2 Chron. xx. 34. " Now the rest of the
   acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold they are written in the
   book of Jehu son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the kings
   of Israel." 1 Kings xvi. 1, 7. And then it was further continued by the
   prophet Isaiah: 2 Chron. xxvi. 22. "Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah,
   first and last, did Isaiah the prophet the son of Amos write." He
   probably did it as well in the second book of Kings, as in the book of
   his prophecy. And the history was carried on and finished by other
   prophets after him.

   Thus the prophets, even from Samuel's time, had been adding to the
   canon of Scripture by their historical writings. But now, in the days
   of Uzziah, did God first raise up a set of great prophets, not only to
   write histories, but to write books of their prophecies. The first of
   these is thought to be Hosea the son of Beeri, and therefore his
   prophecy, or the word of the Lord by him, is called the beginning of
   the word the Lord; Hos. i. 2. "The beginning of the word of the Lord by
   Hosea;" that is, the beginning, or the first part, of the written word
   of that kind, viz. that which is written in books of prophecy. He
   prophesied in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of
   Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel.
   There were many other witnesses for God raised up about the same time
   to commit their prophecies to writing, Isaiah, Amos, Jonah, Micah,
   Nahum, and probably some others: and so from that time forward God
   seemed to continue a succession of writing prophets.

   This was a great dispensation of Providence, and a great advance made
   in the affair of redemption, which will appear, if we consider, that
   the main business of the prophets was to point out Christ and his
   redemption. They were all forerunners of the great prophet. The main
   end why the spirit of prophecy was given them was, that they might give
   testimony to Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer, who was to come.
   Therefore, the testimony of Jesus, and the spirit of prophecy, are
   spoken of as the same thing; Rev. xix. 10. "And I fell at his feet to
   worship him: and he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow
   servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship
   God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." And
   therefore we find, that the great and main thing that the most of the
   prophets in their written prophecies insist upon, is Christ and his
   redemption, and the glorious times of the gospel. And though many other
   things were spoken of in their prophecies, yet they seem to be only as
   introductory to their prophecy of these great things. Whatever they
   predict, here their prophecies commonly terminate.

   These prophets, inspired by the Spirit of Christ, wrote chiefly to
   prepare the way for his coming, and to exhibit the glory that should
   follow. And in what an exalted strain do they all speak of those
   things! Many other things they speak of in men's usual language. But
   when they enter upon this subject, what a joyful heavenly sublimity is
   there in their language! Some of them are very particular and full in
   their predictions of these things, and above all the prophet Isaiah,
   who is therefore deservedly called the evangelical prophet. He seems to
   teach the glorious doctrines of the gospel almost as plainly as the
   apostles did. The apostle Paul therefore takes notice, that the prophet
   Esaias is very bold, Rom. x. 20. i. e. according to the meaning of the
   word in the New Testament, is very plain, he speaks out very plainly
   and fully; so being very bold is used 2 Cor. iii. 12. we use great
   boldness of speech, or boldness, as in the margin.

   How plainly and fully does the prophet Isaiah describe the manner and
   circumstances, the nature and end, of the sufferings and sacrifice of
   Christ, in the 53rd chapter of his prophecy. There is scarce a chapter
   in the New Testament itself which is more full upon it. And how much,
   and in what a glorious strain, does the same prophet speak, from time
   to time, of the glorious benefits of Christ, the unspeakable blessings
   which shall redound to his church through his redemption ! Jesus
   Christ, of whom this prophet spoke so much, once appeared to him in the
   form of the human nature, the nature he should afterwards take upon
   him. We have an account of it in Isaiah 6 at the beginning: Isaiah vi.
   1. "I saw also the Lord sitting on a throne, high and lifted up, and
   his train filled the temple," &c. This was Christ, as we are expressly
   told in the New Testament. (See John xii. 39-41. )

   And if we consider the abundant prophecies of this and the other
   prophets, what a great increase is there of gospel light! How plentiful
   are the revelations and prophecies of Christ, compared with what they
   were in the first period of the Old Testament, from Adam to Noah; or to
   what they were in the second, from Noah to Abraham; or to what they
   were before Moses, or in the time of Moses, Joshua, and the Judges!
   This dispensation was also a glorious advance of the work of redemption
   by the great additions that were made to the canon of scripture. Great
   part of the Old Testament was written now from the days of Uzziah to
   the captivity into Babylon. And how excellent are those portions of it!
   What a precious treasure have those prophets committed to the church of
   God, tending greatly to confirm the gospel of Christ! and which has
   been of great comfort and benefit to God's church in all ages since,
   and doubtless will be to the end of the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [623] Isaiah vii. 2.

   [624] Judges vii. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART VI.

   FROM THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY TO THE COMING OF CHRIST.

   I come now to the last subordinate period of the Old Testament, viz.
   that which begins with the Babylonish captivity, and extends to the
   coming of Christ, being near six hundred years; and shall endeavour to
   show how the work of redemption was carried on through this
   period.--But before I enter upon particulars, I would observe three
   things wherein this period is distinguished from the preceding ones.

   1. Though we have no account of a great part of this period in the
   scripture history, yet the events of it are more the subject of
   scripture prophecy, than any of the preceding periods. There are two
   ways wherein the Scriptures give account of the events by which the
   work of redemption is carried on; one is by history, and another is by
   prophecy; and in one or the other of these ways we have in the
   Scriptures an account how the work of redemption is carried on from the
   beginning to the end. Although the Scriptures do not contain a proper
   history of the whole, yet the whole chain of great events, by which
   this affair hath been carried on from the commencement to the finishing
   of it, is found either in history or prophecy. And it is to be
   observed, that where the Scripture is wanting in one of these ways, it
   is made up in the other. Where scripture history fails, there prophecy
   takes place; so that the account is still carried on, and the chain is
   not broken, till we come to the very last link of it in the
   consummation of all things.

   And accordingly it is observable of this space of time, that though it
   is so much less the subject of scripture history, than most of the
   preceding periods, (there being above four hundred years of which the
   Scriptures give us no history,) yet its events are more the subject of
   prophecy, than those of all the preceding periods put together. Most of
   those remarkable prophecies of the book of Daniel, and most of those in
   Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, against Babylon, Tyrus, Egypt, and many
   other nations, were fulfilled in this period.

   Hence the reason why the Scriptures give us no history of so great a
   part of this time, is not because the events were not so important, or
   less worthy of notice, than those of the foregoing periods; for they
   were great and remarkable. But there are several reasons which may be
   given for it. One is, that it was the will of God that the spirit of
   prophecy should cease in this period, (for reasons that may be given
   hereafter,) so that there were no prophets to write the history of
   these times; and therefore God designing this, took care that the great
   events of this period should not be without mention in his word. It is
   observable, that the writing prophets in Israel, were raised up at the
   latter end of the foregoing period, and at the beginning of this; for
   the time was now approaching, when, the spirit of prophecy having
   ceased, there was to be no inspired history, and therefore no other
   scripture account but what was given in prophecy.

   Another reason may be, for the suspension of inspired history, that God
   in his providence took care, that there should be authentic and full
   accounts of the events of this period preserved in profane history. It
   is very worthy of notice, that with respect to the events of the five
   preceding subordinate periods, of which the Scriptures give the
   history, profane history gives us no account, or at least of but very
   few of them. There are many fabulous and uncertain accounts of things
   that happened before; but the commencement of authentic profane history
   is judged to be but about a hundred years before Nebuchadnezzar's time.
   The learned Greeks and Romans used to call the ages before that the
   fabulous age; but the times after that they called the historical age.
   And from about that time to the coming of Christ, we have undoubted
   accounts in profane history of the principal events; accounts that
   wonderfully agree with the many prophecies that relate to those times.

   Thus the great God, who disposes all things, took care to give an
   historical account of things from the beginning of the world, through
   all those former ages concerning which profane history is silent; and
   ceased not till he came to those ages in which profane history related
   things with some certainty. And concerning those times he gives us
   abundant account in prophecy, that by comparing profane history with
   those prophecies, we might see the agreement.

   2. This last period of the Old Testament seems to have been remarkably
   distinguished from all others by great revolutions among the nations of
   the earth, to make way for the kingdom of Christ. The time now drawing
   nigh wherein Christ, the great King and Saviour of the world, was to
   come, great and mighty were the changes that were brought to pass in
   order to it. The way had been preparing for the coming of Christ from
   the fall of man, through all the foregoing periods; but now, the time
   drawing nigh, things began to ripen apace for his coming; and therefore
   Divine Providence now wrought wonderfully. The greatest revolutions
   that any history has recorded, since the flood, fell out in this
   period. Almost all the nations far and near, within the knowledge of
   the Jews, were overturned again and again. All lands were in their turn
   subdued, captivated, and as it were emptied, and turned upside down,
   and that most of them repeatedly, in this period; agreeable to that
   prophecy, Isa. xxiv. 1. "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty; he
   maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the
   inhabitants thereof."

   This began with God's visible church, in their captivity by the king of
   Babylon. And then the cup from them went round to all other nations,
   agreeable to what God revealed to the prophet Jeremiah xxv. 15-27. Here
   special respect seems to be had to the great revolutions in the times
   of the Babylonish empire. But after that there were three general
   overturnings before Christ came, in the succession of the three great
   monarchies of the world, after the Babylonish empire. The king of
   Babylon is represented in Scripture as overturning the world: but after
   that, the Babylonish empire was overthrown by Cyrus, who founded the
   Persian empire in the room of it; which was of much greater extent than
   the Babylonish empire in its greatest glory. Thus the world was
   overturned the second time. And then, the Persian empire was overthrown
   by Alexander, and the Grecian set up, which was still of much greater
   extent than the Persian. And thus there was a general overturning of
   the world a third time. After that, the Grecian empire was overthrown
   by the Romans, and the Roman empire was established; which vastly
   exceeded all the foregoing empires in power and extent of dominion. And
   so the world was overturned the fourth time.

   These several monarchies, and the great revolutions of the world under
   them, are abundantly spoken of in the prophecies of Daniel. They are
   represented in Nebuchadnezzar's image of gold, silver, brass, and iron,
   and Daniel's interpretation of it, (Dan. ii. ) in the vision of the
   four beasts, and the angel's interpretation of it, (Dan. vii. ) And the
   succession of the Persian and Grecian monarchies is more particularly
   represented in the 8th chapter, in Daniel's vision of the ram and the
   he-goat, and again in the 11th chapter.

   Beside these four general overturnings, the world was kept in a
   constant tumult between whiles; and indeed in a continual convulsion
   through this whole period. Before, the face of the earth was
   comparatively in quietness; though there were many great wars among the
   nations, yet we read of no such mighty and universal convulsions and
   overturnings as there were in this period. The nations of the world,
   most of them, had long remained on their lees, without being emptied
   from vessel to vessel, as is said of Moab, Jer. xlviii. 11. Now these
   great overturnings were because the time of the great Messiah drew
   nigh. That they were to prepare the way for Christ's coming, is evident
   by Scripture, particularly by Ezek. xxi. 27. "I will overturn,
   overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he come whose
   right it is, and I will give it him." The prophet, by repealing the
   word overturn three times, has respect to three overturnings, as in the
   Revelation viii. 13. The repetition of the word woe three times,
   signifies three distinct woes; as appears by what follows, Revelation
   ix. 12. "One woe is past;" and Revelation xi. 14. "The second woe is
   past, and behold the third woe cometh quickly."

   It must be noted, that the prophet Ezekiel prophesied in the time of
   the Babylonish captivity; and therefore there were three great and
   general overturnings to come after this prophecy, before Christ came;
   the first by the Persians, the second by the Grecians, the third by the
   Romans; and then Christ, whose right it was to take the diadem, and
   reign, should come. Here these great overturnings are evidently spoken
   of as preparatory to the coming and kingdom of Christ. But to
   understand the words aright, we must note the particular expression, "
   I will overturn, overturn, overturn it," i.e. the diadem and crown of
   Israel, or the supreme temporal dominion over God's visible people.
   This God said should be no more, i.e. the crown should be taken off,
   and the diadem removed, as it is said in the foregoing verse. The
   supreme power over Israel should be no more in the royal line of David,
   to which it properly belonged, but should be removed away, and given to
   others, and overturned from one to another: first the supreme power
   over Israel should be in the hands of the Persians; then it should be
   overturned, and be in the hands of the Grecians; and then it should be
   overturned again, and come into the hands of the Romans, and be no more
   in the line of David, till that very person should come, who was the
   Son of David, whose proper right it was, and then God would give it to
   him.

   That those great shakings and revolutions of the nations of the world,
   were all to prepare the way for Christ's coming, and setting up his
   kingdom in the world, is further manifest by Haggai ii. 6, 7. "For thus
   saith the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will
   shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea and the dry land: and I
   will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I
   will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts." And again,
   Haggai ii. 21-23. It is evident by this, that these great revolutions
   and shakings of the nations, whereby the thrones of kingdoms and their
   armies were overthrown, and every one came down by the sword of his
   brother, were to prepare the way for the coming of him who is the
   desire of all nations.

   The great changes and troubles that have sometimes been in the visible
   church of Christ, (Rev. xii. 2. ) are compared to the church's being in
   travail to bring forth Christ: so these great troubles and mighty
   revolutions, were, as it were, the world's being in travail to bring
   forth the Son of God. The apostle, in the 8th of Romans, represents the
   whole creation as groaning and travailing in pain together until now,
   to bring forth the liberty and manifestation of the children of
   God.--So the world as it were travailed in pain, and was in continual
   convulsions, for several hundred years together, to bring forth the
   first-born child, and the only-begotten Son of God. And those mighty
   revolutions were as so many pangs and throes in order to it. The world
   being so long a time kept in a state of war and bloodshed, prepared the
   way for the coming of the Prince of peace, as it showed the great need
   the world stood in of such a prince, to deliver the world from its
   miseries.

   It pleased God to order it in his providence, that earthly power and
   dominion should be raised to its greatest height, and appear in its
   utmost glory, in those four great monarchies that succeeded one
   another, and that every one should be greater and more glorious than
   the preceding, before he set up the kingdom of his Son. By this it
   appeared how much more glorious his spiritual kingdom was than the most
   glorious temporal kingdom. The strength and glory of Satan's kingdom in
   these four mighty monarchies, appeared in its greatest height: for,
   being the monarchies of the heathen world, the strength of them was the
   strength of Satan's kingdom. God suffered Satan's kingdom to rise to so
   great a height of power and magnificence before his Son came to
   overthrow it, in order to prepare the way for the more glorious triumph
   of his Son. Goliath must have on all his splendid armour when the
   stripling David comes against him with a sling and a stone, for the
   greater glory of David's victory. God suffered one of those great
   monarchies to subdue another, and erect itself on the other's ruins,
   appearing still in greater strength, and the last to be strongest and
   mightiest of all; that so Christ, in overthrowing that, might as it
   were overthrow them all at once. The stone cut out of the mountain
   without hands, is represented as destroying the whole image, the gold,
   the silver, the brass, the iron, and the clay; so that all became as
   the chaff of the summer threshing-floor.

   These mighty empires were suffered thus to overthrow the world, and
   destroy one another. And though their power was so great, yet they
   could not uphold themselves, but fell one after another, and came to
   nothing; even the last of them, which was the strongest, and had
   swallowed up the earth. It pleased God thus to show in them the
   instability and vanity of all earthly power and greatness; which served
   as a foil to set forth the glory of the kingdom of his Son, which never
   shall be destroyed, Dan. ii. 44. "In the days of these kings shall the
   God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the
   kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces
   and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever." So
   greatly does this kingdom differ from all those kingdoms: they vanish
   away, and are left to other people; but this shall not be so left, but
   shall stand for ever. God suffered the devil to do his utmost, and to
   establish his interest, by setting up the greatest, strongest, and most
   glorious kingdoms in the world, before the despised Jesus overthrew him
   and his empire. Christ came into the world to bring down the high
   things of Satan's kingdom, that the hand of the Lord might be on every
   one that is proud and lofty, and every high tower, and every lofty
   mountain; as the prophet Isaiah says, chap, ii. 12 &c. And therefore
   these things were suffered to rise very high, that Christ might appear
   so much the more glorious in being above them. Thus wonderfully did the
   great and wise Governor of the world prepare the way for the erecting
   of the glorious kingdom of his beloved Son Jesus.

   3. Another thing for which this last space of time before Christ was
   particularly remarkable, was the wonderful preservation of the church
   through all those overturnings. The preservation of the church was on
   some accounts more remarkable through this period, than through any of
   the foregoing. It was very wonderful that the church, which now was so
   weak, and in so low a state, and mostly subject to the dominion of
   heathen monarchies, should be preserved for five or six hundred years
   together, while the world was so often overturned, and the earth was
   rent in pieces, and made so often empty and waste, and the inhabitants
   of it came down so often every one by the sword of his brother. I say,
   it was wonderful that the church in its weak and low state, being but a
   little handful of men, should be preserved in all these great
   convulsions; especially considering that the land of Judea, the chief
   place of the church's residence, lay in the midst of the contending
   parties, was very much the seat of war amongst them, and was often
   overrun and subdued. It was sometimes in the hands of one people, and
   sometimes another, and very much the object of the envy and hatred of
   all heathen nations. It was often almost ruined by them, often great
   multitudes of its inhabitants being slain, and the land in a great
   measure depopulated; and those who had them in their power, often
   intended the utter destruction of the whole nation. Yet they were
   upheld; they were preserved in their captivity in Babylon, in all the
   dangers they passed through under the kings of Persia, in the much
   greater dangers under the empire of the Greeks, and afterwards when the
   world was trodden down by the Romans.

   Their preservation through this period was also peculiarly remarkable,
   in that we never read of the church suffering persecution in any former
   period in any measure to such a degree as they did in this, under
   Antiochus Epiphanes, of which more afterwards. This wonderful
   preservation of the church through all these overturnings of the world,
   gives light and confirmation to what we read in the beginning of the
   46th psalm: "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
   trouble.--Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and
   though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; though the
   waters thereof roar, and be troubled; though the mountains shake with
   the swelling thereof." Thus I have taken notice of some general things
   wherein this last period of the Old-Testament times was distinguished.
   I come now to consider how the work of redemption was carried on in
   particulars.

   I. The first thing that here offers, is the captivity of the Jews into
   Babylon. This was a great dispensation of Providence, and such as never
   was before. The children of Israel in the time of the judges, had often
   been brought under their enemies; and many particular persons were
   carried captive at other times. But never had there been any such thing
   as destroying the whole land, the sanctuary, and the city of Jerusalem,
   and all the cities and villages of the land, and carrying the whole
   body of the people out of their own land into a country many hundred
   miles distant, and leaving the land of Canaan empty of God's visible
   people. The ark had once forsaken the tabernacle of Shiloh, and was
   carried captive into the land of the Philistines: but never had there
   been any such thing as burning the sanctuary, utterly destroying the
   ark, carrying away all the sacred vessels and utensils, breaking up all
   their stated worship in the land, and the land lying waste and empty
   for so many years together. How lively are those things set forth in
   the Lamentations of Jeremiah! The work of redemption was promoted by
   this remarkable dispensation in these following ways.

   1. It finally cured that nation of their idolatry. The prophet Isaiah,
   speaking of the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, speaks of the
   abolishing of idolatry as one thing that should be done to this end:
   Isaiah ii. 18. "and the idols he shall utterly abolish." When the time
   was drawing near, that God would abolish heathen idolatry, through the
   greater part of the known world, as he did by the preaching of the
   gospel, it pleased him first to abolish heathenism among his own
   people; which he did by their captivity into Babylon. This was a
   presage of that abolition of idols, which God was about to bring to
   pass by Christ through so great a part of the heathen world.

   This nation, that was addicted to idolatry for so many ages,
   notwithstanding all reproofs, warnings, corrections, and all the
   judgments God inflicted on them for it; were now finally cured. So that
   however some might fall into this sin afterwards, as they did about the
   time of Antiochus's persecution, yet the nation, as a nation, never
   showed any propensity to this sin any more. This was a remarkable and
   wonderful change in that people, and what directly promoted the work of
   redemption, as it was a great advancement of the interest of religion.

   2. One thing that prepared the way for Christ's coming, and for setting
   up the glorious dispensation of the gospel, was the taking away many of
   those things wherein consisted the glory of the Jewish dispensation. In
   order to introduce the glorious dispensation of the gospel, the
   external glory of the Jewish church must be diminished. This the
   Babylonish captivity did many ways.

   First, it removed the temporal dominion of the house of David, i e. the
   supreme and independent government of themselves. It took away the
   crown and diadem from the nation. The time now approaching when Christ,
   the great and everlasting King of his church, was to reign, it was time
   for the typical kings to withdraw. As God said by Ezekiel chap. xxi.
   26. "He removed the crown and diadem, that it might be no more, till he
   should come whose right it was." The Jews henceforward were always
   dependent on the governing power of other nations, until Christ came,
   for near six hundred years; except about ninety years, during which
   space they maintained a sort of independence by continual wars under
   the dominion of the Maccabees and their posterity.

   Again, by the captivity, the glory and magnificence of the temple were
   taken away, and the temple that was built afterwards was nothing in
   comparison with it. Thus it was meet, that when the time drew nigh that
   the glorious antetype of the temple should appear, that the typical
   temple should have its glory withdrawn.

   Moreover, they lost by the captivity the two tables of the testimony
   delivered to Moses, on which God with his own finger wrote the ten
   commandments on mount Sinai. These seem to have been preserved in the
   ark till the captivity.--These were in the ark when Solomon placed the
   ark in the temple, 1 Kings viii. 9. "There was nothing in the ark, save
   the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb." We have no
   reason to suppose any other, but that they remained there as long as
   that temple stood. But the Jews speak of these as finally lost at that
   time; though the same commandments were preserved in the book of the
   law. These tables also were withdrawn on the approach of their
   antetype.

   Another thing that was lost was the Urim and Thummim. This is evident
   by Ezra ii. 63. "And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not
   eat of the most holy things, till there should stand up a priest with
   Urim and Thummim." We have no account that this was ever restored;
   though the ancient writings of the Jews say the contrary. What this
   Urim and Thummim was, I shall not now inquire; but only observe, that
   it was something by which the high priest inquired of God, and received
   immediate answers from him, or by which God gave forth immediate
   oracles on particular occasions. This was now withdrawn, the time
   approaching when Christ, the antetype of the Urim and Thummim, the
   great word and oracle of God, was to come.

   Another thing that the ancient Jews say was wanting in the second
   temple, was the Shechinah, or cloud of glory over the mercy-seat. This
   was promised to be in the tabernacle: Lev. xvi. 2. "For I will appear
   in the cloud upon the mercy-seat." And we read elsewhere of the cloud
   of glory descending into the tabernacle, Exod. xl. 35. and so we do
   likewise with respect to Solomon's temple. But we have no account that
   this cloud of glory was in the second temple. And the ancient accounts
   of the Jews say, that there was no such thing in the second temple.
   This was needless in the second temple, considering that God had
   promised that he would fill this temple with glory another way, viz. by
   Christ's coming into it; which was afterwards fulfilled. See Haggai.
   ii. 7. "I will shake all nations and the desire of all nations shall
   come, and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts."

   When Moses built the tabernacle and altar in the wilderness, and the
   first sacrifices were offered on it, fire came down from heaven, and
   consumed the burnt-offering, as in Lev. ix. 24. also when Solomon built
   the temple, and offered the first sacrifices, 2 Chron. vii. 1. And this
   fire was never to go out, but to be kept alive with the greatest care,
   as God commanded, Lev. vi. 13. "The fire shall ever be burning upon the
   altar; it shall never go out." And there is no reason to suppose the
   fire kindled in Solomon's time ever went out till the temple was
   destroyed by the Babylonians. But then it was extinguished, and never
   was restored. We have no account of its being given on building the
   second temple, as we have at the building of the tabernacle and first
   temple. But the Jews, after their return, were forced to make use of
   their common fire instead of it, according to the ancient tradition of
   the Jews. Thus the lights of the Old Testament go out on the approach
   of the glorious Sun of righteousness.

   3. The captivity into Babylon occasioned the dispersion of the Jews
   through the greater part of the known world, before the coming of
   Christ. For the whole nation being carried away far out of their own
   land, and continuing in a state of captivity for so long a time, they
   got possessions, built houses, and settled themselves in the land of
   their captivity, agreeable to the direction that Jeremiah gave them,
   (Jer. xxix. ) And therefore, when Cyrus gave them liberty to return to
   the land where they had formerly dwelt, many of them never returned;
   they were not willing to leave their settlements and possessions there,
   to go into a desolate country, many hundred miles distant, which none
   but the old men among them had ever seen; and therefore they were but a
   small number that returned, as we see in the books of Ezra and
   Nehemiah. Great numbers tarried behind, though they still retained the
   same religion with those that returned, so far as it could be practised
   in a foreign land. Those messengers that we read of in the 7th chapter
   of Zechariah, that came to inquire of the priests and prophets in
   Jerusalem, Sherezer and Regem-melech, are supposed to be messengers
   sent from the Jews that remained still in Babylon.

   Those Jews who remained in that country were soon, by the great changes
   that happened in the world, dispersed thence into all the adjacent
   countries. Hence we find, that in Esther's time, which was after the
   return from the captivity, the Jews were dispersed throughout all parts
   of the vast Persian empire, which extended from India to Ethiopia;
   Esth. iii. 8. "And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain
   people scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the
   provinces of thy kingdom," &c. And so they continued dispersed till
   Christ came, and till the apostles went forth to preach the gospel. But
   yet these dispersed Jews retained their religion. Their captivity, as
   before observed, thoroughly cured them of their idolatry; and it was
   their manner, as many of them as could, to go up to Jerusalem at their
   great feasts. Hence we read in the 7th chapter of Acts, that at the
   great feast of Pentecost, there were Jews abiding at Jerusalem out of
   every nation under heaven. These had come up from all countries where
   they were dispersed, to worship at that feast. And hence we find, in
   their history, that wherever the apostles went preaching through the
   world, they found Jews. They came to one city, and to another city, and
   went into the synagogue of the Jews.

   Antiochus the Great, about two hundred years before Christ, on a
   certain occasion, transplanted two thousand families of Jews from the
   country about Babylon into Asia the Less; and so they and their
   posterity, many of them, settled in Pontus, Galatia, Phrygia,
   Pamphylia, and in Ephesus; and from thence settled in Athens, and
   Corinth, and Rome. Whence came the synagogues in those places in which
   the apostle Paul preached.--Now, this dispersion of the Jews through
   the world before Christ came, did many ways prepare the way for his
   coming, and setting up his kingdom in the world.

   This was a means of raising a general expectation of the Messiah
   through the world, about the time that he actually came. For the Jews,
   wherever they were dispersed, carried the Holy Scriptures with them,
   and so the prophecies of the Messiah; and being conversant with the
   nations among whom they lived, they, by that means, became acquainted
   with these prophecies, and with the expectations of the Jews concerning
   their glorious Messiah. Hence, the birth of such a glorious person in
   Judea, about that time, began to be the general expectation of all
   nations, as appears by the writings of learned heathens, which are
   still extant; particularly the famous poet Virgil, who lived in Italy a
   little before Christ, has a poem about the expectation of a great
   prince that was to be born, and the happy times of righteousness and
   peace he was to introduce; some of it very much in the language of the
   prophet Isaiah.

   Another way by which this dispersed state of the Jews prepared the way
   for Christ was, that it showed the necessity of abolishing the Jewish
   dispensation, and introducing a new dispensation of the covenant of
   grace. It showed the necessity of abolishing the ceremonial law, and
   the old Jewish worship: for, by this means, the observance of that
   ceremonial law became impracticable even by the Jews themselves. The
   ceremonial law was adapted to the state of a people dwelling together
   in the same land, where was the city which God had chosen; where was
   the temple, the only place where they might offer sacrifices; and where
   alone it was lawful for their priests and Levites to officiate, where
   they were to bring their first-fruits, where were their cities of
   refuge, and the like. But by this dispersion, many of the Jews lived
   more than a thousand miles distant, when Christ came; which made the
   observance of their laws of sacrifices, and the like, impracticable.
   And though their forefathers might be to blame in not going up to the
   land of Judea when they were permitted by Cyrus, yet the case was now,
   as to many of them at least, become impracticable; which showed the
   necessity of introducing a new dispensation, that should be fitted, not
   only to one particular land, but to the general circumstances and use
   of all nations of the world.

   Again, this universal dispersion of the Jews contributed to make the
   facts concerning Jesus Christ publicly known through the world. For, as
   observed before, the Jews who lived in other countries, used frequently
   to go up to Jerusalem at their three great feasts, from year to year;
   by which means, they could not but become acquainted with the wonderful
   things that Christ did in that land. We find that the great miracle of
   raising Lazarus excited the curiosity of those foreign Jews who came up
   at the feast of the passover to see Jesus; John xii. 19-21. These
   Greeks were foreign Jews and proselytes, as is evident by their coming
   to worship at the feast of the passover. The Jews who lived abroad
   among the Greeks, and spoke their language, were called Greeks,
   Hellenists, and Grecians, Acts vi. 1. These were not Gentile
   Christians; for this occurred before the calling of the Gentiles.

   By the same means the Jews who went up from other countries became
   acquainted with Christ's crucifixion. Thus the disciples going to
   Emmaus say to Christ, whom they did not know, Luke xxiv. 18. "Art thou
   only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which have
   come to pass there in these days;" plainly intimating, that the things
   concerning Jesus were so publicly known to all men, that it was
   wonderful to find any man unacquainted with them. And so afterwards
   they became acquainted with the news of his resurrection; and when they
   returned into their own countries, they carried the news with them, and
   made these facts public through the world, as before they had made the
   prophecies of them.

   After this, those foreign Jews who came to Jerusalem, took great notice
   of the pouring out of the Spirit at Pentecost, and the wonderful
   effects of it; and many of them were converted by it. There were
   Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in
   Egypt, and the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and the strangers of Rome,
   Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians. And so they not only carried
   back the news of these facts, but Christianity itself, into their own
   countries with them; which contributed much to the spreading of it
   through the world.

   Again, the dispersion of the Jews opened a door for the introduction of
   the apostles in all places where they came to preach the gospel. For
   almost in all places where they came to preach the gospel, they found
   synagogues of the Jews, where the Holy Scriptures were wont to be read,
   and the true God worshipped; which was a great advantage to the
   apostles in spreading the gospel through the world. For their way was,
   into whatever city they came, first to go into the synagogue of the
   Jews, (they being of the same nation,) and there to preach the gospel
   unto them. And hereby their new doctrine was taken notice of by their
   Gentile neighbours, whose curiosity excited them to hear what they had
   to say; which became a fair occasion to the apostles to preach the
   gospel to them. This is the account we have in the Acts of the
   Apostles. And these Gentiles had been before, many of them, prepared in
   some measure, by the knowledge they had of the Jewish religion, of
   their worship of one God, their prophecies, and expectation of a
   Messiah. This knowledge they derived from the Jews, who had long been
   their neighbours; which opened the door for the gospel to have access
   to them. And the work of the apostles with them was doubtless much
   easier, than if they never had heard any thing before of such a person
   as the apostles preached, or any thing about the worship of one only
   true God. So many ways did the Babylonish captivity greatly prepare the
   wav for Christ's coming.

   II. The next particular that I would notice is, the addition made to
   the canon of Scripture in the time of the captivity, in those two
   remarkable portions of Scripture, the prophecies of Ezekiel and Daniel.
   Christ appeared to each of these prophets in the form of that nature
   which he was afterwards to take upon him. The prophet Ezekiel gives an
   account of his thus appearing to him repeatedly, as Ezek. i. 26. "And
   above the firmament that was over their heads, was the likeness of a
   throne, as the appearance of a sapphire-stone, and upon the likeness of
   the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it;"
   and so Ezek. viii. 1, 2. So Christ appeared to the prophet Daniel: Dan.
   viii. 15, 16. "There stood before me as the appearance of a man. And I
   heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said,
   Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision." There are several
   things which make it evident, that this was Christ; but I cannot now
   stand to mention particulars. Christ appeared ai:ain as a man to this
   prophet, Dan. x. 5, 6. "Then I lift up mine eyes and looked, and
   behold, a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with
   fine gold of Uphaz: his body also was like the beryl, and his face as
   the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his
   arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of
   his words like the voice of a multitude." Comparing this vision with
   that of the apostle John in the 1st chapter of Revelation, makes it
   manifest that this person was Christ. And the prophet Daniel, in the
   historical part of his book, gives an account of a very remarkable
   appearance of Christ in Nebuchadnezzar's furnace, with Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abednego. Dan. iii. 2.5. "Lo, I see four MEN loose,--and
   the form of the fourth is like the Son of God."

   Christ not only appeared here in the form of the human nature, but he
   appeared in a furnace, saving those persons who believed on him from
   that furnace; by which is represented to us, how Christ, by coming
   himself into the furnace of God's wrath, saves those that believe in
   him from that furnace, so that it has no power on them; and the wrath
   of God never reaches or touches them, so much as to singe the hair of
   their head.

   These two prophets, in many respects, were more particular concerning
   the coming of Christ, and his glorious gospel-kingdom, than any of the
   prophets had been before. They mention those three great overturnings
   of the world that should be before he came. Ezekiel is particular in
   several places concerning the coming of Christ. The prophet Daniel is
   more particular in foretelling the time of Christ's coming than ever
   any prophet had been before, (Dan. chap. ix.) He foretold, that it
   should be seventy weeks, i.e. seventy weeks of years, or seventy times
   seven years, which is four hundred and ninety years, from the decree to
   rebuild and restore the state of the Jews, till the Messiah should be
   crucified. This must be reckoned from the commission given to Ezra by
   Artaxerxes, whereby the very particular time of Christ's crucifixion
   was pointed out, which never had been before. ( Ezra vii.)

   The prophet Ezekiel is very particular in the mystical description of
   the gospel-church, in his vision of the temple and city, towards the
   latter part of his prophecy. The prophet Daniel points out the order of
   particular events that should come to pass relating to the christian
   church after Christ was come, as the rise of Antichrist, the
   continuance of his reign, his fall, and the glory that should
   follow.--Thus does the gospel-light still increase, the nearer we come
   to the time of Christ's birth.

   III. The next particular I would mention is, the destruction of
   Babylon, and the overthrow of the Chaldean empire by Cyrus. The
   destruction of Babylon took place on that night in which Belshazzar the
   king, and the city in general, were drowned in a drunken festival,
   which they kept in honour of their gods, when Daniel was called to read
   the hand-writing on the wall, Dan. v. 30. and it was brought about in
   such a manner, as wonderfully to show the hand of God, and remarkably
   to fulfil his word by his prophets, which I cannot now stand
   particularly to relate. Now that great city, which had long been an
   enemy to the city of God, was destroyed, after it had stood ever since
   the first building of Babel, which was about seventeen hundred years.
   If the check which was put to the building of this city at its
   beginning, whereby they were prevented from carrying it to that extent
   and magnificence they intended, promoted the work of redemption, much
   more did this destruction of it.

   This was a remarkable instance of God's vengeance on the enemies of his
   redeemed church; for God brought destruction on Babylon for the
   injuries they did to God's children, as is often set forth in the
   prophets. It also promoted the work of redemption, as thereby God's
   people who were held captive by them, were set at liberty to return to
   their own land in order to rebuild Jerusalem; and therefore Cyrus is
   called God's shepherd, Isa. xliv. and xlv. 1. And these are over and
   above those ways wherein the setting up and overthrowing the four
   monarchies of the world did promote the work of redemption.

   IV. What next followed was the return of the Jews to their own land,
   and the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the temple. Cyrus, as soon as he
   had destroyed the Babylonish, and erected the Persian empire on its
   ruins, made a decree in favour of the Jews, that they might return to
   their own land, and rebuild their city and temple. This return of the
   Jews out of the Babylonish captivity is, next to the redemption out of
   Egypt, the most remarkable of all the Old-Testament redemptions, and
   most insisted on in Scripture, as a type of the great redemption of
   Jesus Christ. It was under the hand of one of the legal ancestors of
   Christ, viz. Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, whose Babylonish name
   was Sheshbazzar. He was the governor of the Jews, and their leader in
   their first return out of captivity; and, together with Joshua the son
   of Josedek the high priest, had the chief hand in rebuilding the
   temple. This redemption was brought about by the hand of Zerubbabel and
   Joshua the priest, as the redemption out of Egypt was brought about by
   the hand of Moses and Aaron.

   The return out of the captivity was a remarkable dispensation of
   Providence. It was remarkable, that the heart of a heathen prince,
   Cyrus, should be so inclined to favour such a design. He not only gave
   the people liberty to return, and rebuild the city and temple, but gave
   charge that they should be helped with silver and gold, with goods, and
   beasts, as we read in Ezra i. 4. And afterwards God wonderfully
   inclined the heart of Darius to further the building of the house of
   God with his own tribute-money, and gave command to their bitter
   enemies, the Samaritans, who had been striving to hinder them, to help
   them without fail, by furnishing them with all that they needed in
   order to it, and to supply them day by day. He made a decree, that
   whosoever failed of it, timber should be pulled down out of his house,
   and he hanged thereon, and his house made a dunghill, ( Ezra vi. )
   After this, God inclined the heart of Artaxerxes, another king of
   Persia, to promote the work of preserving the state of the Jews, by his
   ample commission to Ezra, ( Ezra vii. ) He helped them abundantly with
   silver and gold out of his own bounty, and offered more, as should be
   needful, out of the king's treasure-house, commanding his treasurers
   beyond the river Euphrates to give more, as should be needed, unto a
   hundred talents of silver, a hundred measures of wheat, a hundred baths
   of wine, a hundred baths of oil, and salt, without prescribing how
   much. He gave leave to establish magistrates in the land; freeing the
   priests of toll, tribute, custom, and other things, which render this
   decree by Artaxerxes the most full and ample in the Jews' favour of any
   that had been given for the restoring of Jerusalem; and therefore, in
   Daniel's prophecy, this is called the decree for restoring and building
   Jerusalem; and hence the seventy weeks are dated.

   After this, another favourable commission was granted by the king of
   Persia to Nehemiah, ( Nehemiah. chap. ii.)--It was remarkable, that the
   hearts of heathen princes should be so inclined. It was the effect of
   his power, who hath the hearts of kings in his hands, and turneth them
   whithersoever he will; and it was a remarkable instance of his favour
   to his people.

   Another remarkable circumstance of this restitution of the state of the
   Jews to their own land was, that it was accomplished against so much
   opposition of their bitter indefatigable enemies, the Samaritans, who,
   for a long time together, with all the malice and craft they could
   exercise, opposed the Jews in this affair, and sought their
   destruction. One while they were opposed by Bishlam, Mithridath,
   Tabeel, Rehum, and Shimshai, as in Ezra iv. and then by Tatnai,
   Shetharboznai, and their companions, as in Ezra v. and afterwards by
   Sunballat and Tobiah, as we read in the book of Nehemiah.

   We have showed before, how the settlement of the people in this land in
   Joshua's time promoted the work of redemption. On the same accounts
   does their restitution belong to the same work. The re-settlement of
   the Jews in the land of Canaan belongs to this work, as it was a
   necessary means of preserving the Jewish church and dispensation in
   being, till Christ should come. If it had not been for this restoration
   of the Jewish church, temple, and worship, the people had remained
   without any temple, or land of their own, that should be as it were
   their headquarters, a place of worship, habitation, and resort. The
   whole constitution, which God had done so much to establish, would have
   been in danger of utterly failing, long before the six hundred years
   had expired, which was from about the time of the captivity till
   Christ. And so all that preparation which God had been making for the
   coming of Christ, from the time of Abraham, would have been in vain.
   Now that very temple was built that God would fill with glory by
   Christ's coming into it, as the prophets Haggai and Zechariah told the
   Jews in order to encourage them in building it.

   V. The next particular I would observe, is the addition made to the
   canon of the Scriptures soon after the captivity by the prophets Haggai
   and Zechariah, who were prophets sent lo encourage the people in their
   work of rebuilding the city and temple; and the main argument they use
   to that end, is the approach of the coming of Christ. Haggai foretold
   that Christ should be of Zerubbabel's legal posterity. This seems to be
   the last and most particular revelation of the descent of Christ, till
   the angel Gabriel was sent to reveal it to his mother Mary.

   VI. The next thing I would take notice of, was the pouring out of the
   Spirit of God that accompanied the ministry of Ezra the priest after
   the captivity. That there was such an effusion of the Spirit of God,
   that accompanied Ezra's ministry, is manifest by many things in the
   books of Ezra and Nehemiah. Presently after Ezra came up from Babylon,
   with the ample commission which Artaxerxes gave him, whence Daniel's
   seventy weeks began, he set himself to reform the vices and corruptions
   he found among the Jews; and his great success in it we have an account
   of in the 10th chapter of Ezra. So that there appeared a very general
   and great mourning of the congregation of Israel for their sins, which
   was accompanied with a solemn covenant that the people entered into
   with God; and this was followed with a great and general reformation,
   as we have there an account. And the people about the same time, with
   great zeal, earnestness, and reverence, gathered themselves together to
   hear the word of God read by Ezra; and gave diligent attention, while
   Ezra and the other priests preached to them, by reading and expounding
   the law, and were greatly affected in the hearing of it. They wept when
   they heard the words of the law, and set themselves to observe it, and
   kept the feast of tabernacles, as the Scripture observes, after such a
   manner as it had not been kept since the days of Joshua the son of
   Nun,(Neh. viii.) After this, having separated themselves from all
   strangers, they solemnly observed a fast, by hearing the word,
   confessing their sins, and renewing their covenant with God. And they
   manifested their sincerity in that transaction, by actually reforming
   many abuses in religion and morals; as we learn from the 9th and
   following chapters of Nehemiah.

   It is observable, that it has been God's manner, on every remarkable
   new establishment of the state of his visible church, to afford a
   remarkable outpouring of his Spirit. So it was on the first
   establishment of the church of the Jews at their coming into Canaan
   under Joshua; so it was now in this second settlement of the church in
   the time of Ezra; and so it was on the first establishment of the
   christian church after Christ's resurrection; God wisely and graciously
   laying the foundation of those establishments in a work of the Holy
   Spirit, for the lasting benefit of his church, thenceforward continued
   in those establishments. And this pouring out of the Spirit, was a
   final cure of the nation of that particular sin which just before they
   especially run into, viz. intermarrying with the Gentiles: for however
   inclined to it they were before, they ever after showed an aversion to
   it.

   VII. Ezra added to the canon of the Scriptures. He wrote the book of
   Ezra; and he is supposed to have written the two books of Chronicles,
   at least of compiling them, if he was not the author of the materials,
   or all the parts, of these writings. That these books were written, or
   compiled and completed, after the captivity, the things contained in
   the books themselves make manifest; for the genealogies contained
   therein, are brought down below the captivity; as1 Chron. iii. 17, &c
   We have there an account of the posterity of Jehoiachin for several
   successive generations. And there is mention in these books of this
   captivity into Babylon, as of a thing past, and of things that were
   done on the return of the Jews after the captivity, (1 Chron. ix. ) The
   chapter is mostly filled up with an account of things that came to pass
   after the captivity into Babylon, as you may see by comparing it with
   what is said in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. And that Ezra was the
   person who compiled these books, is probable by this, because they
   conclude with words that we know are the words of Ezra's history. The
   two last verses are Ezra's words in the history he gives in the two
   first verses of the book of Ezra.

   VIII. Ezra is supposed to have collected all the hooks of which the
   Holy Scriptures did then consist, and disposed them in their proper
   order. Ezra is often spoken of as a noted and eminent scribe of the law
   of God, and the canon of Scripture in his time was manifestly under his
   special care. The Jews, from the first accounts we have from them, have
   always held, that the canon of Scripture, so much of it as was then
   extant, was collected, and orderly disposed and settled, by Ezra; and
   that from him they have delivered it down in the order in which he
   disposed it, till Christ's time; when the christian church received it
   from them, and have delivered it down to our times. The truth of this
   is allowed as undoubted by divines in general.

   IX. The work of redemption was carried on and promoted in this period,
   by greatly multiplying the copies of the law, and appointing the
   constant public reading of them in all the cities of Israel in their
   synagogues. It is evident, that before the captivity, there were but
   few copies of the law. The original was laid up beside the ark; and the
   kings were required to write out a copy of it for their use, and the
   law was required to be read to the whole congregation of Israel once
   every seventh year. And we have no account of any other stated public
   reading of the law before the captivity but this. And it is manifest by
   several things that might be mentioned, that copies of the law were
   exceeding rare before the captivity. But after this, the constant
   reading of the law was set up in every synagogue throughout the land.
   First, they began with reading the law, and then they proceeded to
   establish the constant reading of the other books of the Old Testament.
   And lessons were read out of the Old Testament, as made up of both the
   law and the other parts of the Scripture then extant, in all the
   synagogues, which were set up in every city, and wherever the Jews in
   any considerable number dwelt. Thus we find it was in the time of
   Christ and the apostles. Acts xv. 21. "Moses of old time hath in every
   city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every
   sabbath-day." This custom is universally supposed, both by Jews and
   Christians, to be begun by Ezra. There were doubtless public assemblies
   before the captivity. They used to assemble at the temple at their
   great feasts, and were directed, when they were at a loss about any
   thing in the law, to go to the priest for instruction; and they used
   also to resort to the prophets' houses: and we read of synagogues in
   the land before, Psal. lxxiv.

   8. But it is not supposed that they had copies of the law for constant
   public reading and expounding through the land before. This was one
   great means of their being preserved from idolatry.

   X. The next thing I would mention, is God's remarkably preserving the
   church and nation of the Jews, when they were in imminent danger of
   being universally destroyed by Haman, as in the book of Esther. This
   series of providence was very wonderful in preventing this destruction.
   Esther was doubtless born for this end, to be the instrument of this
   remarkable preservation.

   XI. After this the canon of Scripture was further enlarged in the books
   of Nehemiah and Esther; the one by Nehemiah himself. Whether the other
   was written by Nehemiah, or Mordecai, or Malachi, is not of importance
   for us to know, so long as it is one of those books that were always
   admitted and received as a part of their canon by the Jews, and was
   among those books which the Jews called their Scriptures in Christ's
   time, and as such was approved by him. For Christ often in his speeches
   to the Jews, manifestly approves and confirms those books, which
   amongst them went by the name of the Scriptures, as might easily be
   shown.

   XII. After this the canon of the Old Testament was completed and sealed
   by Malachi. The manner of his concluding his prophecy seems to imply,
   that they were to expect no more prophecies, and no more written
   revelations from God, till Christ should come. For in the last chapter
   he prophesies of Christ's coming; Malachi iv. 2, 3. "But unto you that
   fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his
   wings; and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the stall. And ye
   shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be as ashes under the soles
   of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts.
   Then we read in Malachi iv. 4. "Remember ye the law of Moses my
   servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the
   statutes and judgments," i.e. Remember and improve what ye have; keep
   close to your written rule, as expecting no more additions to it, till
   the night of the Old Testament is over, and the Sun of righteousness
   shall at length arise.

   XIII. Soon after this, the spirit of prophecy ceased among that people
   till the time of the New Testament. Thus the Old-Testament light, the
   stars of the long night, began apace to hide their heads, the time of
   the Sun of righteousness now drawing nigh. We before observed, how the
   kings of the house of David ceased before the true king and head of the
   church came; and how the cloud of glory withdrew, before Christ, the
   brightness of the Father's glory, appeared. And now the spirit of
   prophecy ceased. The time of the great prophet of God was now so nigh,
   it was time for their typical prophets to be silent.

   We have now gone through the time of which we have any historical
   account in the writings of the Old Testament; and the last thing
   mentioned, by which the work of redemption was promoted, was the
   ceasing of the spirit of prophecy.--I now proceed to show how the work
   of redemption was carried on through the remaining times before Christ.
   In this we have not that thread of scripture history to guide us that
   we have had hitherto; but have these three things, viz. the prophecies
   of the Old Testament, human histories, and some occasional evidence of
   things which happened in those times, in the New Testament. Therefore,

   XIV. The next particular that I shall mention under this period, is the
   destruction of the Persian empire, and setting up of the Grecian empire
   by Alexander. This came to pass about sixty or seventy years after the
   times wherein the prophet Malachi is supposed to have prophesied, and
   about three hundred and thirty years before Christ. This was the third
   revolution that came to pass in this period, and was greater and more
   remarkable than either of the foregoing. It was very remarkable on
   account of the suddenness of that conquest which Alexander made, and
   the greatness of the empire he set up, which much exceeded in extent
   all the foregoing.

   This event is much spoken of in the prophecies of Daniel. This empire
   is represented by the third kingdom of brass in Daniel's interpretation
   of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Dan. ii. And in Daniel's vision of the four
   beasts, it is represented by the third beast that was like a leopard,
   that had on his back four wings of a fowl, to represent the swiftness
   of its conquest, Dan. vii. and is more particularly represented by the
   he-goat in Dan. viii. , that came from the west on the face of the
   whole earth, and touched not the ground, to represent how swiftly
   Alexander overran the world. The angel himself expressly interprets
   this he-goat to signify the king of Grecia, Dan. viii. 21. "The rough
   goat is the king of Grecia; and the great horn that is between his eyes
   is the first king," i.e. Alexander himself.

   After Alexander had conquered the world, he soon died; and his dominion
   did not descend to his posterity, but four of his principal captains
   divided his empire between them. Now that being broken, and four stood
   up for it, four kingdoms stand up out of the nation, but not in his
   power; as in the 11th chapter of Daniel. The angel after foretelling
   the Persian empire, proceeds to foretell Alexander, Dan. xi. 3. "And a
   mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do
   according to his will.'' Then he foretells, in the 4th verse, the
   dividing of his kingdom between his four captains: Dan. xi. 4. "And
   when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be
   divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor
   according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be
   plucked up, even for others besides those. Of these four captains, one
   had Egypt and the neighbouring countries on the south of Judea; and
   another had Syria and the neighbouring countries north of Judea; and
   these two are called the kings of the north and of the south. (Dan. xi.
   )

   Now, this setting up of the Grecian empire did greatly prepare the way
   for Christ's coming, and for the erection of his kingdom. Besides the
   ways common to others in this period, there is one peculiar to this
   revolution, which remarkably promoted the work of redemption; and that
   was, that it made the Greek language common in the world. To have one
   common language understood and used through the greater part of the
   world, must greatly prepare the way for the setting up of Christ's
   kingdom. This gave advantage for spreading the gospel through all
   nations, with vastly greater ease, than if every nation had a distinct
   language, and did not understand each other. For though some of the
   first preachers of the gospel had the gift of tongues, so that they
   could preach in any language; yet all had not this particular gift; and
   they who had could not exercise it when they would, but only at special
   seasons, when the Spirit of God was pleased to inspire them in this
   way. And the churches in different and distant parts of the world, as
   at Jerusalem, Antioch, Galatia, Corinth, &c. could not have had that
   communication of which we have an account in the book of Acts, without
   a common language.--After the Grecian empire was set up, many in all
   these countries well understood the Greek language; which wonderfully
   opened the door for mutual communication between those churches which
   were so far separated one from another.

   Again, making the Greek language common through so great a part of the
   world, did wonderfully make way for the kingdom of Christ, because it
   was the language in which the New Testament was to be originally
   written. The apostles propagated the gospel through many scores of
   nations; and if those nations could not have understood the Bible any
   otherwise than as it was translated into so many languages, it would
   have rendered the spreading of the gospel vastly more difficult. But by
   the Greek being made common to all, they all understood the New
   Testament of Jesus Christ in the language in which the apostles and
   evangelists originally wrote it. As soon as ever it was written by its
   original penmen, it immediately lay open to the world in a language
   that was commonly understood.

   XV. The next thing I notice is the translating of the Old Testament
   into the Greek language, which was commonly understood by the Gentiles.
   This is commonly called the Septuagint, or the translation of the
   Seventy; and is supposed to have been made about fifty or sixty years
   after Alexander's conquests. This is the first translation that ever
   was made of the Scriptures that we have any credible account of. The
   canon of the Old Testament had been completed by the prophet Malachi
   but about a hundred and twenty years before in its original. Hitherto
   the Scriptures had remained locked up among the Jews in the Hebrew
   tongue, which was understood by no other nation; but now it was
   translated into a language that was commonly understood by the nations
   of the world.

   This translation of the Old Testament is still extant, and is of great
   use. The Jews have many fables about the occasion and manner of this
   translation; but the truth of the case is supposed to be this, that
   multitudes of the Jews living in other parts of the world besides
   Judea, and being born and bred among the Greeks, the Greek became their
   common language. These not understanding the original Hebrew, they
   procured the Scriptures to be translated for their use into the Greek
   language: and so henceforward the Jews, in all countries, except Judea,
   were wont in their synagogues to make use of this translation instead
   of the Hebrew.

   This translation of the Scriptures into a language so commonly
   understood through the world, greatly prepared the way for setting up
   Christ's kingdom in the world. For the apostles commissioned to preach
   through the world, made great use of the scriptures of the Old
   Testament, and especially of the prophecies concerning Christ that were
   contained in them. By means of this translation, and by the Jews being
   scattered every where, they had the Scriptures at hand in a language
   understood by the Gentiles. Hence they principally made use of this
   translation in their preaching and writings wherever they went. In all
   the numerous quotations out of the Old Testament in their writings,
   they are made almost every where in the very words of the Septuagint.
   The sense is the same as in the original Hebrew; though the words are
   different. But yet this makes it evident, that the apostles in their
   preaching and writings, commonly made use of this translation. And this
   translation was principally used in christian churches through most
   nations of the world, for several hundred years after Christ.

   XVI. The next thing is the wonderful preservation of the church when it
   was eminently threatened and persecuted under the Grecian empire. The
   first time they were threatened was by Alexander himself. When
   besieging the city of Tyre, he sent to the Jews for assistance and
   supplies for his army. Out of a conscientious regard to their oath to
   the king of Persia, they refused; but he being a man of a very furious
   spirit, agreeable to the scripture representation of the rough he-goat,
   marched against them, with a design to cut them off. When he met the
   priests going out to him in their priestly garments, God wonderfully
   turned his heart to spare them, and favour them, as he did the heart of
   Esau when he met Jacob.

   After this, one of the kings of Egypt, a successor of one of
   Alexander's four captains, entertained a design of destroying the
   nation of the Jews; [625] but was remarkably and wonderfully prevented
   by a stronger interposition of Heaven for their preservation.

   But the most wonderful preservation of them all in this period was
   under the cruel persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria, and
   successor of another of Alexander's four captains. The Jews were at
   that time subject to the power of Antiochus; and he being enraged
   against them, long strove to his utmost utterly to destroy them, and
   root them out; at least all of them that would not forsake their
   religion, and worship his idols. He did indeed in a great measure waste
   the country, and depopulate the city of Jerusalem; and profaned the
   temple, by setting up his idols in some parts of it; and persecuted the
   people with insatiable cruelty; so that we have no account of any
   persecution like this before. Many of the particular circumstances of
   this persecution would be very affecting were there time to insist on
   them. This cruel persecution began about a hundred and seventy years
   before Christ. It is spoken of in the prophecy of Daniel, Dan. viii. 9,
   25. xi. 31-38. and in the New Testament, Heb. xi. 36-38.

   Antiochus intended not only to extirpate the Jewish religion, but, as
   far as in him lay, the very nation; and particularly laboured to the
   utmost to destroy all copies of the law. And considering how weak they
   were, in comparison with a king of such vast dominion, the providence
   of God appears very wonderful in defeating his design. Many times the
   Jews seemed to be on the very brink of ruin, just ready to be wholly
   swallowed up; and their enemies often thought themselves sure of
   obtaining their purpose. They once came against the people with a
   mighty army, with a design of killing all, except the women and
   children, and of selling these for slaves; and so confident were they
   of obtaining their purpose, and others of purchasing, that above a
   thousand merchants came with the army, with money in their hands, to
   buy the slaves that should be sold. But God wonderfully stirred up and
   assisted one Judas, and others his successors, called the Maccabees,
   who, with a small handful in comparison vanquished their enemies time
   after time, and delivered their nation. This also was foretold by
   Daniel, Speaking of Antiochus's persecution, he says, Daniel xi. 32.
   "And such as do wickedly against the covenant, shall be corrupt by
   flatteries: but the people that do know their God, shall be strong and
   do exploits."

   God afterwards brought this Antiochus to a fearful, miserable end, by a
   loathsome disease, under dreadful torments of body and horrors of mind;
   which was foretold, in these words, (Dan. xi. 45.)" Yet he shall come
   to his end, and none shall help him." After his death, there were
   attempts still to destroy the church; but God baffled them all.

   XVII. The next thing is the destruction of the Grecian, and setting up
   of the Roman, empire. This was the fourth revolution in this period.
   And though it was brought to pass more gradually than the setting up of
   the Grecian empire, yet it far exceeded that, and was much the greatest
   and largest temporal monarchy that ever was in the world; so that the
   Roman empire was commonly called all the world; as in Luke ii. 1. "And
   there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should
   be taxed:" i.e. all the Roman empire.

   This empire is spoken of as much the strongest and greatest of any of
   the four: Dan. ii. 40. "And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron:
   forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces, and subdueth all things: and as
   iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces, and bruise."
   Dan. vii. 7, 19, 23. The time when the Romans first conquered and
   subdued the land of Judea, was between sixty and seventy years before
   Christ. Soon after this, the Roman empire was established in its
   greatest extent; and the world continued subject to it henceforward
   till Christ came, and many hundred years after.

   The nations being thus united under one monarchy when Christ came, and
   when the apostles went forth to preach the gospel, greatly prepared the
   way for the spreading of the gospel, and the setting up of Christ's
   kingdom in the world.--For the world being thus subject to one
   government, it opened a general communication, and so opportunity was
   given for the more swift propagation of the gospel. Thus we find it in
   the British dominions, the communication is quick from one part to
   another. There are innumerable difficulties in travelling through
   different nations, that are under different independent governments,
   which there are not in travelling through different parts of the same
   realm, or different dominions of the same prince. So the world being
   under one government, that of the Romans, facilitated the apostles'
   travelling.

   XVIII. About the same time learning and philosophy were risen to their
   greatest height in the heathen world.--Almost all the famous
   philosophers among the heathen, were after the captivity into Babylon.
   Almost all the wise men of Greece and Rome flourished in this time.
   What these philosophers in general chiefly professed as their business,
   was to inquire, wherein man's chief happiness lay, and how to obtain
   it. They seemed earnestly to busy themselves in this inquiry, and wrote
   multitudes of books about it, many of which are still extant; but they
   were exceedingly divided, there having been reckoned several hundreds
   of different opinions which they had concerning it. Thus they wearied
   themselves in vain, wandering in the dark, not having the glorious
   gospel to guide them. God was pleased to suffer men to do the utmost
   that they could with human wisdom, and to try the utmost extent of
   their own understandings in order to find out the way to happiness,
   before the true light came to enlighten the world. God suffered these
   great philosophers to try what they could do for six hundred years
   together; and then it proved by the events of so long a time, that all
   they could do was in vain; the world not becoming wiser, better, or
   happier under their instructions, but growing more and more foolish,
   wicked, and miserable. He suffered this, that it might be seen how far
   reason and philosophy could go in their highest ascent, that the
   necessity of a divine teacher might more convincingly appear. God was
   pleased to make foolish the wisdom of this world--to show men the folly
   of their best wisdom--by the doctrines of his glorious gospel, which
   were above the reach of all their philosophy. See 1 Cor. i. 19-21.

   After God had showed the vanity of human learning, when set up in the
   room of the gospel, God was pleased to make it subservient to the
   purposes of Christ's kingdom, as a handmaid to divine revelation.
   Thereby the vanity of human wisdom was shown, and the necessity of the
   gospel appeared; and hereby a handmaid was prepared to the gospel. An
   instance of this we have in the apostle Paul, who was famed for his
   much learning, (Acts xxvi. 24. ) being skilled in the learning not only
   of the Jews, but also of the philosophers. This he improved to subserve
   the gospel; as he did in disputing with the philosophers at Athens,
   Acts xvii. 22, &c. By his learning he knew how to accommodate himself
   in his discourses to learned men, having read their writings; and he
   cites their own poets. Dionysius, a philosopher, was converted by him,
   and was made a great instrument of promoting the gospel. And there were
   many others in that and the following ages, who were eminently useful
   by their human learning in promoting the interests of Christ's kingdom.

   XIX. Just before Christ was born, the Roman empire was raised to its
   greatest height, and also settled in peace. About four and twenty years
   before Christ, Augustus Caesar, the first Roman emperor, began to rule
   as emperor of the world. Till then the Roman empire had of a long time
   been a commonwealth under the government of the senate: but then it
   became an absolute monarchy. This personage, as he was the first, so he
   was the greatest of all the Roman emperors: he reigned in the greatest
   glory. Thus the power of the heathen world, which was Satan's visible
   kingdom, was raised to its greatest height, after it had been
   strengthening itself more and more from the days of Solomon, which was
   about a thousand years. Now the heathen world was in its greatest glory
   for strength, wealth, and learning.

   God did two things to prepare the way for Christ's coming, wherein he
   took a contrary method from that which human wisdom would have taken.
   He brought his own visible people very low, and made them weak; but the
   heathen, his enemies, he exalted to the greatest height, for the more
   glorious triumph of the cross of Christ. With a small number in their
   greatest weakness, he conquered his enemies in their greatest glory.
   Thus Christ triumphed over principalities and powers in his cross.

   Augustus Caesar had been for many years establishing his empire, and
   subduing his enemies, till the very year that Christ was born: when,
   all his enemies being subdued, his dominion over the world seemed to be
   gloriously settled. All was established in peace; in token whereof the
   Romans shut the temple of Janus, which was an established symbol among
   them of there being universal peace throughout the empire. And this
   universal peace, which was begun that very year in which Christ was
   born, lasted twelve years, even till the year that Christ disputed with
   the doctors in the temple.

   Thus the world, after it had been, as it were, in a continual
   convulsion for so many hundred years together--like the four winds
   striving together on the tumultuous raging ocean, whence arose those
   four great monarchies--was now established in the greatest height of
   the fourth and last monarchy, and settled in quietness. Now all things
   are ready for the birth of Christ. This remarkable universal peace,
   after so many ages of tumult and war, was a fit prelude for ushering
   the glorious Prince of peace into the world.

   Thus I have gone through the first grand period of the whole space
   between the fall of man and the end of the world, viz. from the fall to
   the time of the incarnation of Christ; and have shown the truth of the
   first proposition, viz. That from the fall of man to the incarnation of
   Christ, God was doing those things which were preparatory to Christ's
   coming, and were forerunners of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [625] On the death of Alexander the Great, Ptolemy Lagus assumed the
   regal title in Egypt. He was succeeded by Ptolemy Philadelphus,
   Evergetes, and Philopater. This last, no doubt, is the person to whom
   our author here alludes. He was a cruel tyrant, revengeful and
   debauched. Having been at Jerusalem, during his expedition to Syria,
   and having been denied an entrance into the temple, he was greatly
   enraged against the whole body of the Jews. There were great numbers of
   them at Alexandria; these he degraded into slaves. The only condition
   by which a mark of disgrace with hot iron, and consequent slavery,
   could be avoided, was to offer sacrifice to his gods. Out of many
   thousands, only three hundred yielded by base compliance. These being
   excommunicated by their brethren, roused Philopater into greater fury
   He meditated nothing less than the utter ruin of the whole nation,
   beginning with those of Alexandria. He ordered them to be brought into
   the Hippodrome, an immense place without the city where the people
   usually assembled to see public races and diversions, and gave a
   peremptory injunction that five hundred elephants should be let loose
   upon them in that place. The first appointed day, the king, who was to
   have been present, overslept himself after a nocturnal debauch. The
   second passed by a similar disappointment. On the third day the king
   came to the Hippodrome, and the elephants were let loose upon the
   defenceless Jews.--But, by a wonderful providence, these animals turned
   upon the spectators and soldiers, and great numbers were killed by
   them. This, attended with some other circumstances of affright, induced
   the tyrant to desist from his cruel purpose.--W.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART VII.

   IMPROVEMENT OF THE FIRST PERIOD.

   Before I proceed to the next period, I would make some few remarks, by
   way of improvement upon what has been said under this.

   I. From what has been said, we may strongly argue, that Jesus of
   Nazareth is indeed the Son of God, and the Saviour of the world; and so
   that the christian religion is the true religion, seeing that Christ is
   the very person so evidently pointed at, in all the great dispensations
   of Divine Providence from the very fall of man, and was so undoubtedly
   in so many instances foretold from age to age, and shadowed forth in a
   vast variety of types and figures. If we seriously consider the course
   of things from the beginning, and observe the motions of all the great
   wheels of providence, we shall discern that they all tend hither. They
   are all as so many lines, whose course, if it be observed and
   accurately followed, will be found to centre here. It is so very plain
   in many things, that it would argue stupidity to deny it. This person,
   sent from God, came into the world with his commission and authority,
   to do his work, and to declare his mind. The Governor of the world, in
   all his great works towards Jews and Gentiles, down to the time of
   Christ's birth, has declared it. It is a plain and evident truth, that
   he who was born at Bethlehem, who dwelt at Nazareth and Capernaum, and
   who was crucified without the gates of Jerusalem, must be the great
   Messiah. Blessed are all they that believe in and confess him, and
   miserable are all that deny him. This shows the unreasonableness of the
   deists, who deny revealed religion, and of the Jews, who deny that this
   Jesus is the Messiah foretold and promised to their fathers.

   Here should any object, That it may be, some cunning men contrived this
   history, and these prophecies, on purpose to prove that he is the
   Messiah. To such it may be replied, How could such a thing be contrived
   by cunning men to point to Jesus Christ, long before he ever was born?
   How could they know that any such person would be born? And how could
   their subtlety help them to foresee and point at an event that was to
   come to pass many ages afterwards? For no fact can be more evident,
   than that the Jews had those writings long before Christ was born: as
   they have them still in great veneration, in all their dispersions
   through the world. They would never have received such a contrivance
   from Christians, to prove Jesus to be the Messiah, whom they always
   denied; and much less would they have been made to believe that they
   always had those books in their hands, if they had been an imposition.

   II. What has been said, affords a strong argument for the divine
   authority of the books of the Old Testament, from that admirable
   harmony there is in them, whereby they all point to the same thing. For
   we may see by what has been said, how all the parts of the Old
   Testament, though written by so many different penmen, and in ages so
   distant, harmonize one with another. All agree in one, and centre in
   the same event; which it was impossible for any one of them to know,
   but by divine revelation.

   Now, if the Old Testament was not inspired by God, what account can be
   given of such an agreement? for if these books were written without any
   divine direction, then none of these penmen knew that there would come
   such a person as Jesus Christ into the world; his coming was only a
   mere figment of their own brain: and if so, how happened it, that this
   figment of theirs came to pass ? How came a vain imagination of theirs,
   which they foretold without any manner of ground for their prediction,
   to be exactly fulfilled? and especially how did they come all to agree
   in it, all pointing exactly to the same thing, though many of them
   lived so many hundred years distant one from another?--This admirable
   consent and agreement in a future event, is therefore a clear and
   certain evidence of the divine authority of those writings.

   III. Hence we may learn how weak and ignorant the objection is, against
   the Old Testament being the word of God, because it consists so much of
   warlike histories and civil transactions. Here, say some, we have
   histories of their kings and rulers, their wars with neighbouring
   nations, and the changes that happened in their state and government:
   but other nations used to keep histories of their public affairs, as
   well as they; why then should we think that these histories which the
   Jews kept are the word of God, more than those of other people? What
   has been said, shows the folly and vanity of such an objection. For
   hereby it appears, that the case of these histories is very different
   from that of all others. This history alone gives us an account of the
   first original of all things; and this alone deduces things down to us
   in a wonderful series from that original, giving an idea of the grand
   scheme of Divine Providence, as tending to its great end. And, together
   with the doctrines and prophecies contained in it, the same book gives
   a view of the whole series of the great events of Divine Providence,
   from the origin to the consummation of all things; exhibiting an
   excellent and glorious account of the wise and holy designs of the
   supreme Governor in all.--No common history has had such penmen. This
   history was all written by men who came with evident signs and
   testimonies of their being prophets of the most high God, immediately
   inspired.--And though histories, yet containing those great events of
   providence by which it appears how God has been carrying on the
   glorious work of redemption from age to age, they are no less full of
   divine instruction, and those things that show forth Christ, and his
   glorious gospel, than the other parts of the Holy Scriptures.

   To object against a book's being divine, merely because it is
   historical, is a poor fancy; as if that could not be the word of God
   which gives an account of what is past; or as though it were not
   reasonable to suppose, that God, in a revelation he should give
   mankind, would give us any relation of the dispensations of his own
   providence. If so, it must be because his works are not worthy to be
   related: or because the scheme of his government, and the series of his
   dispensations towards his church, and the world he has made, is not
   worthy that any record should be kept of it.

   The objection, That it is a common thing for nations and kingdoms to
   write histories and keep records of their wars, and the revolutions
   that come to pass in their territories, is so far from being a weighty
   objection against the historical part of Scripture, as though it were
   not the word of God, that it is a strong argument in favour of it. For
   if the light of nature teaches all civilized nations to keep records of
   the events of their government and the series of their administrations,
   and to publish histories for the information of others, how much more
   may we expect that God would give the world a record of the
   dispensations of his government, which doubtless is infinitely more
   worthy of a history for our information? If wise kings have taken care
   that there should be good histories written of the nations over which
   they have reigned, shall we think it incredible, that Jesus Christ
   should take care that his church, which is his nation, his peculiar
   people, should have in their hands a certain infallible history of
   their nation, and of his government of them?

   If it had not been for the history of the Old Testament, how woefully
   should we have been left in the dark about many things which the church
   of God needs to know! How ignorant should we have been of God's
   dealings towards mankind, and towards his church, from the beginning!
   We should have been wholly in the dark about the creation of the world,
   the fall of man, the first rise and continued progress of the
   dispensations of grace towards fallen mankind. We should have known
   nothing how God at first set up a church in the world, and how it was
   preserved; after what manner he governed it from the beginning; how the
   light of the gospel first began to dawn in the world; how it increased,
   and how things were preparing for the coining of Christ.

   If we are Christians, we belong to that building of God that has been
   the subject of our discourse: but if it had not been for the history of
   the Old Testament, we should never have known what was the first
   occasion of God's going about this building, how the foundation of it
   was laid, and how it has gone on from the beginning. The times of the
   history of the Old Testament are mostly such as no other history
   includes; and therefore, if God had not taken care to give and preserve
   an account of these things for us, we should have been wholly without
   them.

   Those that object against the authority of the Old-Testament history,
   may as well object against Moses's account of the creation; for, in the
   former, we have a history of a work no less important, viz. the work of
   redemption. Yea, this is a far greater and more glorious work. If it be
   inquired which of the two works, that of creation, or that of
   providence, is greatest? it must be answered, the work of providence;
   but the work of redemption is the greatest of the works of
   providence.--And let those who make this objection consider what part
   of the Old-Testament history can be spared, without making a great
   breach in that thread or series of events by which this glorious work
   has been carried on.--This leads me to observe,

   IV. That, from what has been said, we may see much of the wisdom of God
   in the composition of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, i.e. in the
   parts of which it consists. Let us briefly take a view of the several
   parts of it, and of the need there was of them.

   It was necessary, for instance, that we should have some account of the
   creation of the world, of our first parents, and their primitive state;
   of the fall, of the old world, and its degeneracy; of the universal
   deluge, and the origin of nations after this destruction of mankind.

   It seems necessary, moreover, that there should be some account of the
   succession of the church of God from the beginning. God suffered all
   the world to degenerate, and took one nation only to be his people, to
   preserve the true worship and religion till the Saviour of the world
   should come. In them the world was gradually prepared for that great
   light, and those wonderful things of which he was to be the author.
   Thus they were a typical nation, that in them God might shadow forth
   and teach, as under a vail, all the future glories of the gospel. It
   was therefore necessary that we should have some account of this; how
   it was first effected by the call of Abraham, and by their being
   bond-slaves in Egypt, and how they were brought to Canaan. It was
   necessary that we should have some account of the revelation which God
   made of himself to that people, in giving their law, in the appointment
   of their typical worship, wherein the gospel is vailed, and of the
   formation of their civil and ecclesiastical state.

   It seems exceeding necessary that we should have some account of their
   being actually brought to Canaan, the country promised them and where
   they always dwelt; that we should have a history of the successions of
   the church of Israel, and of those providences towards them, which were
   most considerable and fullest of gospel mystery; that we should have
   some account of the promised external glory of that nation under David
   and Solomon, and a very particular account of David, whose history is
   so full of the gospel, and in whom began the race of their kings; and
   that we should have some account of the building of the temple, which
   was also full of gospel-mystery.

   And it is a matter of great consequence, that we should have some
   account of Israel's dividing from Judah, and of the ten tribes'
   captivity and utter rejection, and therefore a brief history of them
   till that time; that we should have an account of the succession of the
   kings of Judah, and of the church, till their captivity into Babylon;
   of their return from captivity, and resettlement in their own land,
   with the origin of the last state of the church before Christ came.

   A little consideration will convince any one, that all these things
   were necessary, and that none of them could be spared; and in the
   general, that it was necessary we should have a history of God's church
   till such times as are within the reach of human histories. It was of
   vast importance that we should have an inspired history of those times
   of the Jewish church, wherein there was kept up a more extraordinary
   intercourse between God and them, while he used to dwell among them as
   it were visibly, revealing himself by the Shechinah, by Urim and
   Thummim, and by prophecy, and so more immediately to order their
   affairs. And it was necessary that we should have some account of the
   great dispensations of God in prophecy, after the finishing of inspired
   history; for which it was needful that there should be a number of
   prophets raised who should foretell the coming of the Son of God, and
   the nature and glory of his kingdom, as so many harbingers to make way
   for him, and that their prophecies should remain in the church.

   It was also a matter of great consequence that the church should have a
   book of divine songs given by inspiration from God, wherein there
   should be a lively representation of the true spirit of devotion, of
   faith, hope, and divine love, of joy, resignation, humility, obedience,
   repentance, &c. as in the Psalms; also that we should have from God
   such books of moral instructions as we have in Proverbs and
   Ecclesiastes, relating to the affairs and state of mankind, and the
   concerns of human life, containing rules of true wisdom and prudence
   for our conduct in all circumstances; and that we should have
   particularly a song representing the great love between Christ and his
   spouse the church, adapted to the disposition and holy affections of a
   true christian soul towards Christ, and representing his grace and
   marvellous love to, and delight in, his people, as in Solomon's Song.
   It is important that we should have a book to teach us how to conduct
   ourselves under affliction, seeing the church of God here is in a
   militant state, and God's people through much tribulation enter into
   the kingdom of heaven. The church is for a long time under trouble,
   meets with fiery trials, and extreme sufferings, before her time of
   peace and rest in the latter ages of the world. Therefore God has given
   us a book most proper in these circumstances, the book of Job; and
   though written on occasion of the afflictions of a particular saint, it
   was probably at first given to the church in Egypt under her
   afflictions there; and is made use of by the apostle to comfort
   Christians under persecutions, James v. 11. "Ye have heard of the
   patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is
   very pitiful, and of tender mercy." God was also pleased, in this book
   of Job, to give some view of the ancient divinity before the giving of
   the law.

   Thus, from this brief review, I think it appears, that every part of
   the scriptures of the Old Testament is very useful and necessary, and
   no part of it can be spared without loss to the church. And therefore
   the wisdom of God is conspicuous in ordering, that the scriptures of
   the Old Testament should consist of those very books of which they do
   consist.

   Before I dismiss this particular, I would add, that it is very
   observable, that the history of the Old Testament is large and
   particular where the great affair of redemption required it; even where
   there was most done towards this work, most to typify Christ, and to
   prepare the way for him. Thus it is very particular in the history of
   Abraham and the other patriarchs; but very short in the account we have
   of the time which the children of Israel spent in Egypt. It is large in
   the account of the redemption out of Egypt, and the first settling of
   the affairs of the Jewish church and nation in the time of Moses and
   Joshua; but much shorter in the times of the judges. So again, it is
   large and particular in the times of David and Solomon, and then very
   short in the history of the ensuing reigns. Thus the accounts are large
   and short, just as there is more or less of the affair of redemption to
   be seen in them.

   V. From what has been said, we may see, that Christ and his redemption
   are the great subject of the whole Bible. Concerning the New Testament,
   the matter is plain; and by what has been said, it appears to be so
   also with respect to the Old Testament. Christ and his redemption is
   the great subject of the prophecies of the Old Testament, as has been
   shown. It has also been shown, that he is the great subject of the
   songs of the Old Testament; and the moral rules and precepts are all
   given in subordination to him. Christ and his redemption are also the
   great subject of the history of the Old Testament from the beginning
   all along; and even the history of the creation is brought in as an
   introduction to the history of redemption that immediately follows it.
   The whole book, both Old Testament and New, is filled up with the
   gospel; only with this difference, that the Old Testament contains the
   gospel under a vail, but the New contains it unvailed, so that we may
   see the glory of the Lord with open face.

   VI. By what has been said, we may see the usefulness and excellency of
   the Old Testament. Some are ready to look on the Old Testament as being
   out of date, and as if we in these days of the gospel have but little
   to do with it. But this is a very great mistake, arising from want of
   observing the nature and design of the Old Testament, which, if it were
   observed, would appear full of the gospel of Christ, and would in an
   excellent manner illustrate and confirm the glorious doctrines and
   promises of the New Testament. Those parts of the Old Testament which
   are commonly looked upon as containing the least divine instruction,
   are mines and treasures of gospel-knowledge; and the reason why they
   are thought to contain so little is, because persons do but
   superficially read them. The treasures which are hid underneath are not
   observed. They only look on the top of the ground, and suddenly pass a
   judgment that there is nothing there. But they never dig into the mine:
   if they did, they would find it richly stored with what is more
   valuable than silver and gold, and would be abundantly requited for
   their pains.

   What has been said, may show us what a precious treasure God has
   committed into our hands, in that he has given us the Bible. How little
   do most persons consider what a privilege they enjoy, in the possession
   of that holy book, the Bible, which they have in their hands, and may
   converse with as they please. What an excellent book is this, and how
   far exceeding all human writings! It reveals God to us, and gives us a
   view of the grand design and glorious scheme of providence from the
   beginning of the world, either in history or prophecy. It reveals the
   great Redeemer, his glorious redemption, and the various steps by which
   God accomplishes it from the first foundation to the top-stone! Shall
   we prize a history which gives us a clear account of some great earthly
   prince, or mighty warrior, as of an Alexander, a Caesar, or a
   Marlborough? and shall we not prize the history that God gives us of
   the glorious kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, the Prince and Saviour,
   and of the great transactions of that King of kings, and Lord of
   armies, the Lord mighty in battle; and what he has wrought for the
   redemption of his chosen people?

   VII. What has been said, may make us sensible how much most persons are
   to blame for their inattentive, unobservant way of reading the
   Scriptures. How much profitable matter do the Scriptures contain, if it
   were but observed! The Bible is the most comprehensive book in the
   world. But what will all this signify to us, if we read it without
   observing what is the drift of the Holy Ghost in it? The psalmist, begs
   of God, Psal. cxix. 18. "That he would enlighten his eyes that he might
   behold wondrous things out of his law." The Scriptures are full of
   wondrous things. Those histories which are too commonly read as if they
   were only private concerns of particular persons, such as of Abraham,
   Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph; of Ruth, Joshua, the Judges, David and the
   Israelitish princes, are accounts of vastly greater things, things of
   greater importance and more extensive concernment, than they who read
   them are commonly aware of.

   The histories of Scripture are but too commonly read, as if they were
   written only to entertain men's fancies, when the infinitely great
   things contained in them are passed over without notice. Whatever
   treasures the Scriptures contain, we shall be never the better for them
   if we do not observe them. He that has a Bible, and does not observe
   what it contains, is like a man who has a box full of silver and gold,
   and does not know it, nor observe that it is any thing more than a
   vessel filled with common stones. He will be never the better for his
   treasure; and so might as well be without it. He who has plenty of the
   choicest food stored up in his house, and does not know it, will never
   taste what he has, and will be as likely to starve as if his house were
   empty.

   VIII. What has been said, may show us how great a person Jesus Christ
   is, and how great his errand into the world, seeing there was so much
   done to prepare the way for his coming. God had been preparing the way
   for him through all ages of the world from the very beginning. If we
   had notice of a certain stranger being about to come into a country,
   and should observe that a great preparation was made for him, great
   things were done, many alterations made in the state of the whole
   country, many hands employed, persons of great note engaged in making
   the preparation; and all the affairs and concerns of the country
   ordered so as to be subservient to the design of entertaining that
   person, it would be natural for us to think, surely this is some
   extraordinary person, and it is some very great business that he is
   coming upon. How great a person then must he be, for whose coming the
   great God of heaven and earth, and Governor of all things, spent four
   thousand years in preparing the way! Soon after the world was created,
   and from age to age, he has been doing great things, bringing mighty
   events to pass, accomplishing wonders without number, often overturning
   the world in order to it. He has been causing every thing in the state
   of mankind, and all revolutions and changes in the habitable world,
   from generation to generation, to be subservient to this great
   design.--Surely this must be some great and extraordinary person, and a
   great work indeed it must needs be, about which he is coming.

   We read, (Matt. xxi. 8-10.) when Christ was coming into Jerusalem, and
   multitudes ran before him, having cut down branches of palm-trees, and
   strewed them in the way; and others spread their garments in the way,
   crying, " Hosanna to the Son of David," that the whole city was moved,
   saying, Who is this? They wondered who that extraordinary person should
   be, that there should be such preparation made on occasion of his
   coming into the city. But if we consider, what great things were done
   in all ages to prepare the way for Christ's coming, and how the world
   was often overturned to make way for it, much more may we cry out, Who
   is this? What great person is this? and say, (as in Psal. xxiv. 8, 10.)
   "Who is this King of glory," that God should show such respect, and put
   such vast honour upon him? Surely this person is honourable in God's
   eyes, and greatly beloved of him; and surely it is a grand errand upon
   which he is sent.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      PERIOD II.

   FROM CHRIST'S INCARNATION TO HIS RESURRECTION.

   Having shown how the work of redemption was carried on through the
   first period, from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ, I come
   now to the second period, viz. the time of Christ's humiliation, or the
   space from his incarnation to his resurrection. And this is the most
   remarkable article of time that ever was or ever will be. Though it was
   but between thirty and forty years, yet more was done in it than had
   been done from the beginning of the world to that time. We have
   observed, that all which had been done from the fall to the incarnation
   of Christ, was only preparatory for what was now done. And it may also
   be observed, that all which was done before the beginning of time, in
   the eternal counsels between the persons of the blessed Trinity,
   chiefly respected this period. We therefore now proceed to consider the
   second proposition, viz.

   That during the time of Christ's humiliation, from his incarnation to
   his resurrection, the purchase of redemption was made.

   Though many things had been done in the affair of redemption, though
   millions of sacrifices had been offered; yet nothing was done to
   purchase redemption before Christ's incarnation. No part of the
   purchase was made, no part of the price was offered till now. But as
   soon as Christ was incarnate, the purchase began.--And the whole time
   of Christ's humiliation, till the morning that he rose from the dead,
   was taken up in this purchase. Then the purchase was entirely and
   completely finished. As nothing was done before Christ's incarnation,
   so nothing was done after his resurrection, to purchase redemption for
   men. Nor will there ever be any thing more done to all eternity. That
   very moment when the human nature of Christ ceased to remain under the
   power of death, the utmost farthing was paid of the price of salvation
   for every one of the elect.

   But for the more orderly and regular consideration of the great things
   done by our Redeemer to purchase redemption for us, I would speak of
   his becoming incarnate to capacitate himself for this purchase;--and of
   the purchase itself.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   OF CHRIST'S INCARNATION.

   christ became incarnate, or, which is the same thing, became man, to
   put himself in a capacity for working out our redemption. For though
   Christ, as God, was infinitely sufficient for the work, yet to his
   being in an immediate capacity for it, it was needful that he should
   not only be God, but man. If Christ had remained only in the divine
   nature, he would not have been in a capacity to have purchased our
   salvation; not from any imperfection of the divine nature, but by
   reason of its absolute and infinite perfection: for Christ, merely as
   God, was not capable either of that obedience or suffering that was
   needful. The divine nature is not capable of suffering; for it is
   infinitely above all suffering. Neither is it capable of obedience to
   that law which was given to man. It is as impossible that one who is
   only God, should obey the law that was given to man, as it is that he
   should suffer man's punishment.

   And it was necessary not only that Christ should take upon him a
   created nature, but that he should take upon him our nature. It would
   not have sufficed for Christ to have become an angel, and to have
   obeyed and suffered in the angelic nature. But it was necessary that he
   should become a man, upon three accounts.

   1. It was needful in order to answer the law, that the very nature to
   which the law was given, should obey it. Man's law could not be
   answered, but by being obeyed by man. God insisted upon it, that the
   law which he had given to man shall be honoured, and fulfilled by the
   nature of man, otherwise the law could not be answered for men. The
   words, "Thou shalt not eat thereof," &c. were spoken to the race of
   mankind, to the human nature; and therefore the human nature must
   fulfil them.

   2. It was needful to answer the law that the nature that sinned should
   die. These words, "Thou shalt surely die, [626] " respect the human
   nature. The same nature to which the command was given, was that to
   which the threatening was directed.

   3. God saw meet, that the same world which was the stage of man's fall
   and ruin, should also be the stage of his redemption. We read often of
   his coming into the world to save sinners, and of God's sending him
   into the world for this purpose.--It was needful that he should come
   into this sinful, miserable, undone world, in order to restore and save
   it. For man's recovery, it was needful that he should come down to man,
   to man's proper habitation, and that he should tabernacle with us: John
   i. 14. "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us."

   Concerning the incarnation of Christ, I would observe these following
   things.

   I. The incarnation itself; in which especially two things are to be
   considered, viz.

   1. His conception; which was in the womb of one of the race of mankind,
   whereby he became truly the Son of man, as he was often called. He was
   one of the posterity of Adam, a child of Abraham, and a son of David,
   according to God's promise. But his conception was--not in the way of
   ordinary generation, but--by the power of the Holy Ghost. Christ was
   formed in the womb of the Virgin, of the substance of her body, by the
   power of the Spirit of God. So that he was the immediate son of the
   woman, but not the immediate son of any male whatsoever; and so was the
   seed of the woman, and the son of a virgin, one that had never known
   man.

   2. His birth.--Though the conception of Christ was supernatural, yet
   after he was conceived, his human nature was gradually perfected in the
   womb of the virgin, in a way of natural progress; and so his birth was
   in the way of nature. But his conception being supernatural, by the
   power of the Holy Ghost, he was both conceived and born without sin.

   II. The second thing I would observe concerning the incarnation of
   Christ, is the fulness of the time in which it was accomplished. It was
   after things had been preparing for it from the very first fall of
   mankind, and when all things were ready. It came to pass at a time,
   which in infinite wisdom was the most fit and proper: Gal. iv. 4. "But
   when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
   woman, made under the law."

   It was now the most proper time on every account. Any time before the
   flood would not have been so fit a time. For then the mischief and ruin
   that the fall brought on mankind, was not so fully seen. The curse did
   not so fully come on the earth before the flood, as it did afterwards:
   for though the ground was cursed in a great measure before, yet it
   pleased God that the curse should once, before the restoration by
   Christ, be executed in an universal destruction, even of the very form
   of the earth, that the dire effects of the fall might be seen before
   the recovery. Though mankind were mortal before the flood, yet their
   lives were almost a thousand years in length, a kind of immortality in
   comparison with what the life of man is now. It pleased God, that the
   curse, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, should have its
   full accomplishment, and be executed in its greatest degree on mankind,
   before the Redeemer came to purchase a never-ending life.

   It would not have been so fit a time for Christ to come, before Moses;
   for till then mankind were not so universally apostatized from the true
   God; they were not fallen universally into heathenish darkness; and so
   the need of Christ, the light of the world, was not so evident. The
   woeful consequence of the fall with respect to man's mortality, was not
   so fully manifest till then; for man's life was not so shortened as to
   be reduced to the present standard, till about Moses's time.

   It was most fit that the time of the Messiah's coming should not be
   till all nations, but the children of Israel, had lain long in
   heathenish darkness; that the remedilessness of their disease might by
   long experience be seen, and so the absolute necessity of the heavenly
   Physician.

   Another reason why Christ did not come soon after the flood probably
   was, that the earth might be full of people, that he might have the
   more extensive kingdom, that the effects of his light, power, and
   grace, might be glorified, and that his victory over Satan might be
   attended with the more glory in the multitude of his conquests. It was
   also needful that the coming of Christ should be many ages after Moses,
   that the church might be prepared by the Messiah's being long
   prefigured, foretold, and expected. It was not proper that Christ
   should come before the Babylonish captivity, because Satan's kingdom
   was not then come to its height. The heathen world before that
   consisted of lesser kingdoms. But God saw meet that the Messiah should
   come in the time of one of the four great monarchies. Nor was it proper
   that he should come in the time of the Babylonish, the Persian, or the
   Grecian monarchy. It was the will of God that his Son should make his
   appearance in the world in the time of the Roman, the greatest and
   strongest monarchy, which was Satan's visible kingdom in the world;
   that, by overcoming this, he might visibly overcome Satan's kingdom in
   its greatest strength and glory, and so obtain the more complete
   triumph over Satan himself.

   It was not proper that Christ should come before the Babylonish
   captivity. For, before that, we have not histories of the state of the
   heathen world, to give us an idea of the need of a Saviour. Besides,
   learning did not much flourish, and so there had not been opportunity
   to show the insufficiency of human learning and wisdom to reform and
   save mankind. Again, the Jews were not dispersed over the world, as
   they were afterwards; and so things were not prepared in this respect
   for the coming of Christ. The necessity of abolishing the Jewish
   dispensation was not then so apparent as it was afterwards, by reason
   of the dispersion of the Jews; neither was the way prepared for the
   propagation of the gospel, as it was afterwards, by the same
   dispersion. Many other things might be mentioned, by which it would
   appear, that no other season before that very time in which Christ
   came, would have been proper for his appearing.

   III. The next thing that I would observe concerning the incarnation of
   Christ, is the greatness of this event. Christ's incarnation was a
   greater and more wonderful thing than ever had yet come to pass. The
   creation of the world was a very great thing, but not so great as the
   incarnation of Christ. It was a great thing for God to make the
   creature, but not so great as for the Creator himself to become a
   creature. We have spoken of many great things that were accomplished
   between the fall of man and the incarnation of Christ: but God becoming
   man was greater than all. Then the greatest person was born that ever
   was or ever will be.

   IV. Next observe, concerning the incarnation of Christ, the remarkable
   circumstances of it. He was born of a poor virgin; a pious holy person,
   but poor, as appeared by her offering at her purification: Luke ii. 24.
   "And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of
   the Lord, A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons." Which refers
   to Lev. v. 7. " And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall
   bring two turtle-doves or two young pigeons." And this poor virgin was
   espoused to a husband who was but a poor man. Though they were both of
   the royal family of David, which was the most honourable, and Joseph
   was the rightful heir to the crown; yet the family was reduced to a
   very low state; which is represented by the tabernacle of David being
   fallen, Amos ix. 11. "In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of
   David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will
   raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old."

   He was born in the town of Bethlehem, as was foretold: (Mic. v. 2.) and
   there was a very remarkable providence of God to bring about the
   fulfilment of this prophecy, the taxing of all the world by Augustus
   Caesar, (Luke ii.) He was born in a very low condition, even in a
   stable, and laid in a manger.

   V. Observe the concomitants of this great event.--And,

   1. The return of the Spirit; which indeed began a little before, but
   yet was given on occasion of his birth. I have before observed how the
   spirit of prophecy ceased, not long after Malachi. From about the same
   time visions and immediate revelations ceased also. But on this
   occasion, they were granted anew, and the Spirit in these operations
   returns again. The first revealed instance of its restoration is the
   vision of Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, (Luke i.) The next
   is the vision which the Virgin Mary had, (ibid.) The third is the
   vision which Joseph had, (Matt. i.) In the next place, the Spirit was
   given to Elisabeth, (Luke i. 41.) Next, it was given to Mary, as
   appears by her song, (Luke i. 46, &c.) Then to Zacharias again, ( ibid.
   ver. 64.) Then it was sent to the shepherds, (Luke ii. 9.) Then it was
   given to Simeon, (Luke ii. 25.) Then to Anna, ( ver. 36.) Then to the
   wise men in the east. Then to Joseph again, directing him to flee into
   Egypt; and after that directing his return.

   2. The next concomitant of Christ's incarnation is, the great notice
   that was taken of it in heaven, and on earth. How it was noticed by the
   glorious inhabitants of the heavenly world, appears by their joyful
   songs on this occasion, heard by the shepherds in the night. This was
   the greatest event of Providence that ever the angels had beheld. We
   read of their singing praises when they saw the formation of this lower
   world: Job xxxviii. 7. "When the morning-stars sang together, and all
   the sons of God shouted for joy." And so they do, on this much greater
   occasion, the birth of the Son of God, who is the Creator of the world.

   The glorious angels had all along expected this event. They had taken
   great notice of the prophecies and promises of these things: for we are
   told, that they desire to look into the affairs of redemption, 1 Pet.
   i. 12. They had been the ministers of Christ in this affair of
   redemption, in all the several steps of it from the very fall of man;
   as in God's dealings with Abraham, with Jacob, and with the Israelites.
   And doubtless they had long joyfully expected the coming of Christ; but
   now they see it accomplished, and therefore greatly rejoice, and sing
   praises on this occasion.

   Notice was taken of it by Elisabeth and the Virgin Mary before the
   birth of Christ; not to say by John the Baptist before he was born,
   when he leaped in his mother's womb as it were for joy, at the voice of
   the salutation of Mary. Elisabeth and Mary most joyfully praise God
   together, with Christ and his forerunner in their wombs, and the Holy
   Spirit in their souls. And afterwards what joyful notice is taken of
   this event by the shepherds, and by those holy persons, Zacharias, and
   Simeon, and Anna! How do they praise God on the occasion! Thus the
   inhabitants of heaven, and the church on earth, unite in their joy and
   praise on this occasion.

   Great part of the universe takes joyful notice of the incarnation of
   Christ. Heaven takes notice of it, and the inhabitants sing for joy.
   This lower world of mankind, both Jews and Gentiles, take notice of it.
   It pleased God to put honour on his Son, by wonderfully stirring up
   some of the wisest of the Gentiles to come a long journey to see and
   worship him at his birth. They were led by a miraculous star,
   signifying the birth of that glorious person who is the bright and
   morning-star, going before, and leading them to the very place where
   the, young child was. Some think they were instructed by the prophecy
   of Balaam, who dwelt in the eastern parts, and who foretold Christ's
   coming as a star that should rise out of Jacob. Or they might be
   instructed by that general expectation there was of the Messiah's
   coming about that time, from the prophecies the Jews had of him in
   their dispersions in all parts of the world.

   3. The next concomitant of the birth of Christ was his circumcision.
   But this may more properly be spoken of under another head, and so I
   will not insist upon it now.

   4. The next concomitant was his first coming into the second temple,
   when an infant, on occasion of the purification of the blessed Virgin.
   We read, Hagg. ii. 7. "The desire of all nations shall come, and I will
   fill this house, (or temple) with glory." And in Mal. iii. 1."The Lord,
   whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of
   the covenant." And now was the first instance of the fulfilment of
   these prophecies.

   5. The last concomitant I shall mention is the sceptre's departing from
   Judah, in the death of Herod the Great. The sceptre had never totally
   departed from Judah till now. Judah's sceptre was greatly diminished in
   the revolt of the ten tribes in Jeroboam's time; and the sceptre
   departed from Israel or Ephraim at the time of the captivity of the ten
   tribes by Shalmaneser. But it remained in the tribe of Judah, under the
   kings of the house of David. And when the tribes of Judah and Benjamin
   were carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar, the sceptre of Judah ceased for
   a little while, till the return from the captivity under Cyrus: and
   then, though they were not an independent government, as they had been
   before, but owed fealty to the kings of Persia; yet their governor was
   of themselves, who had the power of life and death, and they were
   governed by their own laws; and so Judah had a lawgiver from between
   his feet during the Persian and Grecian monarchies. Towards the latter
   part of the Grecian monarchy, the people were governed by kings of
   their own, of the race of the Maccabees, for near a hundred years; and
   after that they were subdued by the Romans. But yet the Romans suffered
   them to be governed by their own laws, and to have a king of their own,
   Herod the Great, who reigned about forty years, and governed with
   proper kingly authority, only paying homage to the Romans. But
   presently after Christ was born he died, as we have an account, Matt.
   ii. 19. and Archelaus succeeded him; but was soon put down by the Roman
   emperor; and then the sceptre departed from Judah. There were no more
   temporal kings of Judah after that, neither had that people their
   governors from the midst of themselves, but were ruled by a Roman
   governor sent among them; and they ceased to have the power of life and
   death among themselves. Hence the Jews say to Pilate, " It is not
   lawful for us to put any man to death," John xviii. 31. Thus the
   sceptre departed from Judah when Shiloh came.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [626] Genesis ii. 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   THE PURCHASE OF REDEMPTION

   Having thus considered Christ's coming into the world, and his taking
   on him our nature, to put himself in a capacity for the purchase of
   redemption, I come now to show what is intended by the purchase of
   redemption to make some general observations concerning those things by
   which this purchase was made--and then to consider those things more
   particularly which Christ did and suffered, by which that purchase was
   made.

      SECT. I.

   The purchase itself, what?

   By Christ purchasing redemption, two things are intended, his
   satisfaction, and his merit. All is done by the price that Christ lays
   down, which does two things: it pays our debt, and so it satisfies; it
   procures our title to happiness, and so it merits. The satisfaction of
   Christ is to free us from misery, and the merit of Christ is to
   purchase happiness for us.

   The word purchase, in this connexion, is taken either more strictly or
   more largely. It is oftentimes used more strictly, to signify only the
   merit of Christ; and sometimes more largely, to signify both his
   satisfaction and merit. Indeed most of the words used in this affair
   have various significations. Thus sometimes divines use merit for the
   whole price that Christ offered, both satisfactory, and positively
   meritorious. And so the word satisfaction is sometimes used, not only
   for his propitiation, but also for his meritorious obedience. For in
   some sense, not only suffering the penalty, but positively obeying, is
   needful to satisfy the law. The reason of this various use of these
   terms seems to be, that satisfaction and merit do not differ so much
   really as relatively. They both consist in paying a valuable price, a
   price of infinite value: but only that price, as it respects a debt to
   be paid, is called satisfaction; and as it respects a positive good to
   be obtained, is called merit. The difference between paying a debt and
   making a positive purchase is more relative than essential. He who lays
   down a price to pay a debt, does in some sense make a purchase: he
   purchases liberty from the obligation. And he who lays down a price to
   purchase a good, does as it were make satisfaction: he satisfies the
   conditional demands of him to whom he pays it. This may suffice
   concerning what is meant by the purchase of Christ.

      SECT. II.

   Some general observations concerning those things by which this
   purchase was made.

   1. And here observe, That whatever in Christ had the nature of
   satisfaction, was by virtue of the suffering or humiliation that was in
   it; but whatever had the nature of merit, was by virtue of the
   obedience or righteousness there was in it. The satisfaction of Christ
   consists in his answering the demands of the law on man, which were
   consequent on the breach of the law. These were answered by suffering
   the penalty of the law. The merit of Christ consists in what he did to
   answer the demands, which were prior to man's breach of the law, or to
   fulfil what the law demanded before man sinned, which was obedience.

   The satisfaction or propitiation of Christ consists either in his
   suffering evil, or his being subject to abasement. Christ did not only
   make satisfaction by proper suffering, but by whatever had the nature
   of humiliation and abasement of circumstances. Thus he made
   satisfaction by continuing under the power of death, while he lay
   buried in the grave; though neither his body nor soul properly endured
   any suffering after he was dead. Whatever Christ was subject to that
   was the judicial fruit of sin, had the nature of satisfaction for sin.
   But not only proper suffering, but all abasement and depression of the
   state and circumstances of mankind below its primitive honour and
   dignity, such as his body remaining under death, his body and soul
   remaining separate, &c. are the judicial fruits of sin. And all that
   Christ did in his state of humiliation, that had the nature of
   obedience, moral virtue or goodness, had the nature of merit, in it,
   and was part of the price with which he purchased happiness for the
   elect.

   2. Both Christ's satisfaction for sin, and also his meriting happiness
   by his righteousness, were carried on through the whole time of his
   humiliation. Christ's satisfaction for sin was not by his last
   sufferings only, though it was principally by them; but all his
   sufferings, and all his humiliation, from the first moment of his
   incarnation to his resurrection, were propitiatory or satisfactory.
   Christ's satisfaction was chiefly by his death, because his sufferings
   and humiliation in that was greatest. But all his other sufferings, and
   all his other humiliation, all along had the nature of satisfaction;
   the mean circumstances in which he was born; his being born of a poor
   virgin, in a stable, and laid in a manger; his taking the human nature
   upon him in its low state, and under those infirmities brought upon it
   by the fall; his being born in the form of sinful flesh, &c. And so all
   his sufferings in his infancy and childhood, and all that labour,
   contempt, reproach, temptation, and difficulty of any kind which he
   suffered through the whole course of his life, was of a propitiatory
   and satisfactory nature.--And so his purchase of happiness by his
   righteousness was also carried on through the whole time of his
   humiliation till his resurrection: not only in that obedience he
   performed through the course of his life, but also in the obedience he
   performed in laying down his life.

   3. It was by the same things that Christ hath satisfied God's justice,
   and also purchased eternal happiness. He did not make satisfaction by
   some things, and then work out righteousness by other different things;
   but in the same acts by which he wrought out righteousness, he also
   made satisfaction, but only taken in a different relation. One and the
   same act of Christ, considered with respect to the obedience there was
   in it, was part of his righteousness, and purchased heaven: but
   considered with respect to the self-denial, and difficulty, and
   humiliation, with which he performed it, had the nature of satisfaction
   for sin, and procured our pardon. Thus his going about doing good,
   preaching the gospel, and teaching his disciples, was a part of his
   righteousness, and the purchase of heaven, as it was done in obedience
   to the Father; and the same was a part of his satisfaction, as he did
   it with great labour, trouble, and weariness, and under great
   temptations exposing himself hereby to reproach and contempt. So his
   laving down his life had the nature of satisfaction to God's offended
   justice, considered as his bearing punishment in our stead: but
   considered as an act of obedience to God, who had given him this
   command, that he should lay down his life for sinners, it was a part of
   his righteousness and purchase, and as much the principal part of his
   righteousness as it was the principal part of his satisfaction. And to
   instance in his circumcision, what he suffered in it, had the nature of
   satisfaction: the blood that was shed therein was propitiatory blood;
   but as it was a conformity to the law of Moses, it was part of his
   meritorious righteousness. Though it was not properly the act of human
   nature, he being an infant; yet the human nature being the subject of
   it, and being the act of his person, it was accepted as an act of his
   obedience, as our mediator.--And even his being born in such a low
   condition, has the nature of satisfaction by reason of the humiliation
   that was in it; and of righteousness, as it was the act of his person
   in obedience to the Father, what the will of the human nature did
   acquiesce in, though there was no act of the will of the human nature
   prior to it.--These things may suffice to have been observed in
   general, concerning the purchase Christ made of redemption.

      SECT. III.

   Those things in particular by which the purchase was made.--Christ's
   obedience and righteousness.

   I now proceed to consider the things that passed during the time of
   Christ's humiliation, and first, with respect to his obedience and
   righteousness. And this is subject to a threefold distribution. I shall
   therefore consider his obedience, with respect to the laws which he
   obeyed--the different stages of his life in which he performed it--and
   the virtues he exercised in his obedience.

   I. The first distribution of the acts of Christ's righteousness is with
   respect to the laws which he obeyed. But here it must be observed in
   general, that all the precepts which Christ obeyed may be reduced to
   one law, and that is what the apostle calls the law of works, Rom. iii.
   27. Every command that Christ obeyed may be reduced to that great and
   everlasting law of God that is contained in the covenant of works, that
   eternal rule of right which God had established between himself and
   mankind. Christ came into the world to fulfil and answer the covenant
   of works; that is, the covenant that is to stand for ever as a rule of
   judgment. The covenant that we had broken, was the covenant that must
   be fulfilled.

   This law of works indeed includes all the laws of God that ever have
   been given to mankind; for it is a general rule of the law of works,
   and indeed of the law of nature, That God is to be obeyed, and that he
   must be submitted to in whatever positive precept he is pleased to
   give. It is a rule of the law of works, That men should obey their
   earthly parents: and it is certainly as much a rule of the same law,
   That we should obey our heavenly Father: and so the law of works
   requires obedience to all the positive commands of God. It required
   Adam's obedience to that positive command, Not to eat of the forbidden
   fruit; and it required obedience of the Jews to all the positive
   commands of their institution. When God commanded Jonah to arise and go
   to Nineveh, the law of works required him to obey: and so it required
   Christ's obedience to all the positive commands which God gave him.

   But, more particularly, the commands of God which Christ obeyed, were
   of three kinds; they were such as he was subject to either merely as
   man, or as he was a Jew, or purely as Mediator.

   1. He obeyed those commands which he was subject to merely as man.
   These were the commands of the moral law, which was the same with that
   which was given at mount Sinai, written in two tables of stone, which
   are obligatory on mankind of all ages and all nations of the world.

   2. He obeyed all those laws he was subject to as he was a Jew. Thus he
   was subject to the ceremonial law, and was conformed to it. He was
   conformed to it in his being circumcised the eighth day; and he
   strictly obeyed it in going up to Jerusalem to the temple three times a
   year; at least after he was come to the age of twelve years, which
   seems to have been the age when the males began to go up to the temple.
   And so Christ constantly attended the service of the temple, and of the
   synagogues.

   To this head of his obedience may be reduced his submission to John's
   baptism. For it was a special command to the Jews, to go forth to John
   the Baptist, and be baptized of him; and therefore Christ, being a Jew,
   was subject to this command: and therefore, when he came to be baptized
   of John, and John objected, that he had more need to come to him to be
   baptized of him, he gives this reason for it, That it was needful that
   he should do it, that he might fulfil all righteousness. (See Matt.
   iii. 13-15.)

   3. Christ was subject to the mediatorial law; or that which related
   purely to his mediatorial office. Such were the commands which the
   Father gave him to teach such doctrines, to preach the gospel, to work
   such miracles, to call such disciples, to appoint such ordinances, and
   finally to lay down his life: for he did all these things in obedience
   to the commands he had received of the Father, as he often tells us,
   (John x. 18. xiv. 31.) These commands he was not subject to merely as
   man; for they did not belong to other men: nor yet was he subject to
   them as a Jew; for they were no part of the Mosaic law: but they were
   commands he had received of the Father, that purely respected his
   mediatorial office.

   Christ's righteousness, by which he merited heaven for himself, and all
   who believe in him, consists principally in his obedience to this
   mediatorial law: for in fulfilling this law consisted his chief work
   and business in the world. The history of the evangelists is chiefly
   taken up in giving an account of his obedience to this law. This part
   of his obedience was attended with the greatest difficulty; and
   therefore his obedience in it was most meritorious. What Christ had to
   do in the world by virtue of his being Mediator, was infinitely more
   difficult than what he had to do merely as a man, or as a Jew. To his
   obedience to this mediatorial law belongs his going through his last
   sufferings, beginning with his agony in the garden, and ending with his
   resurrection.

   As the obedience of the first Adam, wherein his righteousness would
   have consisted, if he had stood, would have mainly consisted in his
   obedience to that special law to which he was subject as moral head and
   surety of mankind, even the command of abstaining from the tree of
   knowledge of good and evil; so the obedience of the second Adam,
   wherein his righteousness consists, lies mainly in his obedience to
   that special law to which he was subject as mediator and surety for
   man.

   Before I proceed to the next distribution of Christ's righteousness, I
   would observe three things concerning his obedience to these laws.

   1. He performed that obedience to them which was in every respect
   perfect. It was perfect with respect to the work commanded; and the
   principle from which he obeyed. It was perfect with respect to the end
   he acted for; he never had any by-ends, but aimed perfectly at such as
   the law of God required. It was perfect with respect to the manner of
   performance: every circumstance of each act was perfectly conformed to
   the command. It was perfect with respect to the degree of the
   performance: he acted wholly up to the rule.--It was perfect with
   respect to the constancy of obedience, without any interruption; and
   with respect to perseverance. He held out in perfect obedience to the
   very end, in all the changes he passed through, and all the trials that
   were before him.

   The meritoriousness of Christ's obedience, depends on the perfection of
   it. If it had failed in any instance, it could not have been
   meritorious: for imperfect obedience is not accepted as any obedience
   at all in the sight of the law of works, to which Christ was subject.
   That is not accepted as obedience to a law that does not fully answer
   it.

   2. Christ's obedience was performed through the greatest trials and
   temptations that ever any obedience was. His obedience was attended
   with the greatest difficulties, and most extreme abasement; which was
   another thing that rendered it more meritorious and thankworthy. To
   obey another when his commands are easy, is not so worthy, as it is to
   obey when it cannot be done without great difficulty.

   3. He performed this obedience with infinite respect to God, and the
   honour of his law. The obedience he performed was with infinitely
   greater love to God, and regard to his authority, than that of angels.
   The angels perform their obedience with a sinless perfection of love;
   but Christ performed his with infinite love. Though the human nature of
   Christ was not capable of love absolutely infinite, yet Christ's
   obedience in that nature, is the obedience of his person, as God-man;
   and therefore there was infinite love manifest in that obedience. And
   this, together with the infinite dignity of the person who obeyed,
   rendered his obedience infinitely meritorious.

   II. The second distribution of the acts of Christ's obedience, is with
   respect to the different parts of his life, wherein they were
   performed. And in this respect they may be divided into those which
   were performed in private life, and those which were performed in his
   public ministry.

   1st, Those acts he performed during his private life.--He was perfectly
   obedient in his childhood. He infinitely differed from other children,
   who, as soon as they begin to act, begin to sin and rebel. He was
   subject to his earthly parents, though he was Lord of all, Luke ii. 51.
   and was found about his Father's business even when a child, Luke ii.
   42.--He then began to fulfil the mediatorial law, which the Father had
   given him. He continued his private life for about thirty years,
   dwelling at Nazareth in the house of his reputed father Joseph, where
   he served God in a private capacity, and in following a mechanical
   trade, the business of a carpenter.

   2dly, Those acts which he performed during his public ministry, which
   began when he was about thirty years of age, and continued for the
   three last years and a half of his life.--Most of the evangelic history
   is taken up in giving an account of what passed during that time.
   Indeed all the history of Matthew, except the two first chapters; the
   whole of Mark; all the gospel of John; and all of Luke, except the two
   first chapters; excepting also what we find in the evangelists
   concerning the ministry of John the Baptist. Christ's first appearing
   in his public ministry, is what is often called his coming in
   Scripture. Thus John speaks of Christ's coming as future, though he had
   been born long before.

   Concerning the public ministry of Christ, I would observe the following
   things.

   1. The forerunner of Christ's coming in his public ministry was John
   the Baptist. He came preaching repentance for the remission of sins, to
   make way for Christ's coming, agreeable to the prophecies of him, Isa.
   xl. 3-5. and Matt. iv. 5, 6. It is supposed that John the Baptist began
   his ministry about three years and a half before Christ; so that John's
   ministry and Christ's put together, made seven years, which was the
   last of Daniel's weeks; and this time is intended in Dan. ix. 27. "He
   will confirm the covenant with many for one week." Christ came in the
   midst of this week of years, as Daniel foretold,"And in the midst of
   the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease." [627]

   John the Baptist's ministry consisted principally in preaching the law,
   to awaken and convince men of sin, to prepare them for the coming of
   Christ, and to comfort them, as the law is to prepare the heart for the
   entertainment of the gospel. A very remarkable outpouring of the Spirit
   of God attended John's ministry; and the effect of it was, that
   Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, were
   awakened and convinced. They went out to him, and submitted to his
   baptism, confessing their sins. John was the greatest of all the
   prophets who came before Christ, Matt. xi. 11. "Among those that are
   born of women, there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist;"
   i.e. he had the most honourable office. He was as the morning-star,
   which is the harbinger of the approaching day, and forerunner of the
   rising sun. The other prophets were stars that gave light in the night;
   but those stars went out on the approach of the gospel-day. Now the
   coming of Christ being very nigh, the morning-star comes before him,
   the brightest of all the stars, as John the Baptist was, in the sense
   mentioned, the greatest of all the prophets. And when Christ came in
   his public ministry, the light of that morning-star decreased too; as
   we see, when the sun rises, it diminishes the light of the
   morning-star. So John the Baptist says of himself, John iii. 30. "He
   must increase, but I must decrease." And soon after Christ began his
   public ministry, John the Baptist was put to death; as the morning-star
   is visible a little while after the sun is risen, yet soon goes out.

   2. Christ's entrance on his public ministry was by baptism, followed
   with the temptation in the wilderness. His baptism was as it were his
   solemn inauguration, by which he entered on his ministry; and was
   attended with his being anointed with the Holy Ghost, in a solemn and
   visible manner, the Holy Ghost descending upon him symbolically, in a
   visible shape like a dove, attended with a voice from heaven, saying,
   "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," Matt. iii. 16, 17.
   After this he was led by the devil into the wilderness. Satan made a
   violent attack upon him at his first entrance on his work; and now he
   had a remarkable trial of his obedience; but he got the victory. He who
   had such success with the first Adam, had none with the second.

   3. I would take notice of the work in which Christ was employed during
   his ministry. And here are three things chiefly to be noticed, viz. his
   preaching, his working of miracles, and his calling and appointing
   disciples and ministers of his kingdom.

   (1.) His preaching the gospel. Great part of the work of his public
   ministry consisted in this; and much of that obedience by which he
   purchased salvation for us, was in his speaking those things which the
   Father commanded him. He more clearly and abundantly revealed the mind
   and will of God, than ever it had been revealed before. He came from
   the bosom of the Father, perfectly knew his mind, and was in the best
   capacity to reveal it. As the sun, as soon as it is risen, begins to
   shine; so Christ, as soon as he came into his public ministry, began to
   enlighten the world with his doctrine. As the law was given at mount
   Sinai, so Christ delivered his evangelical doctrine, (full of
   blessings, and not curses,) to a multitude on a mountain, Matt. v.-vii.

   When he preached, he did not teach as the scribes, but as one having
   authority; so that his hearers "were astonished at his doctrine:" [628]
   He did not reveal the mind and will of God in the style of the
   prophets, as, "Thus saith the Lord;" but in such a style as this, "I
   say unto you," "Verily, verily, I say unto you." He delivered his
   doctrines, not only as the doctrines of God the Father, but as his own
   doctrines. He gave forth commands, not (as the prophets were wont to
   do) as God's commands, but as his own. He spake in such a style as
   this, "This is my commandment," John xv. 12. "Ye are my friends, if ye
   do whatsoever I command you," ibid. 14.

   (2.) Another thing that Christ was employed in during the course of his
   ministry, was working miracles. Concerning which we may observe,--Their
   multitude. Besides particular instances, we often have an account of
   multitudes coming at once with diseases, and his healing them. They
   were works of mercy. In them was displayed not only his infinite power
   and greatness, but his infinite mercy and goodness. He went about doing
   good, healing the sick, restoring sight to the blind, hearing to the
   deaf, and the proper use of their limbs to the lame and halt; feeding
   the hungry, cleansing the leprous, and raising the dead.

   They were almost all of them such as had been spoken of as the peculiar
   works of God, in the Old Testament. So with respect to stilling the
   sea, Psal. cvii. 29. "He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves
   thereof are still; walking on the sea in a storm, Job ix. 8. "Which
   alone--treadeth upon the waves of the sea;" and casting out devils,
   Psal. Ixxiv. 14. "Thou breakest the heads of leviathan in pieces." So
   as to feeding a multitude in a wilderness: Deut. viii. 16. "Who fed
   thee in the wilderness with manna;" telling man's thoughts, Amos iv.
   13. "Lo, he that declareth unto man what is his thought--the Lord, the
   God of hosts is his name;" and raising the dead, Psal. ixviii. 20.
   "Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death." So as to opening the
   eyes of the blind, Psal. cxlvi. 8. "The Lord openeth the eyes of the
   blind;" healing the sick, Psal. ciii. 3. "Who healeth all thy
   diseases;" and lifting up those who are bowed together, Psal. cxlvi. 8.
   "The Lord raiseth them that are bowed down."

   They were in general such works as were images of the great work which
   he came to work on man's heart; representing that inward, spiritual
   cleansing, healing, renovation, and resurrection, of which all his
   redeemed are the subjects.--He wrought them by his own power, and not
   as the other prophets did. They were wont to work all their miracles in
   the name of the Lord; but Christ wrought in his own name. Moses was
   forbidden to enter into Canaan, because he seemed by his speech to
   assume to himself the honour of working only one miracle. Nor did
   Christ work miracles as the apostles did; but by his own authority and
   will: Thus, saith he, "I will, be thou clean," Matt. viii. 3. And in
   the same strain he put the question, "Believe ye that I am able to do
   this?" Matt.ix. 28.

   (3 ) Another thing that Christ did in the course of his ministry, was
   to call his disciples. He called many disciples, whom he employed as
   ministers. He sent seventy at one time in this work: but there were
   twelve that he set apart as apostles, who were the grand ministers of
   his kingdom, and as it were the twelve foundations of his church. (See
   Rev. xxi. 14.) These were the main instruments of setting up his
   kingdom in the world, and therefore shall sit on twelve thrones,
   judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

   4. I would observe how he finished his ministry. And this was, in
   giving his dying counsels to his disciples, and all that should be his
   disciples, which we have recorded particularly in the 1--In instituting
   a solemn memorial of his death, the sacrament of the Lord's supper,
   wherein we have a representation of his body broken, and of his blood
   shed.--In offering up himself a sacrifice, to God in his last
   sufferings. This act he did as God's minister, as God's anointed
   priest; and it was the greatest act of his public ministry, the
   greatest act of his obedience, by which he purchased heaven for
   believers. The priests of old used to do many other things as God's
   ministers; but the highest execution of their office was their actually
   offering sacrifice on the altar. So the greatest thing that Christ did
   in the execution of his priestly office, and the greatest thing that he
   ever did, and the greatest thing that ever was done, was the offering
   up himself a sacrifice to God. Herein he was the antetype of all that
   had been done by all the priests, in all their sacrifices and
   offerings, from the beginning of the world.

   III. The third distribution of the acts by which Christ purchased
   redemption, regards the virtues that he exercised and manifested in
   them. Christ in doing his work for our redemption, exercised every
   possible virtue and grace. Indeed there are some particular virtues
   that sinful man may have, which were not in Christ; not from any defect
   of virtue, but because his virtue was perfect, and without defect. Such
   is the virtue of repentance, brokenness of heart for sin,
   mortification, and denying of lust. Christ had no sin of his own to
   repent of, nor any lust to deny. But all virtues which do not
   presuppose sin, were in him in a higher degree than in any mere
   creature. Every virtue in him was perfect. Virtue itself was greater in
   him than in any other; and it was under greater advantages to shine in
   him than in any other. Strict virtue shines most when most tried: but
   never any virtue had such trials as Christ's had.

   The virtue that Christ exercised in his work may be divided into three
   sorts, viz. the virtues which more immediately respect God, those which
   immediately respected himself, and those which immediately respect men.

   1. Those virtues which more immediately respect God. There appeared in
   him a holy fear and reverence towards God the Father. Christ had a
   greater trial of his virtue in this respect than any other had, from
   the honourableness of his person. This was the temptation of the angels
   that fell to cast off their worship of God and reverence of his
   majesty, that they were beings of such exalted dignity themselves. But
   Christ was infinitely more worthy and honourable than they; for he was
   the eternal Son of God, and his person was equal to the person of the
   Father: and yet, as he had taken on him the office of mediator, and the
   nature of man, he was full of reverence towards God. He manifested a
   wonderful love toward God. The angels give great testimonies of their
   love towards God, in their constancy and agility in doing his will; and
   many saints have given great testimonies of their love, who, from love
   to God, endured great labours and sufferings: but none ever such
   testimonies of love to God as Christ has given. He manifested the most
   wonderful submission to the will of God. Never was any one's submission
   so tried as his was. And he manifested the most wonderful spirit of
   obedience that ever was manifested.

   2. In this work he most wonderfully manifested those virtues which more
   immediately respected himself; as humility, patience, and contempt of
   the world. Christ, though he was the most excellent and honourable, yet
   was the most humble; yea, he was the most humble of all creatures. No
   angel or man ever equalled him in humility, though he was the highest
   in dignity and honourableness. Christ would have been under the
   greatest temptations to pride, if it had been possible for any thing to
   be a temptation to him. The temptation of the angels that fell was the
   dignity of their nature, and the honourableness of their circumstances;
   but Christ was infinitely more honourable than they. The human nature
   of Christ was so honoured as to be in the same person with the eternal
   Son of God, who was equal with God; and yet that human nature was not
   at all lifted up with pride. Nor was the man Christ Jesus at all lifted
   up with pride with all those wonderful works which he wrought, of
   healing the sick, curing the blind, lame, and maimed, and raising the
   dead. And though he knew that God had appointed him to be the king over
   heaven and earth, angels and men, as he says, Matt. xi. 27. All things
   are delivered unto me or my Father;" though he knew he was such an
   infinitely honourable person, and thought it not robbery to be equal
   with God; and though he knew he was the heir of the Father's kingdom:
   yet such was his humility, that he did not disdain to be abased and
   depressed down into lower and viler circumstances and sufferings than
   ever any other elect creature was; so that he became least of all, and
   lowest of all. The proper trial and evidence of humility, is stooping
   or complying with those acts or circumstances, when called to it, which
   are very low, and contain great abasement. But none ever stooped so low
   as Christ, if we consider either the infinite height that he stooped
   from, or the great depth to which he stooped. Such was his humility,
   that though he knew his infinite worthiness of honour, and of being
   honoured ten thousand times as much as the highest prince on earth, or
   angel in heaven; yet he did not think it too much when called to it, to
   be bound as a malefactor, to become the laughing-stock of the vilest of
   men, to be crowned with thorns, to have a mock robe put upon him, and
   to be crucified like a slave and male-factor, as one of the meanest and
   worst of vagabonds and miscreants, and an accursed enemy of God and
   men, who was not fit to live. And this was not for himself, but for
   some of the meanest and vilest of creatures, even some of those
   accursed wretches that crucified him. Was not this a wonderful
   manifestation of humility, when he cheerfully and most freely submitted
   to this abasement?--And how did his patience shine forth under all the
   terrible sufferings which he endured; when he was dumb, and opened not
   his mouth, but went as a lamb to the slaughter!--And what contempt of
   the glory of this world was there, when he rather chose this meanness,
   and suffering, than to be invested with the external glories of an
   earthly prince, as the multitude often solicited him!

   3. Christ, in a wonderful manner, exercised those virtues which more
   immediately respect other men. And these may be summed up under two
   heads, viz. meekness, and love.

   Christ's meekness was his humble calmness of spirit under the
   provocations that he met with. The greatness of provocation lies in two
   things, viz. in the degree of opposition by which the provocation is
   given; and, secondly, in the degree of the unreasonableness of that
   opposition, or in its being very causeless, and without reason, and the
   great degree of obligation to the contrary. Now, if we consider both
   these things, no man ever met with such provocations as Christ did,
   when he was upon earth. How much he was hated, what abuses he suffered
   from the vilest of men; how great his sufferings, and how spiteful and
   contemptuous they were in offering him those abuses! How causeless and
   unreasonable were these abuses, how undeserving he was of them, yea how
   much deserving of the contrary, viz. of love, and honour, and good
   treatment at their hands! If we consider these things, no man ever met
   with a thousandth part of the provocation that Christ met with from
   men: and yet how meek was he under all! how composed and quiet his
   spirit! how far from being in a ruffle and tumult! When he was reviled,
   he reviled not again; and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he
   opened not his mouth. No appearance was there of a revengeful spirit:
   on the contrary, what a spirit of forgiveness did he exhibit! so that
   he fervently and effectually prayed for their forgiveness, when they
   were in the highest act of provocation that ever they perpetrated, viz.
   nailing him to the cross: Luke xxiii. 34. "Father, forgive them; for
   they know not what they do."

   And never did there appear such an instance of love to men. Christ's
   love to men, especially in going through his last sufferings, and
   offering up his life and soul under those sufferings, which was his
   greatest act of love, was far beyond all parallel. There have been very
   remarkable manifestations of love in some of the saints, as in the
   apostle Paul, the apostle John, and others; but the love to men that
   Christ showed when on earth, as much exceeded the love of all other
   men, as the ocean exceeds a small stream.

   And it is to be observed, that all the virtues which appeared in Christ
   shone brightest in the close of his life, under the trials he met with
   then. Eminent virtue always shows brightest in the fire. Pure gold
   shows its purity chiefly in the furnace. It was chiefly under those
   trials which Christ underwent in the close of his life, that his love
   to God, his honour of God's majesty, his regard to the honour of his
   law, his spirit of obedience, his humility, contempt of the world, his
   patience, meekness, and spirit of forgiveness towards men, appeared.
   Indeed every thing that Christ did to work out redemption for us
   appears mainly in the close of his life. Here mainly is his
   satisfaction for sin, and here chiefly is his merit of eternal life for
   sinners, and here chiefly appears the brightness of his example, which
   he hath set us for imitation.--Thus we have taken a brief view of the
   things whereby the purchase of redemption was made with respect to his
   righteousness that appeared in them.

      SECT. IV.

   Christ's sufferings and humiliation.

   Among those things in particular by which the purchase was made, we
   must reckon the sufferings and humiliation to which Christ was subject,
   whence arose the satisfaction he made for sin.

   I. He was subject to uncommon humiliation and suffering in his infancy.
   His mother not only suffered in bearing him, but when her travail came
   upon her, it is said, "there was no room in the inn," Luke ii. 7. She
   was forced to betake herself to a stable; where Christ was born. And we
   may conclude, that his mother's circumstances in other respects were
   proportionably strait and difficult, and that she was destitute of the
   conveniences necessary for so young an infant which others were wont to
   have. Besides, he was persecuted in his infancy. They began to seek his
   life as soon as he was born. Herod, the chief man of the land, was so
   engaged to kill him, that, in order to it, he killed all the children
   in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
   under. And Christ suffered banishment in his infancy, was driven out of
   his native country into Egypt, and without doubt suffered much by being
   carried so long a journey, when he was so young, into a strange
   country.

   II. Christ was subject to great humiliation in his private life at
   Nazareth. He there led a servile, obscure life, in a mean, laborious
   occupation; for he is called not only the carpenter's son, but the
   carpenter: Mark vi. 3. "Is not this the carpenter, the brother of James
   and Joses, and Juda, and Simon?" By hard labour he earned his bread
   before he ate it, and so suffered that curse which God pronounced on
   Adam, (Gen. iii. 13. "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread."
   Let us consider how great a degree of humiliation the glorious Son of
   God, the Creator of heaven and earth, was subject to in this, that for
   about thirty years he should live a private obscure life among
   labouring men, and all this while be overlooked, not taken notice of in
   the world, more than other common labourers. Christ's humiliation in
   some respects was greater in private life than in the time of his
   public ministry. There were many manifestations of his glory in the
   word he preached, and the miracles he wrought: but the first thirty
   years of his life he spent among ordinary men, as it were in silence.
   There was not any thing to make him to be taken notice of more than any
   ordinary mechanic, only the spotless purity and eminent holiness of his
   life; and that was in a great measure hid in obscurity; so that he was
   little taken notice of till after his baptism.

   III. Christ was the subject of great humiliation and suffering during
   his public life, from his baptism till the night wherein he was
   betrayed.

   1. He suffered great poverty, so that he had not where to lay his head,
   (Matt. viii. 20. compared with John xviii. 1, 2. and Luke xxi. 27. and
   chap. xxii. 30.) So that what was spoken of Christ in Cant. v. 2." My
   head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night," was
   literally fulfilled. And through his poverty he doubtless was often
   tried with hunger, thirst, and cold. Matt. iv. 2. xxi. 18. His mother
   and natural relations were poor, not able to help him; and he was
   maintained by the charity of some of his disciples while he lived. So
   we read in Luke viii. at the beginning, of certain women that followed
   him, and ministered unto him of their substance. He was so poor, that
   he was not able to pay the demanded tribute, without a miracle. See
   Matt. xvii. 27. And when he ate his last passover, it was not at his
   own charge, but that of another, as appears by Luke xxii. 7, &c. And
   from his poverty he had no grave of his own to be buried in. It was the
   manner of the Jews, unless they were poor, to prepare themselves a
   sepulchre while they lived. But Christ had no land of his own, though
   he was possessor of heaven and earth; and therefore was buried by
   Joseph of Arimathea's charity, and in his tomb, which he had prepared
   for himself.

   2. He suffered great hatred and reproach. He was despised and rejected
   of men; one of little account, slighted for his low parentage, and his
   mean city Nazareth. He was reproached as a glutton and drunkard, a
   friend of publicans and sinners; was called a deceiver of the people;
   sometimes was called a madman, and a Samaritan, and one possessed with
   a devil. (John vii. 20. viii. 48. and John x. 20.) He was called a
   blasphemer, and was accounted by many a wizard, or one that wrought
   miracles by the black art, and by communication with Beelzebub. They
   excommunicated him, and agreed to excommunicate any man that should own
   him. (John ix. 22.) They wished him dead, and were continually seeking
   to murder him; sometimes by force, and sometimes by craft. They often
   took up stones to stone him, and once led him to the brow of a hill,
   intending to throw him down the precipice, to dash him in pieces
   against the rocks.

   He was thus hated and reproached by his own visible people: John i. 11.
   "He came to his own, and his own received him not." And he was
   principally despised and hated by those who were in chief repute, and
   were their greatest men. Indeed the hatred was general. Into whatever
   part of the land he went, he met with hatred and contempt; in
   Capernaum, and Jericho; in Jerusalem, which was the holy city, even
   when he went to the temple to worship; also in Nazareth, his own city,
   among his own relations, and his old neighbours.

   3. He suffered the buffetings of Satan in an uncommon manner. One time
   in particular, he had a long conflict with the devil, when he was in
   the wilderness forty days, with wild beasts and devils; and was so
   exposed to the devil's power, that he was carried about by him from
   place to place, while he was otherwise in a very suffering state.--So
   much for the humiliation and suffering of Christ's public life, from
   his baptism to the night wherein he was betrayed.

   IV. I come now to his last humiliation and sufferings, from the evening
   of the night wherein he was betrayed to his resurrection. And here was
   his greatest humiliation and suffering, by which principally he made
   satisfaction to the justice of God for the sins of men. First, his life
   was sold by one of his own disciples for thirty pieces of silver; which
   was the price of the life of a servant, Exod. xxi. 32. Then he was in
   dreadful agony in the garden. There came such a dismal gloom upon his
   soul, that he began to be sorrowful and very heavy, and said, that his
   "soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and was sore amazed.
   [629] " So violent was the agony of his soul, as to force the blood
   through the pores of his skin; so that while his soul was overwhelmed
   with amazing sorrow, his body was clotted with blood. The disciples,
   who used to be as his friends and family, at this time above all
   appeared cold towards, and unconcerned for him, at the same time that
   his Father's face was hid from him. Judas, to whom Christ had been so
   very merciful, and who was treated as one of his family or familiar
   friends, comes and betrays him in the most deceitful, treacherous
   manner. The officers and soldiers apprehend and bind him; his disciples
   forsake him, and flee; his own best friends do not stand by him to
   comfort him in this time of his distress. He is led away as a
   malefactor to appear before the priests and scribes, his venomous,
   mortal enemies, that they might sit as his judges. Now they had got him
   into their hands, they sat up all night, to have the pleasure of
   insulting him. But because they aimed at nothing short of his life,
   they set themselves to find some colour to put him to death, and seek
   for witnesses against him. When none appeared, they set some to bear
   false witness; and when their witness did not agree together, they
   examined him, in hope to catch something out of his own mouth. They
   hoped he would say, that he was the Son of God, and then they thought
   they should have enough. But because they see they are not like to
   obtain this, they adjure him, in the name of God, to say whether he was
   or not: and when he confessed that he was, then it was a time of
   rejoicing with them, which they show, by spitting in his face,
   blindfolding him, and striking him in the face with the palms of their
   hands and then bidding him prophesy who it was that struck him; thus
   ridiculing him for pretending to be a prophet. And the very servants
   have a hand in the sport: Mark xiv. 65. "And the servants did strike
   him with the palms of their hands."

   During the sufferings of the night, Peter, one of the chief of his own
   disciples, instead of standing by to comfort, appears ashamed to own
   him, and denies and renounces him with oaths and curses. And after the
   chief priests and elders had finished the night in so shamefully
   abusing him, in the morning, (the morning of the most wonderful day
   that ever was,) they led him away to Pilate, to be condemned to death
   by him, because they had not the power of life and death in their own
   hands. He is brought before Pilate's judgment-seat, and there the
   priests and elders accuse him as a traitor. And when Pilate, upon
   examining into the matter, declared he found no fault in him, the Jews
   were but the more fierce and violent to have him condemned. Upon which
   Pilate, after clearing him, very unjustly brings him upon a second
   trial; and then not finding any thing against him, acquits him again.
   Pilate treats him as a poor worthless fellow; but is ashamed on so
   little pretence to condemn him as a traitor.

   And then he was sent to Herod to be tried by him, and was brought
   before his judgment-seat; his enemies followed, and virulently accused
   him before Herod. Herod does not condemn him as a traitor, or one that
   would set up for a king, but looks upon him as Pilate did, as a poor
   worthless creature, not worthy to be noticed, and makes a mere laugh of
   the Jews accusing him as dangerous to Caesar, as one setting up to be a
   king against him; and therefore, in derision, dresses him up in a mock
   robe, makes sport of him, and sends him back through the streets of
   Jerusalem to Pilate with the mock robe on.

   Then the Jews prefer Barabbas before him, and are instant and violent
   with loud vociferations to Pilate, to crucify him. So Pilate, after he
   had cleared him twice, and Herod once, very unrighteously brings him on
   trial the third time, to try if he could not find something sufficient
   to crucify him. Christ was stripped and scourged: thus he gave his back
   to the smiters. After that, though Pilate still declared that he found
   no fault in him; yet so unjust was he, that for fear of the Jews he
   delivered Christ to be crucified. But before they execute the sentence,
   his spiteful and cruel enemies take the pleasure of mocking him again;
   they get round him, and make a set business of it. They stripped him,
   put on him a scarlet robe, a reed in his hand, and a crown of thorns on
   his head. Both Jews and Roman soldiers were united in the transaction;
   they bow the knee before him, and in derision cry, Matt. xxvii.
   29."Hail, king of the Jews." They spit upon him also, take the reed out
   of his hand, and smite him on the head. After this they led him away to
   crucify him, made him carry his own cross, till he sunk under it, his
   strength being spent; and then they laid it on one Simon, a Cyrenian.

   At length, being come to mount Calvary, they execute the sentence which
   Pilate had so unrighteously pronounced. They nail him to his cross by
   his hands and feet, then raise it erect, and fix one end in the ground,
   he being still suspended on it by the nails which pierced his hands and
   feet. Now Christ's sufferings are come to the extremity: now the cup,
   which he so earnestly prayed might pass from him, is come; he must, he
   does drink it. In those days crucifixion was the most tormenting kind
   of death by which any were wont to be executed. There was no death
   wherein the person experienced so much of mere torment: and hence the
   Roman word, which signifies torment, is taken from this kind of
   death.--Besides what our Lord endured in this excruciating corporeal
   death, he endured vastly more in his soul. Now was that travail of his
   soul, of which we read in the prophet; now it pleased God to bruise
   him, and to put him to grief; now he poured out his soul unto death, as
   in Isa. liii. And if the mere forethought of this cup made him sweat
   blood, how much more dreadful and excruciating must the drinking of it
   have been! Many martyrs have endured much in their bodies, while their
   souls have been joyful, and have sung for joy, whereby they have been
   supported under the sufferings of their outward man, and have triumphed
   over them. But this was not the case with Christ; he had no such
   support; but his sufferings were chiefly those of the mind, though the
   other were extremely great. In his crucifixion Christ did not sweat
   blood, as he had done before; not because his agony was now not so
   great, but his blood had vent another way. But though he did not sweat
   blood, yet such was the sufferings of his soul, that probably it rent
   his vitals; when his side was pierced, there came forth blood and
   water. And so here was a kind of literal fulfilment of that in Psal.
   xxii. 14. "I am poured out like water;--my heart is like wax, it is
   melted in the midst of my bowels."

   Now under all these sufferings the Jews still mock him; and wagging
   their heads say, "Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in
   three days, save thyself: if thou be the Son of God, come down from the
   cross." [630] And even the chief priests, scribes, and elders, joined
   in the cry, saying, "He saved others, himself he cannot save. [631] "
   And probably the devil at the same time tormented him to the utmost of
   his power; and hence it is said, Luke xxii. 53. "This is your hour, and
   the power of darkness."

   Under these sufferings, Christ, having cried out once and again with a
   loud voice, at last said, IT IS FINISHED, (John xix. 30.) "and bowed
   the head, and gave up the ghost." And thus was finished the greatest
   and most wonderful thing that ever was done. Now the angels beheld the
   most wonderful sight that ever they saw. Now was accomplished the main
   thing that had been pointed at by the various institutions of the
   ceremonial law, by all the typical dispensations, and by all the
   sacrifices from the beginning of the world.

   Christ being thus brought under the power of death, continued under it
   till the morning of next day but one. Then was finished that great
   work, the purchase of our redemption, for which such great preparation
   had been made from the beginning of the world. Then was finished all
   that was required in order to satisfy the threatenings of the law, and
   all that was necessary in order to satisfy divine justice; then the
   utmost that vindictive justice demanded, even the whole debt, was paid.
   Then was finished the whole of the purchase of eternal life. And now
   there is no need of any thing more to be done towards a purchase of
   salvation for sinners; nor has ever any thing been done since, nor will
   any thing more be done for ever and ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [627] Daniel ix. 27.

   [628] Mark i. 22.

   [629] Mark xiv. 33.

   [630] Matthew xxvii. 40.

   [631] Mark xv. 31.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   IMPROVEMENT OF THE SECOND PERIOD.

   In surveying the history of redemption, we have now shown how this work
   was carried on through the two former of the three main periods into
   which this whole space of time was divided, viz. from the fall to the
   incarnation of Christ, and from thence to the end of the time of
   Christ's humiliation. In the first of these periods, we have
   particularly explained how God prepared the way for Christ's appearing
   and purchasing redemption; and in the second period, how that purchase
   was made and finished. I would now make some improvement of what has
   been said on both these subjects considered conjunctly.

      SECT. I.

   An use of reproof.

   I begin with an use of reproof; a reproof of unbelief, of
   self-righteousness, and of a careless neglect of the salvation of
   Christ.

   1. How greatly do these things reprove those who do not believe in, but
   reject, the Lord Jesus Christ! i.e. all those who do not heartily
   receive him. Persons may receive him in profession outwardly, and may
   wish that they had some of those benefits that Christ has purchased,
   and yet their hearts not receive him. They may be hearty in nothing
   that they do towards Christ; they may have no high esteem of, nor any
   sincere respect to, Christ; they may never have opened the door of
   their heart to him, but have kept him shut out all their days, ever
   since the salvation has been offered to them. Though their hearts have
   been opened to others, their door flung wide open to them, with free
   admittance at all times; though they have been embraced, and the
   thrones of their hearts have been allowed them; yet Christ has always
   been shut out, and they have been deaf to all his calls. They never
   could find an inclination of heart to receive him, nor would they ever
   trust in him.

   Let me now call upon such to consider, how great is their sin, in thus
   rejecting Jesus Christ. You slight the glorious person, for whose
   coming God made such great preparation in such a series of wonderful
   providences from the beginning of the world, and whom, after all things
   were made ready, God sent into the world, bringing to pass a thing
   before unknown, viz. the union of the divine nature with the human in
   one person. You have been guilty of slighting that great Saviour, who,
   after such preparation, actually accomplished the purchase of
   redemption; and who, after he had spent three or four and thirty years
   in poverty, labour, and contempt, in purchasing redemption, at last
   finished the purchase by closing his life under such extreme sufferings
   as you have heard; and so by his death, and continuing for a time under
   the power of death, completed the whole. This is the person you reject
   and despise. You make light of all the glory of his person, and of all
   the glorious love of God the Father, in sending him into the world, and
   all his wonderful love appearing in the whole of this affair. That
   precious stone which God hath laid in Zion for a foundation in such a
   manner, and by such wonderful works as you have heard, is a stone set
   at nought by you.

   Sinners sometimes are ready to wonder why unbelief should be looked
   upon as a great sin; but if you consider what you have heard, how can
   you wonder? If this Saviour is so great, and this work so great, and
   such great things have been done in order to it; truly there is no
   cause of wonder that the rejection of this Saviour is so provoking to
   God. It brings greater guilt than the sins of the worst of heathens,
   who never heard of those things, nor have had this Saviour offered to
   them.

   II. What has been said, affords matter of reproof to those who, instead
   of believing in Christ, trust in themselves for salvation. Is it not a
   common thing with men to take it upon themselves to do that great work
   which Christ came into the world to do? to trust in their prayers,
   their good conversations, the pains they take in religion, the
   reformation of their lives, and their self-denial, in order to
   recommend them to God, to make some atonement for their past sins? Let
   such consider three things :

   1. How great a thing that is which you take upon you. It is to do the
   work of the great Saviour of the world.--Though you are poor,
   worthless, vile, and polluted, yet you arrogantly take upon you that
   very work for which the only-begotten Son of God became man; and in
   order to which God employed four thousand years in all the great
   dispensations of his providence, aiming chiefly to make way for
   Christ's coming to do this work. This is the work that you foolishly
   think yourself sufficient for; as though your prayers, and other
   performances, were excellent enough for this purpose. Consider how vain
   is the thought which you entertain of yourself. How must such arrogance
   appear in the sight of Christ, whom it cost so much. It was not to be
   obtained even by him, so great and glorious a person, at a cheaper rate
   than his going through a sea of blood, and passing through the midst of
   the furnace of God's wrath. And how vain must your arrogance appear in
   the sight of God, when he sees you imagining yourself sufficient, and
   your worthless, polluted performance excellent enough, for the
   accomplishing of that work of his own Son, to prepare the way for which
   he was employed in ordering all the great affairs of the world for so
   many ages!

   2. If there be ground for you to trust, as you do, in your own
   righteousness, then all that Christ did to purchase salvation, and all
   that God did from the fall of man to prepare the way for it, is in
   vain. Your self-righteousness charges God with the greatest folly, as
   though he has done all things in vain, to bring about an accomplishment
   of what you alone, with your poor polluted prayers, and the little
   pains you take in religion, are sufficient to accomplish for yourself.
   For if you can appease God's anger, and commend yourself to him by
   these means, then you have no need of Christ; Gal. ii. 21. "If
   righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain."

   If you can do this by your prayers and good works, Christ might have
   spared his pains; he might have spared his blood; he might have kept
   within the bosom of his Father, without coming down into this evil
   world to be despised, reproached, and persecuted to death. God needed
   not to have busied himself, as he did for four thousand years, causing
   so many changes in the state of the world all that while, in order to
   bring about that which you can accomplish in a few days, only with the
   trouble of a few religious performances. Consider, what greater folly
   could you have devised to charge upon God than this, that all those
   things were done so needlessly; when, instead of all this, he might
   only have called you forth, and committed the business to you, which
   you think you can do so easily. Alas! how blind are natural men! and
   especially how vain are the thoughts which they have of themselves! How
   ignorant of their own littleness and pollution! What great things do
   they assume to themselves!

   3. You that trust to your own righteousness, arrogate to yourselves the
   honour of the greatest thing that ever God himself did. You seem not
   only sufficient to perform divine works, but such is your pride and
   vanity, that you are not content without taking upon you to do the very
   greatest work that ever God himself wrought. You see by what has been
   said, how God has subordinated all his other works to this of
   redemption. God's works of providence are greater than those of
   creation; and all his works of providence, from the beginning of the
   generations of men, were in order to make way for the purchasing of
   redemption. To take on yourself to work out redemption, is a greater
   thing than if you had taken it upon you to create a world. What a
   figure you would make, if you should seriously go about to create a
   world: or decking yourself with majesty, should pretend to speak the
   word of power, and call an universe out of nothing, intending to go on
   in order, and say," Let there be light; Let there be a firmament," &c.
   But then consider, that in attempting to work out redemption for
   yourself, you attempt a greater thing than this, and are serious in it,
   and will not be dissuaded from it. You strive in it, are full of the
   thought that you are sufficient for it, and big with hopes of
   accomplishing it.

   You take upon you to do the very greatest and most difficult part of
   this work, viz. to purchase redemption. Christ can accomplish other
   parts of this work without cost; but this part cost him his life, as
   well as innumerable pains and labours. Yet this is that part which
   self-righteous persons go about to accomplish for themselves. If all
   the angels in heaven had been sufficient for this work, would God have
   set himself to effect such things as he did in order to it? and would
   he ever have sent his own Son, the Creator of the angels, into the
   world, to have done and suffered such things?

   What self-righteous persons take to themselves, is the same work that
   Christ was engaged in when he was in his agony and bloody sweat, and
   when he died on the cross, which was the greatest thing that ever the
   eyes of angels beheld. Great as it is, they imagine they can do the
   same that Christ accomplished by it. Their self-righteousness does in
   effect charge Christ's offering up himself in these sufferings, as the
   greatest instance of folly that ever men or angels saw, instead of
   being the most glorious display of the divine wisdom and grace. Yea,
   self-righteousness makes all that Christ did through the whole course
   of his life, all that he said and suffered, and his incarnation itself,
   and not only so, but all that God had been doing in the great
   dispensations of his providence from the beginning of the world to that
   time, as nothing but a scene of the most wild, extreme, and
   transcendent folly.

   Is it any wonder, then, that a self-righteous spirit is so represented
   in Scripture, and spoken of, as that which is most fatal to the souls
   of men? And is it any wonder, that Christ is represented in Scripture
   as being so provoked with the Pharisees and others, who trusted in
   themselves that they were righteous, and were proud of their goodness,
   and thought that their own performances were a valuable price of God's
   favour and love?

   Let persons hence be warned against a self-righteous spirit. You that
   are seeking salvation, and taking pains in religion, take heed to
   yourselves that you do not trust in what you do. Harbour no such
   thoughts, that God now, seeing how much you are reformed, how you are
   sometimes affected, will be pacified towards you, and will not be so
   angry for your former sins; that you shall gain on him by such things,
   and draw his heart to show you mercy. If you entertain the thought,
   that God is obliged to do it, and does not act justly if he refuse to
   regard your prayers and pains; if you quarrel with God, and complain of
   him for not doing it, this shows what your opinion is of your own
   righteousness, viz. that it is a valuable price of salvation, and ought
   to be accepted of God as such. Such complaining of God, and quarrelling
   with him, for not taking more notice of your righteousness, plainly
   shows that you are guilty of arrogance, thinking yourself sufficient to
   offer the price of your own salvation.

   III. What has been said on this subject, affords matter of reproof to
   those who carelessly neglect the salvation of Christ. These live a
   senseless kind of life, neglect the business of religion and their own
   souls, not taking any course to get an interest in Christ, or what he
   has done and suffered, or any part in that glorious salvation he has
   purchased. They have their minds taken up about the gains of the world,
   or the vanities and pleasures of youth, and make light of what they
   hear of Christ's salvation, to that degree, that they do not at present
   so much as seek after it. Let me here apply myself to you in some
   expostulatory interrogations.

   1. Shall so many prophets, and kings, and righteous men, have their
   minds so much taken up with the prospect, that the purchase of
   salvation was to be wrought out in ages long after their death; and
   will you neglect it when actually accomplished? You have heard what
   great account the church in all ages made of the future redemption of
   Christ; how joyfully they expected it, how they spoke of it, how they
   studied and searched into these things, how they sung joyful songs, and
   had their hearts greatly engaged about it, though they did not expect
   that it would be accomplished till many ages after their death, 1 Pet.
   i. 10-12. How much did Isaiah and Daniel, and other prophets, speak
   concerning this redemption! And how much were their hearts engaged, and
   their attention and study fixed upon it! How was David's mind taken up
   in this subject! He declared that it was all his salvation, and all his
   desire; 2 Sam. xxiii. 5. How did he employ his voice and harp in
   celebrating it, and the glorious display of divine grace therein
   exhibited! and all this although they beheld it not as yet
   accomplished, but saw that it was to be brought to pass so long a time
   after their day.--And before this, how did Abraham and the other
   patriarchs rejoice in the prospect of Christ's day, and the redemption
   which he was to purchase! And even the saints before the flood were
   affected and elated in the expectation of this glorious event, though
   it was then so long future, and it was so very faintly and obscurely
   revealed to them.

   Now these things are declared to you as actually fulfilled. The church
   now has seen accomplished all those great things which they so joyfully
   prophesied of; and you are abundantly shown how those things were
   accomplished: Matt. xiii. 17. "Verily I say unto you, that many
   prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye
   see, and have not seen; and to hear those things which ye hear, and
   have not heard then." And yet, when these things are thus abundantly
   set before you as already accomplished, how light do you make of them!
   How unconcerned are you about them, following other things, and not so
   much as feeling any interest in them! Indeed your sin is extremely
   aggravated in the sight of God. God has put you under great advantages
   for your eternal salvation, far greater than those saints of old
   enjoyed. He has put you under a more glorious dispensation; has given
   you a more clear revelation of Christ and his salvation; and yet you
   neglect all these advantages, and go on in a careless course of life,
   as though nothing had been done, no such proposals and offers had been
   made you.

   2. Have the angels been so engaged about this salvation which is by
   Christ ever since the fall of man, though they are not immediately
   concerned in it, and will you who need it, and have it offered to you,
   be so careless about it? You have heard how the angels at first were
   subjected to Christ as mediator, and how they have all along been
   ministering spirits to him in this affair. In all the great
   dispensations which you have heard of from the beginning of the world,
   they have been active and as a flame of fire in this affair, being most
   diligently employed as ministering spirits to minister to Christ in
   this great affair of man's redemption. And when Christ came, how
   engaged were their minds! They came to Zacharias, to inform him of the
   coming of Christ's forerunner.--They came to the Virgin Mary, to inform
   her of the approaching birth of Christ. They came to Joseph, to warn
   him of the danger which threatened the new-born Saviour, and to point
   out to him the means of safety. And how were their minds engaged at the
   time of the birth of Christ! The whole multitude of the heavenly hosts
   sang praises upon the occasion, saying, " Glory to God in the highest,
   on earth peace, good will towards men." And afterwards, from time to
   time, they ministered to Christ when on earth; at the time of his
   temptation, of his agony in the garden, at his resurrection, and at his
   ascension. All these things show, that they were greatly engaged in
   this affair; and the Scripture informs us, that they pry into these
   things: 1 Pet. i. 12. "Which things the angels desire to look into."
   And how are they represented in the Revelation as being employed in
   heaven in singing praises to him that sitteth on the throne, and to the
   Lamb! Now, shall these take so much notice of this redemption, and of
   the purchaser, who need it not for themselves, and have no immediate
   concern or interest in it, or offer of it; and will you, to whom it is
   offered, and who are in such extreme necessity of it, neglect and take
   no notice of it?

   3. Did Christ labour so hard, and suffer so much to procure this
   salvation, and is it not worth the while for you to be at some labour
   in seeking it? Did our salvation lie with such weight on the mind of
   Christ, as to induce him to become man, to suffer even death itself, in
   order to procure it? And is it not worth the while for you, who need
   this salvation, and must perish eternally without it, to take earnest
   pains to obtain an interest in it after it is procured, and all things
   are ready?

   4. Shall the great God be so concerned about this salvation, as often
   to overturn the world to make way for it; and when all is done, is it
   not worth your seeking after? What great, what wonderful things has he
   done; removing and setting up kings, raising up a great number of
   prophets, separating a distinct people from the rest of the world,
   overturning nations and kingdoms, and often the state of the world; and
   so has continued bringing about one change and revolution after another
   for forty centuries in succession, to make way for the procuring of
   this salvation! And when at the close of these ages, the great Saviour
   comes, passing through a long series of reproach and suffering, and
   then suffering all the waves and billows of God's wrath for men's sins,
   insomuch that they overwhelmed his soul; after all these things done to
   procure salvation for sinners, is it not worthy of your being so much
   concerned about it, but that it should be thrown by, and made nothing
   of, in comparison of worldly gain, gay clothing, or youthful
   diversions, and other such trifling things?

   O! that you who live negligent of this salvation, would consider what
   you do! What you have heard from this subject, may show you what reason
   there is in that exclamation of the apostle, Heb. ii. 3. "How shall we
   escape if we neglect so great salvation?" And in Acts xiii. 41.
   "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in
   your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man
   declare it unto you." God looks on you as great enemies of the cross of
   Christ, as adversaries and despisers of all the glory of this great
   work. And if God has made such account of the glory of salvation as to
   destroy many nations, in order to prepare the way for the glory of his
   Son in this affair; how little account will he make of the lives and
   souls of ten thousand such opposers and despisers as you, who continue
   impenitent, when your welfare stands in the way of that glory! Why
   surely you shall be dashed to pieces as a potter's vessel, and trodden
   down as the mire of the streets. God may, through wonderful patience,
   bear with hardened careless sinners for a while; but he will not long
   bear with such despisers of his dear Son, and his great salvation, the
   glory of which he has had so much at heart, before he will utterly
   consume without remedy or mercy.

      SECT. II.

   An use of encouragement.

   I will conclude with a second use, of encouragement to burdened souls
   to put their trust in Christ for salvation. To all such as are not
   careless and negligent, but make seeking an interest in Christ their
   main business, being sensible in some measure of their necessity, and
   afraid of the wrath to come; to such, what has been said on this
   subject holds forth great matter of encouragement, to venture their
   souls on the Lord Jesus Christ. And as motives proper to excite you so
   to do, let me lead you to consider two things in particular.

   1. The completeness of the purchase which has been made. You have
   heard, that this work of purchasing salvation was wholly finished
   during the time of Christ's humiliation. When Christ rose from the
   dead, and was exalted from that abasement to which he submitted for our
   salvation, the purchase of eternal life was completely made, so that
   there was no need of any thing more to be done in order to it. But now
   the servants were sent forth with a message, Matt. xxii. 4. "Behold, I
   have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
   things are ready: come unto the marriage." Therefore, are your sins
   many and great? Here is enough done by Christ to procure their pardon.
   There is no need of any righteousness of yours to obtain your pardon
   and justification: no, you may come freely, without money and without
   price. Since therefore there is such a free and gracious invitation
   given you, come, come naked as you are; come as a poor condemned
   criminal; come and cast yourself down at Christ's feet, as one justly
   condemned, and utterly helpless. Here is a complete salvation wrought
   out by Christ, and through him offered to you. Come, therefore, accept
   of it, and be saved.

   2. For Christ to reject one that thus comes to him, would be to
   frustrate all those great things which God brought to pass from the
   fall of man to the incarnation of Christ. It would also frustrate all
   that Christ did and suffered while on earth; yea, it would frustrate
   the incarnation itself. All the great things done were for that end,
   that those might be saved who should come to Christ. Therefore you may
   be sure Christ will not be backward in saving those who come to him,
   and trust in him; for he has no desire to frustrate himself in his own
   work. Neither will God the Father refuse you; for he has no desire to
   frustrate himself in all that he did for so many hundreds and thousands
   of years, to prepare the way for the salvation of sinners by Christ.
   Come, therefore, hearken to the sweet and earnest calls of Christ to
   your soul. Do as he invites and as he commands you, Matt. xi. 28-30.
   "Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give
   you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; and ye shall find
   rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.''
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      PERIOD III.

   FROM CHRIST'S RESURRECTION TO THE END OF THE WORLD.

   In discoursing on this subject, we have already shown how the work of
   redemption was carried on through the two first of the THREE PERIODS
   into which we divided the whole space of time from the fall to the end
   of the world. We are now come to the third and last period, beginning
   with Christ's resurrection; and would show, that the space of time from
   the end of Christ's humiliation to the end of the world is all taken up
   in bringing about the great effect or success of Christ's purchase.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. I.

   Scriptural representations of this period.

   Not but that there were great effects and glorious success of Christ's
   purchase of redemption before, even from the beginning of the
   generations of men. But all that success which was before, was only
   preparatory, by way of anticipation, as some few fruits are gathered
   before the harvest. There was no more success before Christ came, than
   God saw needful to prepare the way for his coming. The proper time of
   the success or effect of Christ's redemption is after the purchase has
   been made, as the proper time for the world to enjoy the light of the
   sun is the daytime, after the sun is risen, though we may have some
   small matter of it reflected from the moon and planets before. And even
   the success of Christ's redemption while he himself was on earth, was
   very small in comparison of what it was after.

   But, Christ having finished that greatest and most difficult of all
   works, now is come the time for obtaining the end, the glorious effect
   of it. Having gone through the whole course of his sufferings and
   humiliation, Christ is never to suffer any more. But now is the time
   for him to obtain the joy that was set before him. Having made his soul
   an offering for sin, now is the time for him to see his seed, to have a
   portion with the great, and to divide the spoil with the strong.

   One design of Christ in what he did in his humiliation, was to lay a
   foundation for the overthrow of Satan's kingdom; and now is come the
   time to effect it, as Christ, a little before his crucifixion, said,
   John xii. 31. "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince
   of this world be cast out." John xii. 32. "And I, if I be lifted up,
   will draw all men unto me;" which is agreeable to Jacob's prophecy of
   Christ, that "when Shiloh should come, to him should the gathering of
   the people be," Gen. xlix. 10. Another design is the salvation of the
   elect. Now when his sufferings are finished, and his humiliation
   perfected, the time is come for that also: Heb. v. 8, 9. "Though he was
   a Son, yet learned obedience by the things which he suffered: and being
   made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them
   that obey him." Another design was, to accomplish by these things great
   glory to the persons of the Trinity. John xvii. 1. "Father, the hour is
   come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee." Another
   design was the glory of the saints. John xvii. 11. "As thou hast given
   him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many
   as thou hast given him." And all the dispensations of God's providence
   henceforward, even to the final consummation of all things, are to give
   Christ his reward, and fulfil his end in what he did and suffered upon
   earth, and to fulfil the joy that was set before him.

   Before I enter on the consideration of any particular things
   accomplished in this period, I would briefly observe how the times of
   this period are represented in Scripture.

   I. The times of this period, for the most part, are in the Old
   Testament called the latter days. We often, in the prophets of the Old
   Testament, read of things that should come to pass in the latter days,
   and sometimes in the last days, evidently referring to gospel times.
   They are called the latter days, and the last days; because this is the
   last period of the series of God's providences on earth, the last
   period of the great work of redemption; which is as it were the sum of
   God's works of providence; the last dispensation of the covenant of
   grace on earth.

   II. The whole time of this period is sometimes in Scripture called the
   end of the world, 1 Cor. x. 11. "Now all these things happened unto
   them for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom
   the ends of the world are come." And the apostle, Heb. ix. 26. in this
   expression of the end of the world, means the whole of the gospel-day,
   from the birth of Christ to the day of judgment: "But now once in the
   end of the world, hath he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of
   himself. [632] " This space of time may well be called the end of the
   world; for this whole time is taken up in bringing things to their
   great end and issue. Before, things were in a kind of preparatory
   state; but now they are in a finishing state. An end is now brought to
   the former carnal state of things, which by degrees vanishes, and a
   spiritual state begins to be established more and more. Particularly,
   an end is brought to the former state of the church, which may be
   called its worldly state, in which it was subject to carnal ordinances,
   and the rudiments of the world. Then an end is brought to the Jewish
   commonwealth, in the destruction of their city and country. After that,
   an end is brought to the old heathen empire in Constantine's time. The
   next step is the finishing of Satan's visible kingdom in the world,
   upon the fall of Antichrist, and the calling of the Jews. And last will
   come the destruction of the outward frame of the world itself, at the
   conclusion of the day of judgment. Heaven and earth began to shake, in
   order to a dissolution, according to the prophecy of Haggai, before
   Christ came, that so only those things which cannot be shaken may
   remain, i.e. that those things which are to come to an end may
   terminate, and that only those things may remain which are to remain
   eternally.

   In the first place, the carnal ordinances of the Jewish worship came to
   an end, in order to make way for the establishment of that spiritual
   worship, which is to endure to all eternity: John iv. 21. "Jesus saith
   unto the woman, Believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in
   this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." Ver. 23. "But
   the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
   the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to
   worship him." This is one instance of the temporary world coming to an
   end, and the eternal world beginning. And then, the outward temple and
   the city Jerusalem came to an end, to give place to the setting up of
   the spiritual temple and city, which are to last for ever. Another
   instance of removing those things which are ready to vanish away, that
   those things which cannot be shaken may remain, is the bringing to an
   end the old heathen empire, to make way for the empire of Christ, which
   shall last to all eternity. After that, upon the fall of Antichrist, an
   end is put to Satan's visible kingdom on earth, to establish Christ's
   kingdom, which is an eternal kingdom; as the prophet Daniel says, chap.
   vii. 27. "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
   kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
   saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
   all dominions shall serve and obey him;" which is another instance of
   the ending of the temporary world, and the beginning of the eternal
   one. And then, lastly, the very frame of this corruptible world shall
   come to an end, to make way for the church to dwell in another
   dwelling-place, which shall last to eternity.

   Because the world is thus coming to an end by various steps and
   degrees, the apostle perhaps uses this expression, that (not the end
   but) the ends of the world are come on us; as though the world has
   several endings one after another.--The gospel-dispensation is a
   finishing state: it is all spent in finishing things off which before
   had been preparing, or abolishing things which before had stood. It is
   all spent as it were in summing things up, and bringing them to their
   issues, and their proper fulfilment. Now all the old types are
   fulfilled, and the predictions of all the prophets from the beginning
   of the world shall be accomplished in this period.

   III. That state of things which is attained in the events of this
   period is called a new heaven and a new earth: aIsa. lxv. 17, 18. "For
   behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not
   be remembered, nor come into mind. But be you glad and rejoice for ever
   in that which I create: for behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and
   her people a joy." And chap. lxvi. 22. "For as the new heavens and the
   new earth which I make, shall remain before me; so shall your seed and
   your name remain." . See also chap. li. 16. As the former state of
   things, or the old world, by one step after another, is through this
   period coming to an end; so the new state of things, or the new world,
   which is a spiritual world, is beginning and setting up. In consequence
   of each of these finishings of the old state of things, there is the
   beginning of a new and eternal state. So that which accompanied the
   destruction of the literal Jerusalem, was an establishing of the
   spiritual. So with respect to the destruction of the old heathen
   empire, and all the other endings of the old state of things; till at
   length the very outward frame of the world itself shall come to an end;
   and the church shall dwell in heaven, which will be a new habitation.
   Then shall the utmost be accomplished that is meant by the new heavens
   and the new earth. (See Rev. xxi. 1.)

   The end of God's creating the world, was to prepare a kingdom for his
   Son, (for he is appointed heir of the world,) which should remain to
   all eternity. So far as the kingdom of Christ is set up in the world,
   so far is the world brought to its end, and the eternal state of things
   set up--so far are all the great changes and revolutions of the world
   brought to their everlasting issue, and all things come to their
   ultimate period--so far are the waters of the long channel of divine
   providence, which has so many branches, and so many windings, emptied
   into their proper ocean, which they have been seeking from the
   beginning of their course, and so are come to their rest. So far as
   Christ's kingdom is established in the world, so far are things wound
   up and settled in their everlasting state, and a period put to the
   course of things in this changeable world; so far are the first heavens
   and the first earth come to an end, and the new heavens and the new
   earth, the everlasting heavens and earth, established in their
   room.--This leads me to observe,

   IV. That the state of things which is attained by the events of this
   period, is what is so often called the kingdom of heaven, or the
   kingdom of God. We very often read in the New Testament of the kingdom
   of heaven. John the Baptist preached, that the kingdom of heaven was at
   hand; and so did Christ and his disciples after him; referring to
   something that the Jews in those days expected, and called by that
   name. They seem to have taken their expectation and the name chiefly
   from that prophecy of Daniel in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Dan. ii. 44.
   "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
   kingdom;" together with chap. vii. 13, 14.

   Now this kingdom of heaven is that evangelical state of things in the
   church, and in the world, wherein consists the success of Christ's
   redemption in this period. There had been often great kingdoms set up
   before; as the Babylonish, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman
   monarchies. But Christ came to set up the last, which is not an earthly
   kingdom, but a heavenly, John xviii. 36. "My kingdom is not of this
   world." This is the kingdom of which Christ speaks. Luke xxii. 29. "My
   Father hath appointed to me a kingdom." This kingdom began soon after
   Christ's resurrection, and is accomplished in various steps from that
   time to the end of the world. Sometimes by the kingdom of heaven, is
   meant not only that spiritual state of the church which began soon
   after Christ's resurrection; but also that more perfect state which
   shall obtain after the downfall of Antichrist; and sometimes that
   glorious and blessed state to which the church shall be received at the
   day of judgment. So 1 Cor. xv. 50. "This I say, that flesh and blood
   cannot inherit the kingdom of God."--Under this head I would observe
   several things particularly, for the clearer understanding of what the
   Scripture says concerning this period.

   1. The setting up of the kingdom of Christ is chiefly accomplished by
   four successive great events, each of which is in Scripture called
   Christ's coming in his kingdom. The first is Christ's appearing in
   those wonderful dispensations of providence in the apostles' days, in
   setting up his kingdom, and destroying its enemies, which ended in the
   destruction of Jerusalem. This is called Christ's coming in his
   kingdom, Matt. xvi. 28."Verily I say unto you, there be some standing
   here, which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of man
   coming in his kingdom." (And Matt. xxiv.) The second is that which was
   accomplished in Constantine's time, in the destruction of the heathen
   Roman empire. This is represented as Christ's coming, and is compared
   to his coming to judgment, (Rev. vi. at the latter end.) The third is
   that which is to be accomplished at the destruction of Antichrist. This
   also is represented as Christ's coming in his kingdom in the 7th
   chapter of Daniel, and in other places. The fourth and last is his
   coming to the last judgment; which is the event principally signified
   in Scripture by Christ's coming in his kingdom.

   2. Each of the three former of these is a lively image, or type, of the
   fourth and last, viz. Christ's coming to the final judgment, as the
   principal dispensations of providence before were types of his first
   coming.--As Christ's last coming to judgment is accompanied with the
   resurrection of the dead, so is each of the three foregoing with a
   spiritual resurrection. That coming of Christ which ended in the
   destruction of Jerusalem, was preceded by a glorious spiritual
   resurrection of souls in the calling of the Gentiles through the
   preaching of the gospel. Christ s coming in Constantine's time, was
   accompanied with a glorious spiritual resurrection of the greater part
   of the known world, in a restoration of it to a visible church state,
   from a state of heathenism. Christ's coming at the destruction of
   Antichrist, will be attended with a spiritual resurrection of the
   church after it had been long as it were dead, in the times of
   Antichrist. This is called the first resurrection in the 20th chapter
   of Revelation.

   Again, as Christ in the last judgment will gloriously manifest himself
   coming in the glory of his Father, so in each of the three foregoing
   events Christ gloriously manifested himself in sending judgments upon
   his enemies, and in showing favour to his church. As the last coming of
   Christ will be attended with a literal gathering together of the elect
   from the four winds of heaven, so were each of the preceding attended
   with a spiritual gathering in of the elect. As this gathering together
   of the elect will be effected by God's angels with a great sound of a
   trumpet; (Matt. xxiv. 31.) so were each of the preceding spiritual
   ingatherings effected by the trumpet of the gospel, sounded by the
   ministers of Christ. As there shall precede the last appearance of
   Christ, a time of great degeneracy and wickedness, so this has been, or
   will be, the case with each of the other appearances. Before each of
   them is a time of great opposition to the church: before the first, by
   the Jews; before the second, in Constantine's time, by the heathen;
   before the third, by Antichrist; and before the last, by Gog and Magog,
   as described in the Revelation.

   By each of these comings of Christ, God works a glorious deliverance
   for his church. The first, which ended in the destruction of Jerusalem,
   was attended with bringing the church into the glorious state of the
   gospel. The second, which was in Constantine's time, was accompanied
   with an advancement of the church into a state of liberty from
   persecution, the countenance of civil authority, and her triumph over
   heathen persecutors. The third, which shall be at the downfall of
   Antichrist, will be accompanied with an advancement of the church into
   that state of the glorious prevalence of truth, liberty, peace, and
   joy, which we so often read of in the prophetical parts of Scripture.
   The last will be attended with the advancement of the church to
   consummate glory in heaven.

   Each of these comings of Christ is accompanied with a terrible
   destruction of the wicked, and the enemies of the church: the first,
   with the destruction of the persecuting Jews, which was amazingly
   terrible; the second, with dreadful judgments on the heathen
   persecutors of the church; the third, with the awful destruction of
   Antichrist, the most cruel and bitter enemy that ever the church had;
   the fourth, with divine wrath and vengeance on all the
   ungodly.--Further, there is in each of these comings of Christ an
   ending of the old, and a beginning of new, heavens and a new earth; or
   an end of a temporal state of things, and a beginning of an eternal
   state.

   3. I would observe, that each of those four great dispensations which
   are represented as Christ's coming in his Kingdom, are but so many
   steps and degrees of the accomplishment of one event. They are not the
   setting up of so many distinct kingdoms of Christ; but only several
   degrees of the accomplishment of that one event prophesied of, Dan.
   vii. 13,14. "And I saw in the night-visions, and behold, one like the
   Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of
   days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
   dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
   languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
   and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." This is what the
   Jews expected, and called "the coming of the kingdom of heaven;" and
   what John the Baptist and Christ had respect to, when they said, "The
   kingdom of heaven is at hand. [633] " This great event is accomplished
   by several steps.

   4. When Christ came with the preaching of the apostles, to set up his
   kingdom in the world, which dispensation ended with the destruction of
   Jerusalem, then it was accomplished in a glorious degree; when the
   heathen empire was destroyed in Constantine's time, it was fulfilled in
   a further degree; when Antichrist shall be destroyed, it will be
   accomplished in a yet higher degree; but when the end of the world is
   come, then will it be accomplished in its most perfect degree of all.
   And because these four great events are but images one of another, and
   the three former but types of the last, and since they are all only
   several steps of the accomplishment of the same thing; hence we find
   them all from time to time prophesied of under one, as in the
   prophecies of Daniel, and in the 24th chapter of Matthew, where some
   things seem more applicable to one of them, and others to another.

   Thus it appears, that as there are several steps of the accomplishment
   of the kingdom of Christ, so in each one of them the event is
   accomplished in a further degree than in the foregoing. That in the
   time of Constantine was a greater and further accomplishment of the
   kingdom of Christ, than that which ended in the destruction of
   Jerusalem; that which shall be at the fall of Antichrist, will be a
   further accomplishment of the same thing, than that which took place in
   the time of Constantine; and so on with regard to each: so that the
   kingdom of Christ is gradually prevailing and growing by these several
   great steps of its fulfilment, from the time of Christ's resurrection,
   to the end of the world.

   5. The great providences of God between these four events, are to make
   way for the kingdom and glory of Christ in the great event following.
   Those dispensations of providence towards the church and the world,
   before the destruction of the heathen empire in the time of
   Constantine, seem all to have been to make way for the glory of Christ,
   and the happiness of the church in that event. And so the great
   providences after that, till the destruction of Antichrist, and the
   beginning of the glorious times of the church which follow, seem all
   calculated to prepare the way for the greater glory of Christ and his
   church in that event; and the following ones to the end of the world,
   seem to be for the greater manifestation of Christ's glory at the
   consummation of all things.--Thus I thought it needful to observe those
   things in general concerning this last period, before I take notice of
   particular providences by which the work of redemption is carried on
   through this period, in their order.

   Before I proceed, I will briefly answer an inquiry, viz. Why the
   setting up of Christ's kingdom after his humiliation, should be so
   gradual, since God could easily have finished it at once?--Though it
   would be presumption in us to pretend to declare all the ends of God in
   this, yet doubtless much of his wisdom may be seen in it; and
   particularly in these two things.

   1. In this way the glory of God's wisdom is more visible to the
   observation of creatures. If it had been done at once, or in a very
   short time, there would not have been such opportunities for creatures
   to perceive and observe the particular steps of divine wisdom, as when
   the work is gradually accomplished, and one effect of his wisdom is
   held forth to observation after another. It is wisely determined of
   God, to accomplish his great design by a wonderful and long series of
   events, that the glory of his wisdom may be displayed, in the whole
   series of events, that the glory of his perfection may be seen, in
   particular successive manifestations. If all that glory which appears
   in these events had been manifested at once, it would have been too
   much for us; it would have overpowered our sight and capacities.

   2. Satan is more gloriously triumphed over.--God could easily, by an
   act of almighty power, at once have crushed Satan. But by giving him
   time to use his utmost subtlety to hinder the success of what Christ
   had done and suffered, he is not defeated merely by surprise, but has
   large opportunity to ply his utmost power and subtlety again and again,
   to strengthen his own interest all that he can by the work of many
   ages. Thus God destroys and confounds him, and sets up Christ's kingdom
   time after time, in spite of all his subtle machinations and great
   works, and by every step advances it still higher and higher, till at
   length it is fully set up, and Satan perfectly and eternally
   vanquished.--I now proceed to take notice of the particular events,
   whereby, from the end of Christ's humiliation to the end of the world,
   the success of Christ's purchase has been or shall be accomplished.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [632] Heb. ix. 26.

   [633] Matt. iii. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. II.

   How Christ was capacitated for effecting his purpose.

   As the incarnation of Christ was necessary in order to his being in a
   near capacity for the purchase of redemption; so his resurrection and
   ascension were requisite in order to the success of his purchase.

   I. His resurrection. It was necessary in order to Christ's obtaining
   the end and effect of his purchase of redemption, that he should rise
   from the dead. For God the Father had committed the whole affair of
   redemption to his Son, that he should not only purchase it as priest,
   but actually bring it about as king; and that he should do this as
   God-man. God the Father would have nothing to do with fallen man in a
   way of mercy but by a mediator. But in order that Christ might
   accomplish the success of his own purchase as God-man, it was necessary
   that he should rise from the dead. Therefore Christ, after he had
   finished this purchase by death, rises from the dead, to fulfil the end
   of his purchase. This matter God the Father had committed unto him,
   that he might, as Lord of all, manage all to his own purposes: Rom.
   xiv. 9. "For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that
   he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living."

   Indeed Christ's resurrection (and so his ascension) was part of the
   success of what Christ did and suffered in his humiliation. For though
   Christ did not properly purchase redemption for himself, yet he
   purchased eternal life and glory for himself, as a reward of what he
   did and suffered: Phil. ii. 8, 9. "He humbled himself, and became
   obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also
   hath highly exalted him." And it may be looked upon as part of the
   success of Christ's purchase, since he did not rise as a private
   person, but as the head of the elect church; so that they did, as it
   were, all rise with him. Christ was justified in his resurrection, i.e.
   God acquitted and discharged him hereby, as having done and suffered
   enough for the sins of all the elect: Rom. iv. 25. "Who was delivered
   for our offences, and raised again for our justification." And God put
   him in possession of eternal life, as the head of the church, as a sure
   earnest that they should follow. For when Christ rose from the dead,
   that was the beginning of eternal life in him. His life before his
   death was a mortal life, a temporal life; but after his resurrection it
   was an eternal life: Rom. vi. 9. "Knowing that Christ being raised from
   the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him." Rev. i.
   18. "I am he that liveth. and was dead; and behold, I am alive for
   evermore. Amen."--But he was put in possession of this eternal life, as
   the head of the body; so that the whole church, as it were, rises in
   him. And now he who lately suffered so much, is to suffer no more for
   ever, but has entered into eternal glory.

   This resurrection of Christ is the most joyful event that ever came to
   pass; because hereby Christ rested from the great and difficult work of
   purchasing redemption, and received God's testimony, that it was
   finished. The death of Christ was the greatest and most wonderful event
   that ever came to pass; but that has a great deal in it that is
   sorrowful. But by the resurrection of Christ, that sorrow is turned
   into joy. The Head of the church, in that great event, enters on the
   possession of eternal life; and the whole church is, as it were,
   begotten again to a lively hope, 1 Pet. i. 3. Weeping had continued for
   a night, but now joy cometh in the morning. This is the day of his
   reigning, as the head of the church, and all the church reigns with
   him. This day was worthy to be commemorated with the greatest joy. Ps.
   cxviii. 24. "This is the day which the Lord hath made, we will rejoice
   and be glad in it." And therefore this, above all other days, is
   appointed to the end of the world, to be weekly sanctified, as a day of
   holy rest and joy, that the church therein may rest and rejoice with
   her Head. And as the 3rd chapter of Genesis is the most sorrowful
   chapter in the Bible; so those chapters in the evangelist, that give an
   account of the resurrection of Christ, may be looked upon as the most
   joyful. These give an account of the finishing of the purchase of
   redemption, and the beginning of the glory of the Head of the church,
   as the greatest seal and earnest of the eternal glory of all the
   members.

   It is further to be observed, that the day of the gospel most properly
   begins with the resurrection of Christ. Till Christ rose from the dead,
   the Old-Testament dispensation remained: but now it ceases, all being
   fulfilled that was shadowed forth in the typical ordinances of that
   dispensation. Here most properly is the end of the Old-Testament night;
   and Christ rising from the grave with joy and glory, was like the sun
   rising after a long night of darkness, appearing in joyful light to
   enlighten the world. Now that joyful dispensation begins, that glorious
   dispensation, of which the prophets testified so much. Now the
   gospel-sun is risen in his glory, and with healing in his wings, that
   those who fear God s name, may go forth, and grow up as calves of the
   stall.

   II. Christ's ascension into heaven. In this I would include his sitting
   at the right hand of God. For Christ's ascension was nothing else, but
   ascending to God's right hand in glory. A deliverer of a people as
   their king, in order that he may be under the best capacity for it, is
   first installed in his throne. We are told, that Christ was exalted for
   this end, that he might accomplish the success of his redemption: Acts
   v. 31. "Him hath God exalted with his right hand, for to give
   repentance unto Israel, and the remission of sins."

   Christ's ascension into heaven was, as it were, his solemn coronation,
   when the Father set him upon the throne, and invested him with the
   glory of that kingdom which he had purchased for himself that he might
   thereby obtain the success of his redemption in conquering all his
   enemies: Ps. cx. 1. "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
   enemies thy footstool." Christ entered into heaven, in order to obtain
   the success of his purchase, as the high priest of old, after he had
   offered sacrifice, entered into the holy of holies with the blood of
   the sacrifice, in order to obtain the success of the sacrifice which he
   had offered. See Heb. ix. 12. He entered into heaven, there to make
   intercession for his people, to plead the sacrifice which he had made
   in order to the success of it, Heb. vii. 25.--And as he ascended into
   heaven, God the Father did in a visible manner set him on the throne as
   king of the universe. He then put the angels all under him, and
   subjected to him heaven and earth, that he might govern them for the
   good of the people for whom he died, Eph. i. 20-22.--And as Christ rose
   from the dead, so he ascended into heaven, as the head of the body, and
   forerunner of all the church; and they, as it were, ascend with him: so
   that we are both raised up together, and made to sit together in
   heavenly places in Christ, Eph. ii. 6.

   The day of Christ's ascension was doubtless a joyful, glorious day in
   heaven. And as heaven received Christ, God-man, as its king, so
   doubtless it received a great accession of glory and happiness. So that
   the times in both parts of the church, that part which is in heaven,
   and that which is on earth, are become more glorious since Christ's
   humiliation than before.--So much for those things whereby Christ was
   put into the best capacity for obtaining the success of redemption.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. III.

   Established means of success.

   Consider those dispensations of Providence, by which the means of this
   success were established after Christ's resurrection.

   I. The abolishing the Jewish dispensation. This indeed was gradually
   done, but it began from the time of Christ's resurrection, in which the
   abolition of it is founded. For the Jewish dispensation was not fitted
   for the practice of the world in general, or for a church of God
   dwelling in all parts of the world: nor would it have been practicable
   by them. It would have been impossible for men living in all parts of
   the world to go to Jerusalem three times a year, as was prescribed in
   that constitution. When therefore God had a design of enlarging his
   church, as he did after Christ's resurrection, it was necessary that
   this dispensation should be abolished. If it had been continued, it
   would have been a great block and hindrance to the enlargement of the
   church. Besides, their ceremonial law, by reason of its burdensomeness,
   and great peculiarity of some of its rites, was a wall of partition
   between the Jews and Gentiles, and would have kept the Gentiles from
   complying with the true religion. This wall therefore was broken down
   to make way for the more extensive success of the gospel; as Eph. ii.
   14, 15.

   II. The next thing in order of time seems to be the appointment of the
   christian sabbath. For though this was gradually established in the
   christian church, yet those things by which the revelation of God's
   mind and will was made, began on the day of Christ's resurrection, by
   his appearing then to his disciples, John xx. 19. And afterwards, his
   appearing was from time to time on that day rather than any other, John
   xx. 26. This appointment was confirmed by his sending down the Holy
   Spirit so remarkably on that day, Acts ii. 1. and afterwards by
   directing, that the public worship of Christians should be on that day,
   which may be concluded from Acts xx. 1 1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2. and Rev. i.
   10. And so the day of the week on which Christ rose from the dead, that
   joyful day, is appointed to be the day of the church's holy rejoicing
   to the end of the world, and the day of their stated public worship.
   And this is a very great and principal means of the success which the
   gospel has had in the world.

   III. The next thing was Christ's appointment of the gospel-ministry, by
   commissioning and sending forth his apostles to teach and baptize all
   nations. Of these things we have an account in Matt. xxviii 19, 20. "Go
   ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
   Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe
   all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you
   alway, even unto the end of the world."--There were three things done
   by this one commission of Christ to his apostles, viz.

   1. The appointment of the office of the gospel-ministry.--For this
   commission which Christ gives to his apostles, in the most essential
   parts of it, belongs to all ministers; and the apostles, by virtue of
   it, were ministers or elders of the church.

   2. Something peculiar in this commission, viz. to go forth from one
   nation to another, preaching the gospel in all the world. The apostles
   had something above what belonged to their ordinary character as
   ministers; they had an extraordinary power of teaching and ruling,
   which extended to all the churches; and not only all the churches which
   then were, but all that should be to the end of the world by their
   ministry. And so the apostles were, in subordination to Christ, made
   foundations of the christian church. See Eph. ii. 20. and Rev. xxi. 14.

   3. Here is an appointment of Christian baptism. This ordinance indeed
   had a beginning before; John the Baptist and Christ baptized. But now
   especially by this institution is it established as an ordinance to be
   upheld in the christian church to the end of the world.--The ordinance
   of the Lord's supper had been established before, just before Christ's
   crucifixion.

   IV. The next thing to be observed, is the enduing the apostles, and
   others, with extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost; such
   as the gift of tongues, the gift of healing, of prophecy, &c. The
   Spirit of God was poured out in great abundance in this respect; so
   that not only ministers, but a very great part of the Christians
   through the world were endued with them, both old and young; not only
   officers, and more honourable persons, but the meaner son of people,
   servants, and handmaids, agreeable to Joel's prophecy, Joel ii. 28, 29.
   of which prophecy the apostle Peter takes notice, that it is
   accomplished in this dispensation, Acts ii. 11.

   How wonderful a dispensation was this! Under the Old Testament but few
   had such honours put upon them by God. Moses indeed wished that all the
   Lord's people were prophets, Numb. xi. 29. whereas Joshua thought it
   much that Eldad and Medad prophesied. But now we find the wish of Moses
   fulfilled. And this continued in a very considerable degree to the end
   of the apostolic age, or the first hundred years after the birth of
   Christ, which is therefore called the age of miracles.

   This was a great means of the success of the gospel, and of
   establishing the christian church, not only in that age, but in all
   ages to the end of the world. For Christianity being established
   through so great a part of the known world by miracles, it was after
   that more easily continued by tradition; and by means of these
   extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, the apostles and others were
   enabled to write the New Testament, to be an infallible and perpetual
   rule of faith and manners to the church. And these miracles recorded in
   those writings are a standing proof of the truth of Christianity to all
   ages.

   V. The next thing is the revealing of those glorious doctrines fully
   and plainly, which had under the Old Testament been obscurely revealed.
   The doctrine of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness, his ascension
   and glory, and the way of salvation, were under the Old Testament in a
   great measure hid under the vail of types and shadows, and more obscure
   revelations, as Moses put a vail on his face to hide the shining of it;
   but now the vail of the temple is rent from the top to the bottom.
   Christ, the antetype of Moses, shines; his face is without a vail; 2
   Cor. iii. 12, 13, and 18. Now these glorious mysteries, which were in a
   great measure kept secret from the foundation of the world, are clearly
   revealed. Eph. iii. 3-5. Rom. xvi. 25. "According to the revelation of
   the mystery which was kept secret since the world began, but now is
   made manifest;" and, Col. i. 26. "Even the mystery which hath been hid
   from ages and generations, but now is made manifest to his saints."

   Thus the Sun of righteousness, after it is risen, begins to shine forth
   clearly, and not by a dim reflection as before.--Christ, before his
   death, revealed many things more clearly than ever they had been in the
   Old Testament: but the great mysteries of Christ's redemption,
   reconciliation by his death, and justification by his righteousness,
   were not so plainly revealed before Christ's resurrection. Christ gave
   this reason for it, that he would not put new wine into old bottles;
   and it was gradually done even after his resurrection. In all
   likelihood, Christ much more clearly instructed them personally after
   his resurrection, and before his ascension; as we read that he
   continued with them forty days, speaking of the things pertaining to
   the kingdom, Acts i. 3. and that" he opened their understandings, that
   they might understand the scriptures," Luke xxiv. 45. But the clear
   revelation of these things was principally after the pouring out of the
   Spirit on the day of Pentecost, agreeable to Christ's promise, John
   xvi. 12, 13. "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
   bear them now. Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come, he shall
   guide you into all truth." This clear revelation of the mysteries of
   the gospel, as they are delivered, we have chiefly through the hands of
   the apostle Paul, by whose writings a child may come to know more of
   the doctrines of the gospel, in many respects, than the greatest
   prophets knew under the darkness of the Old Testament.

   Thus we see how the light of the gospel, which began to dawn
   immediately after the fall, and gradually increased through all the
   ages of the Old Testament, is now come to the light of perfect day, as
   the brightness of the sun shining forth in his unvailed glory.

   VI. The next thing that I would observe, is the appointment of the
   office of deacons in the christian church, which we have an account of
   in the 6th chapter of the Acts, to take care for the outward supply of
   the members of Christ's church, and the exercise of that great
   christian virtue charity.

   VII. The calling, qualifying, and sending the apostle Paul. This was
   begun in his conversion as he was going to Damascus, and was one of the
   greatest means of the success of Christ's redemption that followed: for
   this success was more by the labours, preaching, and writings of this
   apostle, than all the other apostles put together. For, as he says, 1
   Cor. xv. 10. he laboured more abundantly than they all. As he was the
   apostle of the Gentiles, so it was mainly by his ministry that the
   Gentiles were called and the gospel spread through the world. Our
   nation, and the other nations of Europe, have the gospel among them
   chiefly through his means; and he was more employed by the Holy Ghost
   in revealing the glorious doctrines of the gospel by his writings, for
   the use of the church in all ages, than all the other apostles taken
   together.

   VIII. The next thing I would observe, is the institution of
   ecclesiastical councils, for deciding controversies, and ordering the
   affairs of the church of Christ, of which we have an account in the
   15th chapter of Acts.

   IX. The last thing I shall mention under this head, is the committing
   the New Testament to writing. This was all written after the
   resurrection of Christ by the apostles themselves, except the gospels
   of Mark and Luke, and the book of the Acts. He that wrote the gospel of
   Mark, is supposed to be the son of Mary, in whose house they were
   praying for Peter, when he, brought out of prison by the angel, came
   and knocked at the door; of which we read, "And when he had considered
   the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose
   surname was Mark, where many were gathered together, praying." He was
   the companion of the apostles Barnabas and Paul: Acts xv. 37. "And
   Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was
   Mark."--He was Barnabas's sister's son, and seems some time to have
   been a companion of the apostle Paul: Col. iv. 10. "Aristarchus, my
   fellow-prisoner, saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son to Barnabas;
   touching whom ye received commandment: if he come unto you, receive
   him." The apostles seem to have made great account of him, as appears
   by those places, and also by Acts xii. 25. "And Barnabas and Saul
   returned from Jerusalem, and took with them John, whose surname was
   Mark;" and Acts xiii. 5. "And when they were at Salamis, they preached
   the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews; and they had also John
   to their minister;" and2 Tim. iv. 11. "Only Luke is with me: take Mark
   and bring him with thee; for he is profitable to me for the ministry."

   He who wrote the gospel of Luke and the book of Acts, was a great
   companion of the apostle Paul. Beside the last-mentioned place, he
   speaks of himself as accompanying Paul in his travels, and therefore
   speaks in the first person plural; We went to such a place; We set
   sail, &c. He was greatly beloved by the apostle Paul: he is that
   beloved physician spoken of, Col iv. 14. The apostle ranks Mark and
   Luke among his fellow-labourers, Philemon 24. "Marcus, Aristarchus,
   Demas, Lucas, my fellow-labourers."

   The books of the New Testament are either historical, doctrinal, or
   prophetical. The historical books are the writings of the four
   evangelists, giving us the history of Christ, his purchase of
   redemption, his resurrection and ascension; and the Acts of the
   Apostles, giving an account of the great things by which the christian
   church was first established and propagated. The doctrinal books are
   the epistles; most of which we have from the great apostle Paul. And we
   have one prophetical book, which takes place after the end of the
   history of the whole Bible, and gives an account of the great events
   which were to come to pass, by which the work of redemption was to be
   carried on to the end of the world.

   All these books are supposed to have been written before the
   destruction of Jerusalem, excepting those which were written by the
   apostle John, who lived the longest of all the apostles, and who wrote
   after the destruction of Jerusalem, as is supposed. To this beloved
   disciple it was that Christ revealed those wonderful things which were
   to come to pass in his church to the end of time; and he was the person
   who put the finishing hand to the canon of Scripture, and sealed the
   whole of it. So that now the canon of Scripture, that great and
   standing written rule, which was begun about Moses's time, is completed
   and settled, and a curse denounced against him that adds any thing to
   it, or diminishes any thing from it. And so all the stated means of
   grace were finished in the apostolical age, or before the death of the
   apostle John, and are to remain unaltered to the day of judgment. Thus
   far we have considered those things by which the means of grace were
   given and established in the christian church.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECT. IV.

   How the success was carried on.

   From Christ's resurrection till the fall of Antichrist, is the
   appointed day of Zion's troubles. During this space of time, some part
   or other of the church is under persecution; and great part of the
   time, the whole church, or at least the generality of God's people,
   have been persecuted. For the first three hundred years after Christ,
   the church was for the most part in a state of great affliction, the
   object of reproach and persecution; first by the Jews, and then by the
   heathen.--After this, from the beginning of Constantine's time, the
   church had rest and prosperity for a little while; which is represented
   in Rev. vii. at the beginning, by the angel's holding the four winds
   for a little while. But presently after, the church again suffered
   persecution from the Arians. After that, Antichrist rose, the church
   was driven away into the wilderness, was kept down in obscurity,
   contempt, and suffering, for a long time before the Reformation by
   Luther and others. And since the Reformation, the church's persecutions
   have been beyond all that ever were before. And though some parts of
   God's church sometimes have had rest, yet to this day, for the most
   part, the true church is very much kept under by its enemies, and some
   parts of it under grievous persecution. And so we may expect it will
   continue till the fall of Antichrist. Then will come the appointed day
   of the church's prosperity on earth, the set time in which God will
   favour Zion, the time when the saints shall not be kept under by wicked
   men, but wherein they shall reign, as it is said, Rev. v. 10. "And the
   kingdom shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High,"
   Dan. vii. 27.

   The suffering state of the church is in Scripture represented as a
   state of the church's travail, (John xvi. 20, 21. and Rev. xii. 1, 2.)
   striving to bring forth that glory and prosperity which shall be after
   the fall of Antichrist, and then shall she bring forth her child. This
   is a long time of the church's trouble and affliction, though it be but
   for a little season, in comparison of the eternal prosperity of the
   church. Hence under the long continuance of this affliction, she cries
   out, (Rev. vi. 10.) How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not
   judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" And we are
   told, that "white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was
   said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until
   their fellow-servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as
   they were, should be fulfilled. [634] " So, Dan. xii. 6. How long shall
   it be to the end of these wonders."

   It is to be observed, that during the time of these sufferings of the
   church, the main instrument of their sufferings has been the Roman
   government. Rome therefore in the New Testament is called Babylon;
   because, as of old the troubles of the city of Jerusalem were mainly
   from that adverse city Babylon, so the troubles of the christian
   church, the spiritual Jerusalem, during the long time of its
   tribulation, are mainly from Rome. Before the time of Constantine, the
   troubles of the christian church were from heathen Rome: since that
   time, its troubles have been mainly from antichristian Rome. And as of
   old, the captivity of the Jews ceased on the destruction of Babylon, so
   the time of the trouble of the christian church will cease with the
   destruction of the church of Rome, that spiritual Babylon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [634] Rev. vi. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART I.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST TO THE
   DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.

   I would now show, how the success of Christ's purchase of redemption
   was carried on from Christ's resurrection to the destruction of
   Jerusalem. In speaking of this I would, 1. take notice of the success
   itself; and, 2. the opposition made against it by its enemies; and, 3.
   the terrible judgments of God on those enemies.

   I. I would observe the success itself. Soon after Christ had entered
   into the holy of holies with his own blood, there began a glorious
   success of what he had done and suffered.--Having undermined the
   foundation of Satan's kingdom, it began to fall apace. Swiftly did it
   hasten to ruin, which might well be compared to Satan's falling like
   lightning from heaven. Satan before had exalted his throne very high in
   this world, even to the very stars of heaven, reigning with great glory
   in his heathen Roman empire; but never before had he such a downfall as
   he had soon after Christ's ascension. He had, we may suppose, been very
   lately triumphing in a supposed victory, having brought about the death
   of Christ, which he doubtless gloried in as the greatest feat that ever
   he did; and probably imagined he had totally defeated God's design by
   him. But he was quickly made sensible, that he had only been ruining
   his own kingdom, when he saw it tumbling so fast so soon after, as a
   consequence of the death of Christ. For Christ, having ascended, and
   received the Holy Spirit, poured it forth abundantly for the conversion
   of thousands and millions of souls.

   Never had Christ's kingdom been so set up in the world. There probably
   were more souls converted in the age of the apostles, than had been
   before from the beginning of the world till that time. Thus God so soon
   begins gloriously to accomplish his promise to his Son, wherein he had
   promised, That he should see his seed, and that the pleasure of the
   Lord should prosper in his hand, if he would make his soul an offering
   for sin. And,

   1. Here is to be observed the success which the gospel had among the
   Jews; for God first began with them. He being about to reject the main
   body of that people, first calls in his elect from among them. It was
   so in former great and dreadful judgments of God on that nation; the
   bulk of them were destroyed, and only a remnant saved, or reformed. The
   bulk of the ten tribes was rejected, when they left the true worship of
   God under Jeroboam, and afterwards more fully in Ahab's time; but yet
   there was a remnant of them reserved. Many left their possessions in
   these tribes, and settled in the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. And
   afterwards there were seven thousand in Ahab's time, who had not bowed
   the knee to Baal. From the captivity into Babylon, only a remnant of
   them ever returned to their own land. So now the greater part of the
   people were rejected entirely, but some few were saved. And therefore
   the Holy Ghost compares this reservation of a number that were
   converted by the preaching of the apostles, to those former remnants:
   Rom. ix. 27. "Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number
   of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be
   saved."--See Isa. x. 22.

   The glorious success of the gospel among the Jews after Christ's
   ascension, began by the pouring out of the Spirit upon the day of
   Pentecost. (Acts ii.) So wonderful was this effusion, and so remarkable
   and swift the effect of it, that we read of three thousand who were
   converted to the christian faith in one day, Acts ii. 41. and probably
   the greater part of these were savingly converted. And after this, we
   read of God's adding to the church daily such as should be saved, (
   ver. 47.) Soon after, we read, that the number of them were about five
   thousand. Thus were not only a multitude converted, but the church was
   then eminent in piety, as appears by Acts ii. 46, 47. iv. 32.

   Thus the christian church was first formed from the nation of Israel;
   and therefore, when the Gentiles were called, they were added to the
   christian church of Israel, as the proselytes of old were to the Mosaic
   church of Israel. They were only grafted on the stock of Abraham, and
   were not a distinct tree; for they were all still the seed of Abraham
   and Israel; as Ruth the Moabitess, and Uriah the Hittite, and other
   proselytes of old, were the same people, and ranked as the seed of
   Israel.

   The christian church began at Jerusalem, and from thence was propagated
   to all nations: so that this church of Jerusalem was the mother of all
   other churches in the world; agreeable to the prophecy, Isa. ii. 3, 4.
   "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
   Jerusalem: and he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many
   people." So that the whole church of God is still his spiritual
   Jerusalem.

   After this, we read of many thousands of Jews in Jerusalem that
   believed, Acts xxi. 20. And we read of multitudes of Jews who were
   converted in other cities of Judea, and in other parts of the world.
   For it was the manner of the apostles to go first into the synagogues
   of the Jews, and preach the gospel to them, and many in one place and
   another believed; as in Damascus, Antioch, and many other places.

   In this pouring out of the Spirit, at the Pentecost, began that first
   great dispensation which is called Christ's coming in his kingdom.
   Christ's coming thus in a spiritual manner for the glorious erection of
   his kingdom in the world, is represented as his coming down from
   heaven, whither he had ascended, John xiv. 18. "I will not leave you
   comfortless; I will come unto you." And ver. 28. "Ye have heard how I
   said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you." And thus the
   apostles began to see the kingdom of heaven come with power, as he
   promised them, Mark ix. 1.

   2. After the success of the gospel had been so gloriously begun among
   the Jews, we Spirit of God was next wonderfully poured out on the
   Samaritans; who were the posterity of those whom the king of Assyria
   removed from different parts of his dominions, and settled in the land
   which had been inhabited by the ten tribes, whom he carried captive.
   These had received the five books of Moses, and practised most of the
   Mosaic rites, and so were a sort of mongrel Jews. We do not find them
   reckoned as Gentiles in the New Testament: for the calling of the
   Gentiles is spoken of as a new thing after this, beginning with the
   conversion of Cornelius. But yet it was an instance of making those a
   people who were no people: for they had corrupted the religion of
   Moses, and did not go up to Jerusalem to worship. They had another
   temple of their own in mount Gerizim; which is the mountain of which
   the woman of Samaria speaks, when she says, Our fathers worshipped in
   this mountain. Christ there does not approve of their separation from
   the Jews; but says, that they worshipped they knew not what, and that
   salvation is of the Jews. But now salvation is brought from the Jews to
   them by the preaching of Philip, (excepting that before Christ had some
   success among them,) with whose preaching there was a glorious pouring
   out of the Spirit of God in the city of Samaria; where we are told,
   that "the people believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
   kingdom of Christ, and were baptized, both men and women; and that
   there was great joy in that city," Acts viii. 8-12.

   Thus Christ had a glorious harvest in Samaria; according to what he
   said to his disciples at Jacob's well, three or four years before, on
   occasion of the people of Samaria appearing at a distance in the fields
   coming to the place where he was. John iv. 35, 36. The disposition
   which the people of Samaria showed towards Christ and his gospel,
   showed that they were ripe for the harvest; and now the harvest is come
   by Philip s preaching. There used to be a most bitter enmity between
   the Jews and Samaritans; but now, by their conversion, the christian
   Jews and Samaritans are all happily united: for in Christ Jesus is
   neither Jew nor Samaritan, but Christ is all in all. This was a
   glorious instance of the wolf dwelling with the lamb, and the leopard
   lying down with the kid.

   3. The next thing to be observed is the calling the Gentiles. This was
   a great and glorious dispensation, much spoken of in the Old Testament,
   and by the apostles, as a most glorious event. This was began in the
   conversion of Cornelius and his family, greatly to the admiration of
   Peter, who was used as the instrument of it, and of those who were with
   him, Acts x. and xi. The next instance was the conversion of great
   numbers of Gentiles in Cyprus, Cyrene, and Antioch, by the disciples
   who were scattered abroad by the persecution which arose about Stephen,
   Acts xi. 19-21. And presently upon this the disciples began to be
   called Christians first at Antioch, ( ver. 26.)

   After this vast multitudes of Gentiles were converted in different
   parts of the world, chiefly by the ministry of the apostle Paul.
   Multitudes flocked into the church of Christ in a great number of
   cities where the apostle came. So the number of Gentile members of the
   christian church soon far exceeded that of its Jewish members; yea, in
   less than ten years' time after Paul was sent forth from Antioch to
   preach to the Gentiles, it was said of him and his companions, that
   they had turned the world upside down: Acts xvii. 6. "These that have
   turned the world upside down are come hither also." But the most
   remarkable instance, seems to be that in Ephesus, which was a very
   great city, Acts xix. There was also a very extraordinary ingathering
   of souls at Corinth, one of the greatest cities in all Greece. And
   after this many were converted in Rome, the chief city of all the
   world; and the gospel was propagated into all parts of the Roman
   empire. Thus the gospel-sun which had lately risen on the Jews, now
   rose upon, and began to enlighten, the heathen world, after they had
   continued in gross heathenish darkness for so many ages.

   This was a great and new thing, such as never had been before. All
   nations but the Jews, and a few who had occasionally joined them, had
   been rejected from about the time of Moses. The Gentile world had been
   covered with the thick darkness of idolatry; but now at the joyful
   sound of the gospel, they began in all parts to forsake their idols,
   and to cast them to the moles and to the bats. They now learned to
   worship the true God, and to trust in his Son Jesus Christ. God owned
   them for his people; and those who had so long been afar off, were made
   nigh by the blood of Christ. Men, from being heathenish and brutish,
   became the children of God; were called out of Satan's kingdom of
   darkness, and brought into God's marvellous light. In almost all
   countries throughout the known world there were christian assemblies,
   and joyful praises were sung to the true God, and Jesus Christ the
   glorious Redeemer. Now that great building which God began soon after
   the fall of man, rises gloriously in a new manner; now Daniel's
   prophecies concerning the last kingdom, which should succeed the four
   heathenish monarchies, begins to be fulfilled; now the stone cut out of
   the mountain without hands, began to smite the image on its feet, and
   to break it in pieces, and to make great advances towards filling the
   earth; and now God gathers together his elect from the four winds of
   heaven, by the preaching of the apostles and other ministers, (the
   angels of the christian church sent forth with the great sound of the
   gospel-trumpet,) before the destruction of Jerusalem, agreeable to what
   Christ foretold, Matt. xxiv. 31.

   II. I would proceed now, in the second place, to take notice of the
   opposition which was made to this success of Christ's purchase by the
   enemies of it.--Satan, who lately was so ready to triumph and exult, as
   though he had gained the victory in putting Christ to death, now
   finding himself fallen into the pit which he had digged, and finding
   his kingdom falling so fast, and seeing Christ's kingdom make such
   amazing progress, was filled with the greatest confusion and
   astonishment: and hell seemed to be effectually alarmed to make the
   most violent opposition against it. And, first, the devil stirred up
   the Jews, who had before crucified Christ, to persecute the church: for
   it is observable, that the persecution which the church suffered during
   this period, was mostly from the Jews. Thus we read in the Acts, when
   the Holy Ghost was poured out at Pentecost, how the Jews mocked, and
   said, These men are full of new wine; and how the scribes and
   Pharisees, and the captain of the temple, were alarmed, and bestirred
   themselves to oppose and persecute the apostles. They first apprehended
   and threatened them, and afterwards imprisoned and beat them; and
   breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the
   Lord, they stoned Stephen in a tumultuous rage; and were not content to
   persecute those that they could find in Judea, but sent abroad to
   Damascus and other places, to persecute all that they could find every
   where. Herod, who was chief among them, stretched forth his hands to
   vex the church, and killed James with the sword, and proceeded to take
   Peter also, and cast him into prison.

   So in other countries we find, that almost wherever the apostles came,
   the Jews opposed the gospel in a most malignant manner, contradicting
   and blaspheming. How many things did the blessed apostle Paul suffer at
   their hands! How violent and blood-thirsty did they show themselves
   towards him, when he came to bring alms to his nation! In this
   persecution and cruelty was fulfilled that saying of Christ, Matt.
   xxiii. 34. "Behold, I send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and
   some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye
   scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city."

   III. I proceed to take notice of the judgments which were executed on
   those enemies of Christ, the persecuting Jews.

   1. The bulk of the people were given up to judicial blindness of mind
   and hardness of heart. Christ denounced such a woe upon them in the
   days of his flesh; Matt. xiii. 14, 15.--This curse was also denounced
   on them by the apostle Paul, Acts xxviii. 25, 26, 27. and under this
   curse, this judicial blindness and hardness, they remain to this very
   day, having been subject to it for about seventeen hundred years, being
   the most awful instance of such a judgment, and monument of God's
   terrible vengeance, of any people. That they should continue from
   generation to generation so obstinately to reject Christ, so that it is
   a very rare thing that any one of them is converted to the christian
   faith--though their own Scriptures of the Old Testament, which they
   acknowledge, are so full of plain testimonies against them--is a
   remarkable evidence of their being dreadfully left of God.

   2. They were rejected from being any longer God's visible people. They
   were broken off from the stock of Abraham, and since that have no more
   been reputed his seed, than the Ishmaelites or Edomites, who are as
   much his natural seed as they. The greater part of the two tribes were
   now cast off, as the ten tribes had been before, and another people
   were taken in their room, agreeable to the predictions of their own
   prophets; Deut. xxxii. 21. "They have moved me to jealousy with that
   which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities;
   and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people, I
   will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation; and Isaiah. lxv. 1.
   "I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that
   sought me not."--They were visibly rejected by God's directing his
   apostles to turn away from them, and let them alone; Acts xiii. 46, 47.
   "Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the
   word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it
   from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we
   turn to the Gentiles: for so hath the Lord commanded us." And so Acts
   xviii. 6. and Acts xxviii. 28.

   Thus far we have had the scripture history to guide us: henceforward we
   shall have the guidance only of scripture prophecy, and human
   histories.

   3. The third and last judgment of God on those enemies of the success
   of the gospel which I shall mention, is the terrible destruction of
   their city and country by the Romans.--They had great warnings and many
   means used with them before this destruction. First, John the Baptist
   warned them, and told them, that the axe was laid at the root of the
   tree; and that every tree which should not bring forth good fruit,
   should be hewn down, and cast into the fire. Then Christ warned them
   very particularly, and told them of their approaching destruction, at
   the thoughts of which he wept over them. And then the apostles after
   Christ's ascension abundantly warned them. But they proved obstinate,
   and went on in their opposition to Christ and his church, and in their
   bitter persecuting practices. Their so indignantly persecuting the
   apostle Paul, of which we have an account towards the end of the Acts
   of the Apostles, is supposed to have been not more than seven or eight
   years before their destruction.

   After this, God was pleased to give them one more very remarkable
   warning by the apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Hebrews, written, it
   is supposed, about four years before their destruction; wherein the
   plainest and clearest arguments are set before them from their own law,
   and from their prophets, for whom they professed such a regard, to
   prove that Christ Jesus must be the Son of God, that all their law
   typified him, and that the Jewish dispensation must needs have ceased.
   For though the epistle was more immediately directed to the christian
   Hebrews, yet the matter of the epistle plainly shows that the apostle
   intended it for the use and conviction of the unbelieving Jews. And in
   this epistle he mentions particularly the approaching destruction,
   chap. x. 25. "So much the more, as ye see the day approaching;" and in
   ver. 27. he speaks of the approaching judgment and fiery indignation
   which should devour the adversaries.

   But the generality of them, refusing to receive conviction, God soon
   destroyed with such terrible circumstances, as the destruction of no
   country or city since the foundation of the world can parallel;
   agreeable to what Christ foretold, Matt. xxiv. 21. "For then shall be
   tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the world to this
   time, no, nor ever shall be." The first destruction of Jerusalem by the
   Babylonians was very terrible, as it is in a most affecting manner
   described by the prophet Jeremiah, in his Lamentations; but that was
   nothing to the dreadful misery and wrath which they suffered in this
   destruction. God, as Christ foretold, brought on them all the righteous
   blood that had been shed from the foundation of the world. Thus the
   enemies of Christ are made his footstool after his ascension, agreeable
   to God's promise in Psalm cx. and he rules them with a rod of iron. The
   briars and thorns set themselves against him in battle: but he went
   through them; he burned them together.

   This destruction of Jerusalem was in all respects agreeable to what
   Christ had foretold of it, Matt. xxiv. as appeals by the account which
   Josephus gives of it, who was then present, who had a share in the
   calamity, and who wrote the history of their destruction. Many
   circumstances resembled the destruction of the wicked at the day of
   judgment; by his account, it was accompanied with many fearful sights
   in the heavens, and with a separation of the righteous from the wicked.
   Their city and temple were burnt, and razed to the ground; and the
   ground on which the city stood was ploughed, so that one stone was not
   left upon another, Matt. xxiv. 2.

   The people had ceased for the most part to be an independent government
   after the Babylonish captivity; but the sceptre entirely departed from
   Judah on the death of Archelaus, when Judea was made a Roman province.
   After this, they were cast off from being the people of God; but now
   their very city and land are utterly destroyed, and they carried away
   from it; and so have continued in their dispersions through the world
   for now above sixteen hundred years.

   Thus there was a final end put to the Old-Testament world: all was
   finished with a kind of day of judgment, in which the people of God
   were saved, and his enemies terribly destroyed.--Thus does he who was
   so lately mocked, despised, and spit upon by these Jews, and whose
   followers they so malignantly persecuted, appear gloriously exalted
   over his enemies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART II.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM, TO THE
   TIME OF CONSTANTINE.

   Jerusalem was destroyed about the year of our Lord sixty-eight, and so
   before that generation passed away which was contemporary with Christ.
   The destruction of the heathen empire under Constantine, was about two
   hundred and sixty years after this. In showing how the success of the
   gospel was carried on through this time, I would, 1. Take notice of the
   opposition made against it by the Roman empire. 2. How the work of the
   gospel went on notwithstanding all that opposition. 3. The peculiar
   circumstances of tribulation and distress that the church was in just
   before their deliverance by Constantine; and 4. The great revolution in
   Constantine's time.

   I. I would briefly show what opposition was made against the gospel,
   and the kingdom of Christ, by the Roman empire. This opposition was
   mainly after the destruction of Jerusalem, though it began before; but
   that which was before the destruction of Jerusalem, was mainly by the
   Jews. When Jerusalem was destroyed, the Jews were much incapacitated
   for troubling the church; therefore the devil turns his hand elsewhere,
   and uses other instruments. The opposition which was made in the Roman
   empire against the kingdom of Christ was chiefly of two kinds.

   1. They employed all their learning, philosophy, and wit, in opposing
   it. Christ came into the world in an age wherein learning and
   philosophy were at their height in the Roman empire. The gospel, which
   held forth a crucified Saviour, was not at all agreeable to the notions
   of the philosophers.--The christian scheme of trusting in such a
   crucified Redeemer, appeared foolish and ridiculous to them. Greece was
   a country the most famous for learning of any in the Roman empire; but
   the apostle observes, that the doctrine of Christ crucified appeared
   foolishness to the Greeks, 1 Cor. i. 23. and therefore the wise men and
   philosophers opposed the gospel with all the wit they had. We have a
   specimen of their manner of opposing, in their treatment of the apostle
   Paul at Athens, which was, and had been for many ages, the chief seat
   of philosophers in all the whole world. We read in Acts xvii. 18. that
   the philosophers of the Epicureans and Stoics encountered him, saying,"
   What will this babbler say? He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange
   gods.'' Thus they were wont to deride and ridicule Christianity; and,
   after the destruction of Jerusalem, several philosophers published
   books against it. The chief of these were Celsus and Porphyry, who
   wrote with a great deal of virulence and contempt, much after the
   manner of the deists of the present age. As great enemies and despisers
   as they were of the Christian religion, they never denied the facts
   recorded of Christ and his apostles in the New Testament, particularly
   the miracles which they wrought, but allowed them. They lived too near
   the times of these miracles to deny them; for they were so publicly
   done, and so lately, that neither Jews nor heathens in those days
   appeared to deny them; but they ascribed them to the power of magic.

   2. The authority of the Roman empire employed all their strength, time
   after time, to persecute, and if possible to root out, Christianity.
   This they did in ten general successive persecutions. We have
   heretofore observed that Christ came into the world when the strength
   of heathen dominion and authority was the greatest under the Roman
   monarchy. All the strength of this monarchy was employed for a long
   time to oppose and persecute the christian church, and if possible to
   destroy it, in ten successive attempts, which are called the ten
   heathen persecutions.

   The first of these, which was the persecution under Nero, was a little
   before the destruction of Jerusalem, in which the apostle Peter was
   crucified, and the apostle Paul beheaded, soon after he wrote his
   second epistle to Timothy. When he wrote that epistle, he was a
   prisoner at Rome under Nero, and says, chap. iv. 6, 7. "I am now ready
   to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a
   good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." There
   were many thousands of other Christians slain in that persecution.--The
   other nine persecutions were all after the destruction of Jerusalem.
   Some of these were very terrible indeed, and far exceeded the first
   persecution under Nero. One emperor after another set himself with the
   utmost rage to root out the christian church from the earth, that there
   should not be so much as the name of Christian left in the world.
   Thousands, yea millions, were put to cruel deaths in them; for they
   spared neither sex nor age.

   In the second general persecution, (under Domitian,) that which was
   next after the destruction of Jerusalem, the apostle John was banished
   to the isle of Patmos, where he had those visions which he has recorded
   in the Revelation. Under that persecution it was reckoned, that about
   forty thousand suffered martyrdom; which yet was nothing to what were
   put to death under some succeeding persecutions. Ten thousand suffered
   that one kind of cruel death, crucifixion, in the third persecution
   under the emperor Adrian. Under the fourth persecution, which began
   about the year of Christ one hundred and sixty-two, many suffered
   martyrdom in England, the land of our forefathers, where Christianity
   had been planted, it is supposed, in the days of the apostles. And in
   the later persecutions, the Roman emperors being vexed at the
   frustration of their predecessors, who were not able to extirpate
   Christianity, or hinder its progress, were enraged to be the more
   violent in their attempts.

   Thus a great part of the first three hundred years after Christ was
   spent in violent and cruel persecutions of the church by the Roman
   powers. Satan was very unwilling to quit his hold of so great and
   distinguished a part of the world, as the countries contained in the
   Roman empire, of which he had had the quiet possession for so many
   ages: and therefore, when he saw it going so fast out of his hands, he
   bestirred himself to his utmost. All hell was raised to oppose it with
   its utmost power.

   Satan thus exerting himself by the power of the heathen Roman empire,
   is called the great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns,
   fighting against the woman clothed with the sun. (Rev. xii.) And this
   terrible conflict between the church of Christ, and the powers of the
   heathen empire before Constantine, is represented (verse 7.) by the war
   between Michael and his angels, and the dragon and his angels: " And
   there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought, and the dragon
   fought and his angels."

   II. I would take notice what success the gospel had in the world before
   the time of Constantine, notwithstanding all this opposition.--Though
   the learning and power of the Roman empire were so great, and both were
   employed to the utmost against Christianity; yet all was in vain. They
   could neither root it out, nor stop its progress. In spite of all, the
   kingdom of Christ wonderfully prevailed, and Satan's heathen kingdom
   mouldered and consumed away before it, agreeable to the text, "The moth
   shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like
   wool. [635] " And it was very observable that, for the most part, the
   more they persecuted the church, the more it increased; insomuch that
   it became a common saying, The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the
   church.--Herein the church of Christ proved to be like a palm-tree; of
   which it is remarked, that the greater weight is hung to its branches,
   the more it grows and flourishes. On this account probably the church
   is compared to a palm-tree, Cant. vii. 7. "This thy stature is like to
   a palm-tree." Justin Martyr, an eminent father in the christian church,
   says, that in his days there was no part of mankind, whether Greeks or
   barbarians, or by what name soever they were called, even the most rude
   and unpolished nations, where prayers and thanksgivings were not made
   to the great Creator of the world, through the name of the crucified
   Jesus. Tertullian, another eminent father in the christian church, who
   lived in the beginning of the following age, testifies, that in his
   days the christian religion had extended itself to the utmost bounds of
   the then known world, in which he reckons Britain; and thence
   demonstrates, that the kingdom of Christ was then more extensive than
   any of the four great monarchies. He moreover says, that though the
   Christians were strangers of no long standing, yet they had filled all
   places of the Roman dominions, their cities, islands, castles,
   corporations, councils, armies, tribes, the palace, senate, and courts
   of judicature; only they had left to the heathen their temples. He
   adds, that if they should all agree to retire out of the Roman empire,
   the world would be amazed at the solitude and desolation that would
   ensue upon it, there would be so few left; and that the Christians were
   enough to be able easily to defend themselves, if they were disposed to
   rise up in arms against the heathen magistrates.--And Pliny, a heathen
   who lived in those days, says, that multitudes, of each sex, of every
   age and quality, were become Christians. This superstition, says he,
   having infected and overrun not the city only, but towns and countries,
   the temples and sacrifices are generally desolate and forsaken.

   And it was remarked by both heathen and christian writers in those
   days, that the famous heathen oracles in their temples--where princes
   and others for many past ages had been wont to inquire and receive
   answers with an audible voice from their gods, which were indeed
   answers from the devil--were now struck dumb, and gave no more answers:
   and particularly the oracle at Delphos, the most famous in the whole
   world, which both Greeks and Romans used to consult, began to cease to
   give any answers, even from the birth of Christ. The false deity who
   was worshipped, and who used to give answers from his oracle in that
   temple, being once inquired of, why he did not now give answers as he
   was wont to do? made this reply, (as several heathen historians who
   lived about those times relate,) There is a Hebrew boy, who is king of
   the gods, who has commanded me to leave this house, and begone to hell,
   and therefore you are to expect no more answers. And many heathen
   writers who lived about that time, speak much of the oracles being
   silenced, at which they wondered, not knowing what the cause should be.
   Plutarch wrote a particular treatise about it, which is still extant.
   And Porphyry, who opposed the christian religion, has these words, "It
   is no wonder if the city for these many years has been overrun with
   sickness; Esculapius, and the rest of the gods, having withdrawn their
   converse with men: for since Jesus began to be worshipped, no man has
   received any public help or benefit by the gods." Thus did the kingdom
   of Christ prevail against the kingdom of Satan.

   III. I now proceed to take notice of the peculiar circumstances of
   tribulation and distress just before Constantine the Great came to the
   throne. This distress they suffered under the tenth heathen
   persecution, which, as it was the last, so it was by far the heaviest
   and most severe. The church before this, after the ceasing of the ninth
   persecution, had enjoyed a time of quietness for about forty years
   together; but abusing their liberty, they began to grow cold and
   lifeless in religion, and contentions prevailed among them; by which
   they offended God to suffer this dreadful trial to come upon them. And
   Satan having lost ground so much, notwithstanding all his attempts, now
   seemed to bestir himself with more than ordinary rage. Those who were
   then in authority set themselves with the utmost violence to root out
   Christianity, by burning all Bibles, and destroying all Christians; and
   therefore they did not stand to try or convict them in a formal
   process, but fell upon them wherever they could. Sometimes they set
   fire to houses where multitudes were assembled, burning them
   altogether; at other times they slaughtered such multitudes that their
   persecutors were quite spent with the labour of killing and tormenting
   them; and in some populous places, so many were slain together, that
   the blood ran like torrents. It is related, that seventeen thousand
   martyrs were slain in one month's time; and that during the continuance
   of this persecution, in the province of Egypt alone, no less than one
   hundred and forty-four thousand Christians died by the violence of
   their persecutors, besides seven hundred thousand that died through the
   fatigues of banishment, or the public works to which they were
   condemned.

   This persecution lasted for ten years together, and as it exceeded all
   the foregoing persecutions, in the number of martyrs, so it exceeded
   them in the variety and multitude of inventions of torture and cruelty.
   Some authors who lived at that time, say, they were innumerable, and
   exceed all account and expression. This persecution in particular was
   very severe in England; and is that which was foretold in Rev. vi. 9,
   10. "And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
   souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
   testimony which they held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying,
   How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our
   blood on them that dwell on the earth?" And at the end of the ten
   years, during which this persecution continued, the heathen persecutors
   thought they had finished their work, and boasted that they had utterly
   destroyed the name and superstition of the Christians, and had restored
   and propagated the worship of the gods.

   Thus it was the darkest time with the christian church, just before the
   break of day. They were brought to the greatest extremity before God
   appeared for their glorious deliverance, as the bondage of the
   Israelites in Egypt was the most severe and cruel just before their
   deliverance by the hand of Moses. Their enemies thought they had
   swallowed them up, and sealed their destruction, as Pharaoh and his
   host thought when they had hemmed in the children of Israel at the Red
   sea.

   IV. I come now, in the fourth place, to the great revolution by
   Constantine, which was in many respects like Christ's appearing in the
   clouds of heaven to save his people, and judge the world. The people of
   Rome being weary of the government of those tyrants to whom they had
   lately been subject, sent to Constantine, who was then in the city of
   York in England, to come and take the throne. He was encouraged, it is
   said, by a vision of a pillar of light in the heavens, in the form of a
   cross, in the sight of his whole army, with this inscription, NOT
   ENGLISH, In this overcome; and the night following, by Christ's
   appearing to him in a dream with the same cross in his hand, who
   directed him to make a cross like that to be his royal standard, that
   his army might fight under that banner, and assured him that he should
   overcome. Accordingly he overcame his enemies, took possession of the
   imperial throne, embraced the christian religion, and was the first
   christian emperor that ever reigned. He came to the throne about three
   hundred and twenty years after Christ. There are several things which I
   would take notice of which attended, or immediately followed,
   Constantine's coming to the throne.

   1. The christian church was thereby wholly delivered from persecution.
   Now the day of her deliverance came after such a dark night of
   affliction: weeping had continued for a night, but now deliverance and
   joy came in the morning. Now God appeared to judge his people, and
   repented himself for his servants, when he saw their power was gone,
   and that there was none shut up or left. Christians had no persecutions
   now to fear. Their persecutors now were all put down, and their rulers
   were some of them Christians like themselves.

   2. God now appeared to execute terrible judgments on their enemies.
   Remarkable are the accounts which history gives of the fearful ends to
   which the heathen emperors, princes, generals, captains, and other
   great men were brought, who had exerted themselves in persecuting the
   Christians; dying miserably, one after another, under exquisite
   torments of body, and horrors of conscience, with a most visible hand
   of God upon them. So that what now came to pass might very fitly be
   compared to their hiding themselves in the dens and rocks of the
   mountains.

   3. Heathenism now was in a great measure abolished throughout the Roman
   empire. Images were now destroyed, and heathen temples pulled down.
   Images of gold and silver were melted down, and coined into money. Some
   of the chief of their idols, which were curiously wrought, were brought
   to Constantinople, and there drawn with ropes up and down the streets
   for the people to behold and laugh at. The heathen priests were
   dispersed and banished.

   4. The christian church was brought into a state of great peace and
   prosperity. Now all heathen magistrates were put down, and only
   Christians were advanced to places of authority all over the empire.
   They had now christian presidents, christian governors, christian
   judges and officers, instead of their old heathenish ones. Constantine
   set himself to put honour upon christian bishops or ministers, and to
   build and adorn churches; and now large and beautiful christian
   churches were erected in all parts of the world, instead of the old
   heathen temples.

   This revolution was the greatest change in the face of things that ever
   came to pass in the world since the flood.--Satan, the prince of
   darkness, that king and god of the heathen world, was cast out. The
   roaring lion was conquered by the Lamb of God, in the strongest
   dominion that he ever had. This was a remarkable accomplishment of Jer.
   x. 11. "The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even
   they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.''--The
   chief part of the world was now brought utterly to cast off their gods
   and their old religion, to which they had been accustomed much longer
   than any of their histories give an account of. They had been
   accustomed to worship the gods so long, that they knew not any
   beginning of it. It was formerly spoken of as a thing unknown for a
   nation to change their gods, Jer. ii. 10, 11. but now the greater part
   of the nations of the known world were brought to cast off all their
   former gods. That multitude of gods which they worshipped, were all
   forsaken. Thousands of them were cast away for the worship of the true
   God, and Christ the only Saviour: and there was a most remarkable
   fulfilment of Isa. ii. 17, 18. "And the loftiness of man shall be bowed
   down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone
   shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish."
   And since that, those gods which were once so famous in the world, as
   Jupiter, and Saturn, and Minerva, and Juno, &c. are only heard of as
   things of old. They have had no temples, no altars, no worshippers, for
   many hundred years.

   Now is come the end of the old heathen world in its principal part, the
   Roman empire. And this great revolution, with that terrible destruction
   of the great men who had been persecutors, is compared, (Rev. vi.) to
   the end of the world, and Christ coming to judgment; and is most
   immediately signified under the sixth seal, which followed upon the
   souls under the altar crying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost
   thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? This vision
   of the sixth seal, by the general consent of expositors, has respect to
   this downfall of the heathen Roman empire; though it has a more remote
   respect to the day of judgment of which this was a type. The day of
   judgment cannot be what is immediately intended; because we have an
   account of many events which were to come to pass after those of the
   sixth seal.

   What came to pass now is also represented by the devil's being cast out
   of heaven to the earth. In his great strength and glory, over that
   mighty Roman empire, he had exalted his throne up to heaven. But now he
   fell like lightning from heaven, and his kingdom was confined to the
   meaner and more barbarous nations, or to the lower parts of the world.
   This is the event foretold, Rev. xii. 9, &c. "And the great dragon was
   cast out, that old serpent, called the devil and Satan, which deceiveth
   the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were
   cast out with him," &c. Satan had formerly tempted Christ, and promised
   to give him the glory of the kingdoms of the world; but now he is
   obliged to give it to him even against his will. This was a glorious
   fulfilment of that promise which God made to his Son, Isa. liii. 12.
   "Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
   divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul
   unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the
   sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." This was a
   great fulfilment of prophecies concerning the glorious time of the
   gospel, and particularly those of Daniel. Now it pleased the Lord God
   of heaven to set up a kingdom on the ruins of Satan's kingdom; and such
   honour does the Father put upon Christ for the disgrace he suffered
   when on earth.

   From what has been said of the success of the gospel from Christ's
   ascension to the time of Constantine, we may deduce a strong argument
   for the truth of the christian religion, and that the gospel of Jesus
   Christ is really from God. Particularly,

   1. We may gather from what has been said, that it is the gospel, and
   that only, which has actually been the means of bringing the world to
   the knowledge of the true God. That those are no gods whom the heathen
   worshipped, and that there is but one only God, is what, now since the
   gospel has so taught us, we can see to be truth by our own reason. It
   is plainly agreeable to the light of nature; and it can be easily shown
   by reason to be demonstrably true. The very deists themselves
   acknowledge, that it can be demonstrated, that there is one God, and
   but one, who has made and governs the world. But now it is evident that
   it is the gospel, and that only, which has actually been the means of
   bringing men to the knowledge of this truth. It was not the
   instructions of philosophers; they tried in vain: The world by wisdom
   knew not God. Till the gospel and the Holy Scriptures came abroad, all
   the world lay in ignorance of the true God, and in the greatest
   darkness with respect to religion, embracing the absurdest opinions and
   practices, which all civilized nations now acknowledge to be childish
   fooleries. The light of nature, their own reason, and all the wisdom of
   learned men, signified nothing till the Scriptures came. But when these
   came abroad, they were successful to bring the world to an
   acknowledgment of the one only true God, and to worship and serve him.

   And hence it is, that all that part of the world which now acknowledges
   one only true God--Christians, Jews, Mahometans, and even
   deists--originally came to own him. It is owing to this that they are
   not in general at this day left in heathenish darkness. They have it
   all, either immediately from the Scriptures, or by tradition from their
   fathers, who had it first from the Scriptures. And doubtless those who
   now despise the Scriptures, and boast of the strength of their own
   reason, as being sufficient to lead into the knowledge of the one true
   God, if the gospel had never come abroad in the world to enlighten
   their forefathers, would have been as sottish and brutish idolaters as
   the world in general was before the gospel came abroad. The Mahometans,
   who own but one true God, at first borrowed the notion from the
   Scriptures: for the first Mahometans had been educated in the christian
   religion, and apostatized from it. And this is evident, that the
   Scriptures were designed of God to be the proper means to bring the
   world to the knowledge of himself, rather than human reason, or any
   thing else. For it is unreasonable to suppose, that the gospel, and
   that only which God never designed as the proper mean for obtaining
   this effect, should actually obtain it; and that after human reason,
   which he designed as the proper mean, had been tried for a great many
   ages without any effect. If the Scriptures be not the word of God, then
   they are nothing but darkness and delusion, yea, the greatest delusion
   that ever was. Now, is it reasonable to suppose, that God in his
   providence would make use of falsehood and delusion, to bring the world
   to the knowledge of himself, and that no part of it should be brought
   to the knowledge of him any other way?

   2. The gospel prevailing as it did against such powerful opposition,
   plainly shows the hand of God. The Roman government, that so violently
   set itself to hinder the success of the gospel, and to subdue the
   church of Christ, was the most powerful that ever was in the world; and
   not only so, but they seemed to have the church in their hands. The
   Christians who were under their command, never took up arms to defend
   themselves; they armed themselves with nothing but patience, and such
   like spiritual weapons: and yet this mighty power could not conquer,
   but, on the contrary, Christianity conquered them. The Roman empire had
   subdued many mighty and potent kingdoms; they subdued the Grecian
   monarchy, though it made the utmost resistance: and yet they could not
   conquer the church which was in their hands; but, on the contrary, were
   subdued and finally triumphed over by the church.

   3. No other sufficient cause can possibly be assigned for this
   propagation of the gospel, but only God's own power.--There was
   certainly some reason. Here was a great and wonderful effect; and this
   effect was not without some cause.--Now, what other cause can be
   devised but only the divine power? It was not the outward strength of
   the instruments which were employed in it. At first, the gospel was
   preached only by a few fishermen, who were without power and worldly
   interest to support them. It was not their craft and policy that
   produced this wonderful effect; for they were poor illiterate men. It
   was not the agreeableness of the story they had to tell to the notions
   and principles of mankind. This was no pleasant fable: a crucified God
   and Saviour was to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks
   foolishness. It was not the agreeableness of their doctrines to the
   dispositions of men: for nothing is more contrary to the corruptions of
   men than the pure doctrines of the gospel. This effect therefore can
   have proceeded from no other cause than the power and agency of God:
   and if the power of God was thus exercised to cause the gospel to
   prevail, then the gospel is his word; for surely God does not use his
   almighty power to promote a mere imposture and delusion.

   4. This success is agreeable to what Christ and his apostles
   foretold.--Matt. xvi. 18. "Upon this rock will I build my church: and
   the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." John xii. 24. "Verily,
   verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground,
   and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much
   fruit." And John xii. 31, 32. "Now is the judgment of this world: now
   shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up
   from the earth, will draw all men unto me." John xvi. 8. "When he (the
   Comforter) is come, he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness,
   and of judgment,--because the prince of this world is judged."

   So the apostle Paul, in 1 Cor. i. 21-28 declares, how that after the
   world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of
   preaching, to save them that believe; and that God chose the foolish
   things of the world to confound the wise; and weak things of the world,
   to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world,
   and things which are despised, yea and things which are not, to bring
   to nought things that are.--If any man foretells a thing, very likely
   in itself to come to pass, from causes which can be foreseen, it is no
   great argument of a revelation from God: but when a thing is foretold
   which is very unlikely ever to come to pass, is entirely contrary to
   the common course of things, and yet it does come to pass just
   agreeable to the prediction, this is a strong argument that the
   prediction was from God. Thus the consideration of the manner of the
   propagation and success of the gospel during the time which has been
   spoken of, affords great evidence that the Scriptures are the word of
   God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [635] Isa. li. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART III.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE TIME OF CONSTANTINE TO THE RISE OF
   ANTICHRIST.

   I am now to show how the success of Christ's redemption is carried on
   from the overthrow of the heathen Roman empire in the time of
   Constantine the Great, till the rise of Antichrist. And in order to a
   more clear view of the great works of God in accomplishing the success
   of Christ's redemption, and our seeing the glory of them, it will be
   necessary, as in the foregoing periods, to consider not only the
   success itself, but the opposition made to it.

   I. The opposition. Satan, the great red dragon, after so sore a
   conflict with Michael and his angels for the greater part of three
   hundred years, was at last entirely routed and vanquished; so that he
   was cast down, as it were, from heaven to the earth. Yet he does not
   give over his opposition to the woman, the church of Christ, concerning
   which all this conflict had been; but is still in a rage, renews his
   attempts, and has recourse to new devices against the church. The
   serpent, after he is cast out of heaven to the earth, casts out of his
   mouth water as a flood, to cause the woman to be carried away of the
   flood. The opposition that he made to the church of Christ before the
   rise of Antichrist, was principally of two sorts. It was either by
   corrupting the church of Christ with heresies, or by new endeavours to
   restore paganism.

   1. After the destruction of the heathen Roman empire, Satan infested
   the church with heresies. Though there had been so glorious a work of
   God in delivering the church from her heathen persecutors, and
   overthrowing the heathen empire; yet the days of the church's travail
   not being ended, and the set time of her prosperity not being yet come,
   (as being what was to succeed the fall of Antichrist,) therefore the
   peace and prosperity which the church enjoyed in Constantine's time,
   was but very short. It was a respite, which gave the church a time of
   peace and silence, as it were, for half an hour, wherein the four
   angels held the four winds from blowing till the servants of God should
   be sealed in their foreheads. But the church soon began to be greatly
   infested with heresies; the two principal, and those which did most
   infest the church, were the Arian and Pelagian.

   The Arians began soon after Constantine came to the throne. They denied
   the doctrine of the Trinity, the divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost,
   and maintained, that they were but mere creatures. This heresy
   increased more and more in the church, and prevailed like a flood which
   threatened to overthrow all, and entirely to carry away the church,
   insomuch that before the close of the fourth century, the greater part
   of the christian church were become Arians. Some emperors, the
   successors of Constantine, were Arians; so that being the prevailing
   party, and having the civil authority on their side, they raised a
   great persecution against the true church of Christ; so that this
   heresy might well be compared to a flood out of the mouth of the
   serpent, which threatened to overthrow all, and quite carry away the
   woman.

   The Pelagian heresy arose in the beginning of the next century. It
   began by one Pelagius, who was born in Britain: his British name was
   Morgan. He denied original sin and the influence of the Spirit of God
   in conversion, and held the power of free will, and many other things
   of like tendency; and this heresy did for a while greatly infest the
   church. Pelagius's principal antagonist, who wrote in defence of the
   orthodox faith, was St. Augustin.

   2. The other kind of opposition which Satan made against the church,
   was in his endeavours to restore paganism. His first attempt was by
   Julian the apostate. Julian was nephew to Constantine the Great. When
   Constantine died, he left his empire to three sons; and after their
   death, Julian the apostate reigned in their stead. He had been a
   professed Christian; but he fell from Christianity, and turned pagan;
   and therefore is called the apostate. When he came to the throne, he
   used his utmost endeavours to overthrow the christian church, and set
   up paganism again in the empire. He put down the christian magistrates,
   and set up heathens in their room. He rebuilt the heathen temples, set
   up the heathen worship, and became a most notorious persecutor of the
   Christians. He used to call Christ, by way of reproach, the Galilean.
   He was killed with a lance in his wars with the Persians. When he saw
   that he was mortally wounded, he took a handful of his blood, and threw
   it up towards heaven, crying out, "Thou hast overcome, O Galilean." He
   is commonly thought by divines to have committed the unpardonable sin.

   Another way that Satan attempted to restore paganism in the Roman
   empire, was by the invasions and conquest of heathen nations. For in
   this space of time, the Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous nations
   from the north, invaded the empire, and obtained great conquests. They
   even overran the empire, and in the fifth century took the city of
   Rome, and finally conquered and took possession of the western half of
   the empire, and divided it amongst them. It was divided into ten
   kingdoms, with which began the ten horns of the beast; for we are told,
   that the ten horns are ten kings, who should rise in the latter part of
   the Roman empire: these are also represented by the ten toes of
   Nebuchadnezzar's image. The invasion and conquests of these heathen
   nations are supposed to be foretold in the 8th chapter of Revelation,
   in what came to pass under the sounding of the four first trumpets. Now
   by their means heathenism was again for a while restored after it had
   been rooted out.--So much for the opposition of Satan against the
   success of the gospel during this space before the rise of Antichrist.
   I proceed,

   II. To show what success there was of the gospel in this space,
   notwithstanding this opposition.

   1. I would observe, that the opposition of Satan in those things was
   baffled. Though the dragon cast out of his mouth such a flood after the
   woman to carry her away, yet he could not obtain his design; but the
   earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the
   flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth. These heresies, which for
   a while so much prevailed, after a while dwindled away, and orthodoxy
   was again restored.

   2. The gospel, during this space of time, was further propagated
   amongst many barbarous nations in the confines of the Roman empire. In
   the time of Constantine there was a considerable propagation of the
   gospel in the East Indies, chiefly by the ministry of one Frumentius.
   Great numbers of the Iberians were converted to Christianity by a
   christian woman of eminent piety, whom they had taken captive. And some
   account is given of several other barbarous nations who were not within
   the Roman empire, that great numbers of them were brought to receive
   the gospel by the teaching and example of captives whom they had taken
   in war. About the year of Christ three hundred and seventy-two, the
   gospel was propagated among the barbarous inhabitants of Arabia; and
   among some of the northern nations; particularly, a prince of the Goths
   about this time became Christian, and a great number of his people with
   him. Towards the latter end of this century, the gospel was also
   further propagated among the Persians; and also the Scythians, a
   barbarous people, whom the apostle mentions, Col. iii. 11. "Barbarian,
   Scythian, bond nor free."

   And after this, about the year four hundred and thirty, there was a
   remarkable conversion of the Burgundians to the christian faith. Now
   the gospel began to be propagated in Ireland; and the Irish, who till
   now had been heathen, began to receive the christian faith. About the
   same time it was further propagated among some barbarous people in
   Scotland, and in some other places. In the next century, Zathus, a
   heathen king, who ruled over the Colchians, was brought to renounce his
   heathenism, and to embrace the christian religion. Several other
   barbarous nations are recorded to have renounced heathenism and
   embraced Christianity about this time, that I cannot stand to
   mention.--Thus I have briefly considered the principal events of
   Providence which concern the success of the gospel of Christ from
   Constantine to the rise of Antichrist.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART IV.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE RISE OF ANTICHRIST TO THE
   REFORMATION.

   I come now to the darkest and most dismal day that ever the christian
   church saw, and probably the darkest that ever it will see; from the
   rise of Antichrist till the Reformation by Luther and others. The true
   church in this space was for many hundred years in a state of great
   obscurity; like the woman in the wilderness, she was almost hid from
   sight and observation. In speaking of the events of this space of time,
   I would, 1. Take notice of the great machinations and works of Satan
   against the kingdom of Christ; 2. How the church of Christ was upheld
   during this time.

   I. I would take notice of the great machinations and works of Satan
   against the kingdom of Christ during this time. Satan had done great
   things against the christian church before, but had been baffled once
   and again. Michael and his angels had obtained a glorious victory. How
   terrible was his opposition during the continuance of the heathen
   empire; and how glorious was Christ's victory and triumph over him in
   the time of Constantine! It pleased God now to prepare the way for a
   yet more glorious victory over him; he is suffered to renew his
   strength, and to do the utmost that his power and subtlety can effect.
   He has a long time to lay his schemes, to establish his interest, and
   make his matters strong. God suffers him to carry his designs a great
   length indeed, almost to the swallowing up of his church; and to
   exercise a high, proud, and almost uncontrolled dominion in the world,
   a long time before Christ finally conquers, and utterly ruins his
   visible kingdom. This he will do in the time of the destruction of
   Antichrist: thus gloriously triumphing over Satan, after he has done to
   the utmost of his power and subtlety; after he has lifted himself
   highest of all, and dealt most proudly.

   The two great works of the devil, in this space of time, against the
   kingdom of Christ, are his creating his Antichristian and Mahometan
   kingdoms; which both together comprehend the ancient Roman empire; the
   kingdom of Antichrist the Western, and the Mahometan kingdom the
   Eastern, empire. As the Scriptures in the book of Revelation represent
   it, it is in the destruction of these that the glorious victory of
   Christ, at the introduction of the glorious times of the church, will
   mainly consist. And here let us briefly observe how Satan erects and
   maintains these two great kingdoms of his in opposition to the kingdom
   of Christ.

   1. With respect to the kingdom of Antichrist. This seems to be the
   masterpiece of all the contrivances of the devil against the kingdom of
   Christ, and is evidently so spoken of in Scripture. Antichrist is that
   man of sin, (2 Thess. ii. 3.) emphatically, as though he were so
   eminently. He is called Antichrist, which signifies the opponent or
   adversary of Christ, not because he is the only opponent of Christ; for
   the apostle John observes, that in his days there were many
   Antichrists. But yet this is called the Antichrist, as though there
   were none but he, because he was so eminently, and above all others. So
   this contrivance of the devil, is called the mystery of iniquity, 2
   Thess. ii. 7. We find no enemy of Christ one half so much spoken of in
   the prophecies of Revelation as this; and the destruction of no enemy
   is spoken of as so glorious, and so happy for the church.

   This is a contrivance to turn the ministry of the christian church into
   a ministry of the devil, and the angels of the churches into fallen
   angels. In the tyranny, superstition, idolatry, and persecution, which
   he sets up, he contrives to make an image of ancient paganism, and more
   than to restore what was lost by the overthrow of paganism in the time
   of Constantine. By these means, the head of the beast, which was
   wounded unto death in Constantine, has his deadly wound healed in
   Antichrist, Rev. xiii. 3. And the dragon, that formerly reigned in the
   heathen Roman empire, being cast out thence, after the beast with seven
   heads and ten horns rises up out of the sea, gives him his power, and
   seat, and great authority; and all the world wonders after the beast.

   I am far from pretending to determine the time when the reign of
   Antichrist began, which is a point that has been so much controverted
   among divines and expositors. It is certain that the twelve hundred and
   sixty days, or years, which are so often in Scripture mentioned as the
   time of the continuance of Antichrist's reign, did not commence before
   the year of Christ four hundred and seventy-nine; because if they did,
   they would have ended, and Antichrist would have fallen before now. The
   rise of Antichrist was gradual. The christian church corrupted itself
   in many things presently after Constantine's time; growing more and
   more superstitious in its worship, and by degrees bringing in many
   ceremonies into the worship of God, till at length they brought in the
   worship of saints, and set up images in their churches. The clergy in
   general, and especially the bishop of Rome, assumed more and more
   authority to himself. In the primitive times, he was only a minister of
   a congregation; then a standing moderator of a presbytery; then a
   diocesan bishop; then a metropolitan, which is equivalent to an
   archbishop; then a patriarch. Afterwards he claimed the power of
   universal bishop over the whole christian church; wherein he was
   opposed for a while, but afterwards was confirmed in it by the civil
   power of the emperor in the year six hundred and six. After that he
   claimed the power of a temporal prince, and so was wont to carry two
   swords, to signify that both the temporal and spiritual sword was his.
   He claimed more and more authority, till at length, as Christ's
   vice-regent on earth, he claimed the very same power that Christ would
   have done, if he was present on earth reigning on his throne; or the
   same power that belongs to God, and was used to be called God on earth;
   to be submitted to by all the princes of Christendom. He claimed power
   to crown princes, and to degrade them at his pleasure; and this power
   was owned: yea, kings and emperors used to kiss his feet. The emperors
   received their crowns at his hands; and princes were wont to dread the
   displeasure of the pope, as they would dread a thunderbolt from heaven.
   If the pope was pleased to excommunicate a prince, all his subjects
   were at once freed from their allegiance to him; and obliged not to own
   him any more, on pain of excommunication; and not only so, but any man
   might kill him wherever he found him. Further, the pope was believed to
   have power to damn men at pleasure; for whoever died under his
   excommunication, was looked upon as certainly damned. Several emperors
   were actually deposed, and ejected, and died miserably by his means;
   and if the people of any state or kingdom did not please him, he had
   power to lay that state or kingdom under an interdict, which was a
   sentence pronounced by the pope against that state or kingdom, whereby
   all sacred administrations among them could have no validity. There
   could be no valid baptisms, or sacraments, or prayers, or preaching, or
   pardons, till that interdict was taken off; so that that people
   remained, in their apprehension, in a miserable, damnable state, and
   therefore dreaded it as they would a storm of fire and brimstone from
   heaven. And in order to execute his wrath on a prince or people with
   whom he was displeased, other princes must also be put to a great deal
   of trouble and expense.

   And as the pope and his clergy robbed the people of their
   ecclesiastical and civil liberties and privileges, so they also robbed
   them of their estates, drained all Christendom of their money. They
   engrossed most of their riches into their own coffers, by vast
   revenues, besides pay for pardons and indulgences, baptisms and extreme
   unctions, deliverance out of purgatory, and a hundred other
   things.--See how well this agrees with the prophecies, 2 Thess. ii. 3,
   4. Dan. vii. 20, 21. Rev. xiii. 6, 7; xvii. 3, 4.

   During this time also superstition and ignorance more and more
   prevailed. The Holy Scriptures by degrees were taken out of the hands
   of the laity, the better to promote the unscriptural and wicked designs
   of the pope and the clergy; and instead of promoting knowledge among
   the people, they industriously promoted ignorance. It was a received
   maxim among them, That ignorance is the mother of devotion: and so
   great was the darkness of those times, that learning was almost extinct
   in the world. The very priests themselves, most of them, were
   barbarously ignorant as to any commendable learning, or any other
   knowledge, than their hellish craft in oppressing and tyrannizing over
   the souls of the people.--The superstition and wickedness of the church
   of Rome, kept growing worse and worse till the very time of the
   Reformation, and the whole christian world were led away into this
   great defection, excepting the remains of the christian church in the
   Eastern empire that had not been utterly overthrown by the Turks. The
   Greek church, and some others, were also sunk into great darkness and
   gross superstition, excepting also those few that were the people of
   God, who are represented by the woman in the wilderness, and God's two
   witnesses, of which more hereafter.--This is one of those two great
   kingdoms which the devil in this period erected in opposition to the
   kingdom of Christ, and was the greatest and chief.

   2. The Mahometan kingdom is another of mighty power and vast extent,
   set up by Satan against the kingdom of Christ. He set this up in the
   Eastern empire, as he did that of Antichrist in the Western.

   Mahomet was born in the year of Christ five hundred and seventy, in
   Arabia. When he was about forty years of age, he began to boast that he
   was the great prophet of God; and proceeded to teach his new-invented
   religion, of which he was to be worshipped as the head next under God.
   He published his Alcoran, which he pretended he received from the angel
   Gabriel; and being a subtle crafty man, possessed of considerable
   wealth, and living among a people who were very ignorant, and greatly
   divided in their opinions on religious matters, he by subtlety and fair
   promises of a sensual paradise, gained a number to be his followers. He
   set up for their prince, and propagated his religion by the sword, and
   made it meritorious of paradise to fight for him. By such means his
   party grew, and went on fighting till they conquered and brought over
   the neighbouring countries; and so his party gradually increased till
   they overran a great part of the world. First, the Saracens were some
   of his followers, who were a people of Arabia, where Mahomet lived, and
   who about the year seven hundred, dreadfully wasted the Roman
   empire.--They overran a great many countries belonging to the empire,
   and continued their conquests for a long time. These are supposed to be
   meant by the locusts mentioned in the 9th chapter of Revelation.

   And then the Turks, who were originally different from the Saracens,
   became followers of Mahomet, and conquered all the Eastern empire. They
   began their empire about the year of Christ twelve hundred and
   ninety-six; began to invade Europe in the year thirteen hundred; took
   Constantinople, and so became masters of all the Eastern empire, in the
   year fourteen hundred and fifty-three. And thus all the cities and
   countries where stood those famous churches of which we read in the New
   Testament, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, &c. now became
   subject to the Turks. These are supposed to be prophesied of by the
   horsemen in the 9th chapter of Revelation, beginning with the 15th
   verse. And the remains of the Christians in those parts of the world,
   who are mostly of the Greek church, are in miserable slavery under
   these Turks; are treated with a great deal of barbarity and cruelty,
   and are become mostly very ignorant and superstitious.

   Thus I have shown what great works of Satan were wrought during this
   space of time in opposition to the kingdom of Christ.

   II. I come now to show how the church of Christ was upheld through this
   dark time.

   1. It is to be observed, that towards the former part of this space of
   time, some of the nations of Christendom held out a long time before
   they complied with the corruptions and usurpations of the church of
   Rome. Though all the world wondered after the beast, yet all nations
   did not fall in at once. Many of the principal corruptions of the
   church of Rome were brought in with a great deal of struggle and
   opposition; and particularly, when the pope gave out, that he was
   universal bishop, many churches greatly opposed him in it; and it was a
   long time before they would yield to his exorbitant claims. And so,
   when the worship of images was first brought into the churches, there
   were many who greatly opposed it, and long held out against it. And so
   with respect to other corruptions of the church of Rome. Those who
   dwelt nearer to the city of Rome complied sooner; but some that were
   more remote, were a long time before they could be induced to put their
   necks under the yoke: and particularly a great part of the churches in
   England, Scotland, and France, retained the ancient purity of doctrine
   and worship much longer than many others who were nearer the chief seat
   of Antichrist.

   2. In every age of this dark time, there appeared particular persons in
   all parts of christendom, who bore a testimony against the corruptions
   and tyranny of the church of Rome--There is no one age of Antichrist,
   even in the darkest times, but ecclesiastical historians mention many
   by name who manifested an abhorrence of the pope, and his idolatrous
   worship, and pleaded for the ancient purity of doctrine and worship.
   God was pleased to maintain an uninterrupted succession of many
   witnesses through the whole time, in Germany, France, Britain, and
   other countries; private persons and ministers, some magistrates and
   persons of great distinction.--And there were numbers in every age who
   were persecuted and put to death for this testimony.

   3. Besides these particular persons dispersed, there was a certain
   people called the Waldenses, who lived separate from all the rest of
   the world, and constantly bore a testimony against the church of Rome
   through all this dark time. The place where they dwelt was the Vaudois,
   or the five valleys of Piedmont, a very mountainous country, between
   Italy and France; it was compassed about with those exceeding high
   mountains, the Alps, which were almost impassable, and therefore the
   valleys were almost inaccessible. There this people lived for many
   ages, in a state of a separation from all the world, having very little
   to do with any other people. And there they served God in the ancient
   purity of his worship, and never submitted to the church of Rome. This
   probably was the place especially meant in the 12th chapter of
   Revelation, 6th verse, as prepared of God for the woman, that they
   should feed her there during the reign of Antichrist.

   Some of the popish writers themselves own, that this people never
   submitted to the church of Rome. One of the popish writers, speaking of
   the Waldenses, says, The heresy of the Waldenses is the oldest heresy
   in the world. It is supposed that they first betook themselves to this
   place among the mountains, to hide themselves from the severity of the
   heathen persecutions which existed before Constantine the Great. And
   thus the woman fled into the wilderness from the face of the serpent,
   Rev. xii. 6, 14. "And to the woman were given two wings of a great
   eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place: where
   she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face
   of the serpent." The people being settled there, their posterity
   continued from age to age: and being, as it were, by natural walls, as
   well as by God's grace, separated from the rest of the world, they
   never partook of the overflowing corruption.

   These especially were those virgins who were not defiled, when other
   churches prostituted themselves; but they kept themselves pure for
   Christ alone. They followed the Lamb, their spiritual husband,
   whithersoever he went: they followed him into this hideous wilderness,
   Rev. xiv. 4, 5.--Their doctrine and worship appear to be the same with
   the protestant doctrine and worship; and by the confession of popish
   writers, they were a people remarkable for the strictness of their
   lives, for charity and other christian virtues. They lived in external
   poverty in this hideous country; but they chose this rather than comply
   with the great corruptions of the rest of the world.

   Living in so secret a place, it was a long time before they were
   noticed. But at last, falling under observation, the Romanists went out
   in mighty armies against them, fell upon them with insatiable cruelty,
   barbarously massacring and putting to death men, women, and children,
   with all imaginable tortures. Their enemies continued persecuting them
   with but little intermission for several hundred years; by which means
   many were driven out of the valleys of Piedmont. These fled into all
   parts of Europe, carrying with them their doctrine, to which many were
   brought over. Their persecutors could not by all their cruelties
   extirpate the church of God; so fulfilling his word, Matt. xvi. 18.
   "that the gates of hell should not prevail against it."

   4. Towards the latter part of this dark time, several noted divines
   openly appeared to defend the truth, and bear testimony against the
   corruptions of the church of Rome.--The first and principal of these
   was a certain English divine, John Wickliff, who appeared about one
   hundred and forty years before the Reformation; he strenuously opposed
   the popish religion, taught the same doctrine that the Reformers
   afterwards did, and had many followers in England. He was hotly
   persecuted in his lifetime, yet died in peace; but after he was buried,
   his bones were dug up by his persecutors, and burnt. His followers
   remained in considerable numbers in England till the Reformation; they
   were cruelly persecuted, and multitudes were put to death for their
   religion.

   Wickliff had many disciples, not only in England, but in other parts of
   Europe, whither his books were carried; and particularly in Bohemia,
   among whom were two eminent divines, John Huss, and Jerom, a divine of
   Prague, the chief city of Bohemia. These strenuously opposed the church
   of Rome, and had many who adhered to them. They were both burnt by the
   papists for their doctrine; and their followers in Bohemia were cruelly
   persecuted, but never extirpated till the Reformation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART V.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE REFORMATION TO THE PRESENT TIME.

   Thus having gone through the dark time of the church, I come now to
   consider that part which begins with the Reformation, and reaches to
   the present time. And here I would, 1. Speak of the Reformation itself;
   2. The opposition which the devil has made to the Reformed church; 3.
   What success there has lately been of the gospel in one place and
   another; 4. What the state of things is now in the world with regard to
   the church of Christ, and the success of his purchase.

   I. The first thing to be taken notice of is the Reformation itself.
   This was begun in Germany, about the year fifteen hundred and fifteen,
   by the preaching of Martin Luther, who being stirred in his spirit to
   see the horrid practices of the popish clergy--and having set himself
   diligently to inquire after truth by the study of the Holy Scriptures,
   and the writings of the ancient fathers of the church--very openly and
   boldly decried the corruptions and usurpations of the Romish church in
   his preaching and writings. He had soon a great number who fell in with
   him; among whom was the Elector of Saxony, the sovereign prince of the
   country to which he belonged. This greatly alarmed the church of Rome;
   it rallied all its force to oppose him and his doctrine, and fierce
   wars and persecutions were raised against it. But yet it went on by the
   labours of Luther and Melancthon in Germany, Zuinglius in Switzerland,
   and other eminent divines, who were contemporary with Luther;
   particularly Calvin, who appeared after the beginning of the
   Reformation, but was one of the most eminent reformers.

   Many of the princes of Germany soon fell in with the Reformed religion,
   and many other states and kingdoms in Europe, as England, Scotland,
   Sweden, Denmark, Norway, great part of France, Poland, Lithuania,
   Switzerland, and the Low Countries. So that it is thought, that
   heretofore about half Christendom were of the protestant religion;
   though since, the papists have gained ground: so that the protestants
   now have not so great a proportion.

   Thus God began gloriously to revive his church again, and advance the
   kingdom of his Son; after such a dismal night of darkness from the rise
   of Antichrist to that time. There had been many endeavours used by the
   witnesses for the truth for a reformation before. But now, when God's
   appointed time was come, his work went on with a swift and wonderful
   progress; and Antichrist, who had been rising higher and higher from
   his beginning till that time, was swiftly and suddenly brought down; he
   fell half-way towards utter ruin, and never has been able to rise again
   to his former height. A certain late expositor, (Mr. Lowman,) who
   explains the five first vials in the 16th chapter of Revelationwith
   greater probability perhaps than any who went before him, explains the
   fifth vial, which was poured out on the seat of the beast, of what came
   to pass in the Reformation; having explained the four preceding vials
   of certain great judgments which God brought on the popish dominions
   before the Reformation. It is said, Rev. xvi. 10. that "the fifth angel
   poured out his vial on the seat of the beast;" in the original, it is
   the throne of the beast; "and his kingdom was full of darkness, and
   they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven
   because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their
   deeds." [636] He poured out his vial upon the throne of the beast, i.e.
   on the authority and dominion of the pope: so the word throne is often
   used in Scripture; so 1 Kings i. 37. "As the Lord hath been with my
   lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater
   than the throne of my lord King David;" i.e. make his dominion and
   authority greater, and his kingdom more glorious.

   But now, in the Reformation, the vials of God's wrath were poured out
   on the throne of the beast, till it was terribly shaken and diminished.
   The pope's authority and dominion was so greatly diminished, both as to
   extent and degree, that he lost about half his dominions; besides that
   authority, even in popish dominions, which he had before. He is not
   regarded, and his power is dreaded in no measure as it was wont to be.
   The powers of Europe have learned not to put their necks under the
   pope's feet. He is as a lion that has lost his teeth, in comparison of
   what he was once. And when the pope and his clergy, enraged to see
   their authority so diminished at the Reformation, laid their heads
   together, and joined their forces to destroy the Reformation; their
   policy, which was wont to serve them so well, failed. They found their
   kingdom full of darkness, so that they could do nothing, any more than
   the Egyptians, who rose not from their seats for three days. The
   Reformed church was defended as Lot and the angels were in Sodom, by
   smiting the Sodomites with darkness or blindness, so that they could
   not find the door. God then fulfilled that in Job v. 11, &c. "To set up
   on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to
   safety. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
   cannot perform their enterprise. He taketh the wise in their own
   craftiness; and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. They
   meet with darkness in the day-time, and grope in the noon-day as in the
   night. But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and
   from the hand of the mighty."--Those proud enemies of God's people
   being so disappointed, and finding themselves so unable to uphold their
   own dominion and authority, were made as it were to gnaw their tongues
   for pain, or to bite them for mere rage.

   II. I proceed to show what opposition has been made by Satan and his
   adherents, to this success of Christ's purchase by the Reformation;
   observing as we go along, how far they have been baffled, and how far
   they have been successful.

   The opposition which Satan has made against the Reformed religion has
   been principally of the following kinds, viz. that which was made, 1.
   by a general council of the church of Rome; 2. by secret plots and
   devices; 3. by open wars and invasions; 4. by cruel oppression and
   persecution; and, 5. by bringing in corrupt opinions.

   1. The first opposition that I shall notice is that which was made by
   the clergy of the church of Rome in a general council. This was the
   famous council of Trent, which the pope called a little while after the
   Reformation. In that council, there met together six cardinals,
   thirty-two archbishops, two hundred and twenty-eight bishops, besides
   innumerable others of the Romish clergy. This council, in all their
   sittings, including the times of intermission, was held for twenty-five
   years together. Their main business all this while was to concert
   measures for establishing the church of Rome against the reformers, and
   for destroying the Reformation. But it proved that they were not able
   to perform their enterprise. The Reformed church, notwithstanding their
   great council, remained, and still remains. So that the council of the
   froward is carried headlong: their kingdom is full of darkness, and
   they weary themselves to find the door.

   Thus the church of Rome, instead of repenting of their deeds, when such
   clear light was held forth to them by Luther and other servants of God,
   persisted, by general agreement in council, in their vile corruptions
   and wickedness, and obstinate opposition to the kingdom of Christ. The
   doctrines and practices of the church of Rome, which were chiefly
   condemned by the Reformed, were confirmed by the decrees of their
   council; and the corruptions, in many respects, were carried higher
   than ever before. They uttered blasphemous reproaches and curses
   against the Reformed religion, and all the Reformed church was
   excommunicated and anathematized by them. According to the prophecy,
   they blasphemed God. Thus God hardened their hearts, [i. e. left them
   to do so,] intending to destroy them.

   2. The papists have often endeavoured to overthrow the Reformation by
   secret plots and conspiracies. There were many plots against the life
   of Luther. The papists were contriving to despatch him out of their
   way; and he, being a very bold man, often very much exposed himself in
   the cause of Christ: but yet they were wonderfully prevented from
   hurting him, and he at last died in his bed in peace. There have been
   innumerable schemes secretly laid for the overthrow of the protestant
   religion; one of the most considerable, and which seemed to be the most
   likely to have taken effect, was that in the time of King James II. of
   England. There was at that time a strong conspiracy between the king of
   England and Lewis XIV. of France, who were both papists, to extirpate
   the Northern heresy, as they called the protestant religion, not only
   out of England, but out of all Europe; and they had laid their schemes
   so, that they seemed to be almost sure of their purpose. They looked
   upon it, that if the Reformed religion were suppressed in the British
   realms, and in the Netherlands, which were the strongest part, and
   chief defence of the protestant interest, they should have easy work
   with the rest. And just as their matters seemed to be come to a head,
   and their enterprise ripe for execution, God in his providence,
   suddenly dashed all their schemes in pieces by the Revolution, at the
   coming in of King William and Queen Mary; by which all their designs
   were at an end. Now the protestant interest was more strongly
   established, by the crown of England being transferred to the
   protestant house of Hanover, and a papist being, by the constitution of
   the nation, for ever rendered incapable of wearing the crown of
   England. Thus they groped in darkness at noon-day as in the night, and
   their hands could not perform their enterprise, and their kingdom was
   full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain.

   After this, there was a deep design laid to bring the same thing to
   pass in the latter end of Queen Anne's reign, by the bringing in of the
   popish Pretender; which was no less suddenly and totally baffled by
   Divine Providence; as all the plots against the Reformation by bringing
   in the Pretender have been.

   3. The Reformation has often been opposed by open wars and invasions.
   The emperor of Germany declared war with the duke of Saxony, and the
   principal men who favoured and received Luther's doctrine. But they
   could not obtain their end; they could not suppress the Reformation.
   For the same end, some time after, the king of Spain maintained a long
   war with Holland and the Low Countries. But those cruel wars issued
   greatly to the disadvantage of the Romish church, as they occasioned
   the setting up of one of the most powerful protestant states in Europe.
   The design of the Spanish invasion of England in Queen Elizabeth's
   time, was to suppress and root out the Reformed religion; and therefore
   they brought in their fleet all manner of instruments of cruelty
   wherewith to torture the protestants who would not renounce the
   protestant religion. But their design was totally baffled, and their
   mighty fleet in a great measure ruined.

   4. Satan has opposed the Reformation with cruel persecutions. The
   persecutions with which the protestants have been harassed by the
   church of Rome, have in many respects been far beyond any of the
   heathen persecutions. So that Antichrist has proved the greatest and
   most cruel enemy to the church of Christ that ever was in the world, in
   this, as well as in all other respects; agreeable to the description
   given of the church of Rome, Rev. xvii. 6. "And I saw the woman drunken
   with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of
   Jesus." And, Rev. xviii. 24. "And in her was found the blood of
   prophets, and of saints, and of all them that were slain upon the
   earth."

   The heathen persecutions had been very dreadful: but now persecution by
   the church of Rome was improved, and studied, and cultivated, as an art
   or science. Such ways of afflicting and tormenting were found out, as
   are beyond the invention of ordinary men, or men unstudied in those
   things: and beyond the invention of all former ages. And that
   persecution might be managed the more effectually, there were certain
   societies of men established in various parts of the popish dominions,
   whose business it should be to study, and improve, and practise
   persecution in its highest perfection, viz. the courts of inquisition.
   The particular histories of the Romish persecution, and their courts of
   inquisition, will give that idea which a few words cannot express.

   When the Reformation began, the beast with seven heads and ten horns
   began to rage in a dreadful manner. The church of Rome renewed its
   persecution of the poor Waldenses, and great multitudes of them were
   cruelly tortured and put to death. Soon after the Reformation, there
   were terrible persecutions in various parts of Germany; and especially
   in Bohemia, which lasted for thirty years together; in which so much
   blood was shed for the sake of religion, that a certain writer compares
   it to the plenty of waters of the great rivers of Germany. The
   countries of Poland, Lithuania, and Hungary, were in like manner
   deluged with protestant blood.

   By means of these and other cruel persecutions, the protestant religion
   was in a great measure suppressed in Bohemia, the Palatinate, and
   Hungary, which before were protestant countries. Thus was fulfilled
   what was foretold of the little horn, Dan. vii. 20, 21."--and of the
   ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and
   before whom three fell, even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth
   that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his
   fellows. I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and
   prevailed against them." And what was foretold of the beast having
   seven heads and ten horns, Rev. xiii. 7."And it was given unto him to
   make war with the saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him
   over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations."

   Holland and the other Low Countries were for many years a scene of
   nothing but the most affecting and amazing cruelties, being deluged
   with the blood of protestants, under the merciless hands of the
   Spaniards, to whom they were then in subjection. But in this
   persecution, the devil in a great measure failed of his purpose; as it
   issued in a great part of the Netherlands casting off the Spanish yoke,
   and setting up a wealthy and powerful protestant state, to the great
   defence of the protestant cause ever since.

   France is also another country, which since the Reformation, in some
   respects, perhaps more than any other, has been a scene of dreadful
   cruelties suffered by the protestants. After many cruelties had been
   exercised towards the protestants in that kingdom, there was begun a
   persecution of them in the year fifteen hundred and seventy-one, in the
   reign of Charles IX. king of France. It began with a cruel massacre,
   wherein seventy thousand protestants were slain in a few days, as the
   king boasted: and in all this persecution, he slew, as is supposed,
   three hundred thousand martyrs. And it is reckoned, that about this
   time, within thirty years, there were martyred in this kingdom, for the
   protestant religion, thirty-nine princes, one hundred and forty-eight
   counts, two hundred and thirty-four barons, one hundred and forty-seven
   thousand five hundred and eighteen gentlemen, and seven hundred and
   sixty thousand common people.

   But all these persecutions were, for exquisite cruelty, far exceeded by
   those which followed in the reign of Lewis XIV. which indeed are
   supposed to exceed all others; and being long continued, by reason of
   the long reign of that king, they almost wholly extirpated the
   protestant religion out of that kingdom, where had flourished a
   multitude of famous protestant churches all over the kingdom. Thus it
   was given to the beast to make war with the saints, and to overcome
   them.

   There was also a terrible persecution in England in Queen Mary's time,
   wherein great numbers in all parts of the kingdom were burnt alive. And
   after this, though the protestant religion has been for the most part
   established by law in England, yet there have been very severe
   persecutions by the high-churchmen, who symbolize in many things with
   the papists. Such was that which occasioned our forefathers to flee
   from their native country, and to come and settle in this land, which
   was then a hideous howling wilderness. And these persecutions were
   continued with little intermission till King William came to the
   throne.

   Scotland has also been the scene, for many years together, of cruelties
   and blood by the hands of high-churchmen, such as came very little
   short of the popish persecution in Queen Mary's days, and in many
   things much exceeded it, which continued till they were delivered by
   King William.

   Ireland also has been as it were overwhelmed with protestant blood. In
   the days of King Charles I. of England, above two hundred thousand
   protestants were cruelly murdered in that kingdom in a few days; the
   papists, by a secret agreement, rising at an appointed time, intending
   to kill every protestant in the kingdom at once.

   Besides these, there have been very cruel persecutions in Italy, and
   Spain, and other places, which I shall not stand to relate.--Thus did
   the devil, and his great minister Antichrist, rage with such violence
   and cruelty against the church of Christ! and thus did the whore of
   Babylon make herself drunk with the blood of the saints and martyrs of
   Jesus! By these persecutions the protestant church has been much
   diminished. Yet have they not been able to prevail; but still the
   protestant church is upheld, and Christ fulfils his promise, that Matt.
   xvi. 18. "the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."

   5. The last kind of opposition that Satan has made to the Reformation
   is by corrupt opinions. The first opposition of this kind was by the
   sect of the Anabaptists, which began about four or five years after the
   Reformation itself. This sect, as it first appeared in Germany, were
   vastly more extravagant than the present Anabaptists are in England.
   They held a great many exceeding corrupt opinions. One tenet of theirs
   was, that there ought to be no civil authority, and that it was lawful
   to rebel against it. And on this principle, they refused to submit to
   magistrates, or any human laws; and gathered together in vast armies,
   to defend themselves against their civil rulers, and put all Germany
   into an uproar, and so kept it for some time.

   The next opposition of this kind to the Reformation was that which was
   made by enthusiasts. Those are called enthusiasts who falsely pretend
   to be inspired by the Holy Ghost as the prophets were. These began in
   Germany about ten years after Luther began the Reformation; and there
   arose various sects of them who were exceeding wild and extravagant.
   The followers of these are the Quakers in England, and other parts of
   the British dominions.

   The next to these were the Socinians, who had their beginning chiefly
   in Poland, by the teaching of Laelius Socinus and Faustus Socinus. They
   held, that Christ was a mere man, and denied Christ's satisfaction and
   most of the fundamental doctrines of the christian religion. Their
   heresy has since been greatly propagated among protestants in Poland,
   Germany, Holland, England, and other places.

   After these arose the Arminians. They take their name from a Dutchman,
   whose name was Jacobus Van Harmin, which, turned into Latin, is called
   Jacobus Arminius; and from his name the whole sect are called
   Arminians. This Jacobus Arminius was first a minister at Amsterdam, and
   then a professor of divinity in the university of Leyden. He had many
   followers in Holland. There was upon this a synod of all the reformed
   churches called together, who met at Dort in Holland. The synod of Dort
   condemned them; but yet they spread and prevailed. They began to
   prevail in England in the reign of Charles I. especially in the church
   of England. The church of England divines before that were almost
   universally Calvinists: but since that, Arminianism has gradually more
   and more prevailed, till they are become almost universally Arminians.
   And not only so, but Arminianism has greatly prevailed among the
   dissenters, and has spread greatly in New England, as well as Old.

   Since this, Arianism has been revived. Arianism, a little after
   Constantine's time, almost swallowed up the christian world, like a
   flood out of the mouth of the serpent which threatened to swallow up
   the woman. And of late years, this heresy has been revived in England,
   and greatly prevails there, both in the church of England, and among
   dissenters. These hold, that Christ is but a mere creature, though they
   grant that he is the greatest of all creatures.

   Another thing which has of late exceedingly prevailed among
   protestants, and especially in England, is deism. The deists wholly
   cast off the christian religion, and are professed infidels. Indeed
   they own the being of God; but deny any revealed religion, or any word
   of God at all; and say, that God has given mankind no other light to
   walk by but their own reason. With these opinions our nation, which is
   the principal nation of the Reformation, is very much overrun, and they
   prevail more and more. Thus much concerning the opposition that Satan
   has made against the Reformation.

   III. I proceed now to show what success the gospel has had in these
   later times of the Reformed church. This success may be reduced to
   three heads: 1. Reformation in doctrine and worship in countries called
   Christian; 2. Propagation of the gospel among the heathen; 3. Revival
   of religion in the power and practice of it.

   1. As to the first, viz. reformation in doctrine, the most considerable
   success of late has been in the empire of Muscovy, which is a country
   of vast extent. The people of this country, so many of them as call
   themselves Christians, professed to be of the Greek church; but were
   barbarously ignorant, and very superstitious, till of late years. Their
   late emperor, Peter the Great, set himself to reform his dominions,
   took great pains to bring them out of their darkness, and to have them
   instructed in religion. To that end, he set up schools of learning,
   ordered the Bible to be printed in the language of the country, made a
   law that every family should keep the Holy Scriptures in their houses,
   that every person should be able to read the same, and that no person
   should be allowed to marry till they were able to read the Scriptures.
   He also reformed the churches of his country of many of their
   superstitions, whereby the religion professed and practised in Muscovy
   is much nearer to that of the protestants than formerly it used to be.
   This emperor gave great encouragement to the exercise of the protestant
   religion in his dominions. And since that, Muscovy is become a land of
   light, in comparison of what it was fifty years past.

   2. As to the second kind of success which the gospel has lately had,
   viz. its propagation among the heathen, I would take notice of three
   things.

   (1.) The propagation of the gospel among the heathen here in America.
   This American continent, which is a very great part of the world, and,
   together with its neighbouring seas adjoining, takes up one side of the
   globe, was wholly unknown to all christian nations till these latter
   times. It was not known that there was any such part of the world,
   though it was very full of people: and therefore the devil had this
   part of the world as it were secure to himself, out of the reach of the
   light of the gospel, and so out of the way of molestation in his
   dominion over them. Here the many nations of Indians worshipped him as
   God from age to age, while the gospel was confined to the opposite side
   of the globe. It is probably supposed, from some remaining accounts,
   that the occasion of first peopling America was this; that the devil,
   being alarmed and surprised by the wonderful success of the gospel the
   first three hundred years after Christ, and by the downfall of the
   heathen empire in the time of Constantine--and seeing the gospel spread
   so fast, and fearing that his heathenish kingdom would be wholly
   overthrown through the world--led away a people from the other
   continent into America, that they might be quite out of the reach of
   the gospel, that here he might quietly possess them, and reign over
   them as their god.--Many writers intimate, that some of the Indian
   nations, when the Europeans first came into America, had a tradition
   among them, that their god first led them into this continent, and went
   before them in an ark.

   However, it is certain that the devil did here quietly enjoy his
   dominion over the poor Indians for many ages. But in later times God
   has sent the gospel into these parts, and now the christian church is
   set up here in New England, and in other parts of America, where before
   had been nothing but the grossest heathenish darkness. Great part of
   America is now full of Bibles, and full of at least the form of the
   worship of the true God and Jesus Christ, where the name of Christ
   before had not been heard of for many ages, if at all. And though there
   has been but a small propagation of the gospel among the heathen here,
   in comparison of what were to be wished for; yet there has been
   something worthy of notice.--There was something remarkable in New
   England, both at first and of late, and in other parts of America among
   many Indians, of an inclination to be instructed in the christian
   religion.

   However small the propagation of the gospel among the heathen here in
   America has been hitherto; yet I think we may well look upon the
   discovery of so great a part of the world, and bringing the gospel into
   it, as one thing by which Divine Providence is preparing the way for
   the future glorious times of the church; when Satan's kingdom shall be
   overthrown, throughout the whole habitable globe, on every side, and on
   all its continents. When those times come, then doubtless the gospel
   shall have glorious success, and all the inhabitants of this
   new-discovered world shall become subjects of the kingdom of Christ, as
   well as all the other ends of the earth. In all probability, Providence
   has so ordered it, that the mariner's compass (which is an invention of
   later times, whereby men are enabled to sail over the widest ocean,
   when before they durst not venture far from land) should prove a
   preparation for what God intends to bring to pass in the glorious times
   of the church, viz. the sending forth the gospel wherever any of the
   children of men dwell, how far soever off, and however separated by
   wide oceans from those parts of the world which are already
   christianized.

   (2.) There has of late years been a very considerable propagation of
   the gospel among the heathen in the dominions of Muscovy. I have
   already observed the reformation which has lately been among those who
   are called Christians there: but I now speak of the heathen. Great part
   of the vast dominions of the emperor of Muscovy are gross heathens. The
   greater part of Great Tartary, a heathen country, has in later times
   been brought under the Muscovite government; and there have been of
   late great numbers who have renounced their heathenism, and have
   embraced the christian religion.

   (3.) There has been lately a very considerable propagation of the
   christian religion among the heathen in the East Indies; particularly,
   many in Malabar have been brought over to the christian protestant
   religion, chiefly by the labours of certain missionaries sent thither
   to instruct them by the king of Denmark, who have brought over many
   heathens to the christian faith, and have set up schools among them,
   and a printing-press to print Bibles and other books for their
   instruction, in their own language, with great success.

   3. The last kind of success which I shall notice, is the revivals of
   the power and practice of religion. And here I shall take notice of but
   two instances.

   (1.) There has been not long since a remarkable revival of the power
   and practice of religion in Germany, through the endeavours of an
   eminent divine there, August Herman Frank, professor of divinity at
   Halle in Saxony. Being a person of eminent charity, the great work that
   God wrought by him, began with his setting on foot a charitable design.
   It began only with his placing an alms-box at his study-door, into
   which some poor mites were thrown, whereby books were bought for the
   instruction of the poor. And God was pleased so wonderfully to smile on
   his design, and so to pour out a spirit of charity on that occasion,
   that he was enabled in a little time to erect public schools for the
   instruction of poor children, and an orphan-house for their supply and
   instruction.--At last, near five hundred children were maintained and
   instructed in learning and piety by the charity of others; and the
   number continued to increase more and more for many years. This was
   accompanied with a wonderful reformation and revival of religion, and a
   spirit of piety, in the city and university of Halle; and thus it
   continued. Which also had great influence in many other places in
   Germany. Their example seemed remarkably to stir up multitudes to their
   imitation.

   (2.) Another thing, which it would be ungrateful in us not to notice,
   is that remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God which has been of
   late in this part of New England, of which we, in this town, have had
   such a share. But it is needless for me particularly to describe it,
   seeing you have so lately been eye-witnesses of it, and I hope
   multitudes are sensible of the benefit. Thus I have mentioned the more
   remarkable instances of the success which the gospel has lately had in
   the world.

   IV. I proceed now to the last thing proposed to be considered, relating
   to the success of Christ's redemption during this space, viz. what is
   the present state of things now in the world, with regard to the church
   of Christ, and the success of his purchase. And this I would do, by
   showing how things are now compared with the first times of the
   Reformation.--And, 1. I would show wherein the state of things is
   altered for the worse; and, 2. How it is altered for the better.

   1. I would show wherein the state of things is altered from what it was
   in the beginning of the Reformation, for the worse; and it is so
   especially in these three respects.

   (1.) The reformed church is much diminished. The Reformation, in former
   times, was supposed to take place through one half of Christendom,
   excepting the Greek church; or that there were as many protestants as
   papists. But now it is not so; the protestant church is much
   diminished. Heretofore there have been multitudes of protestants in
   France; many famous protestant churches were planted all over that
   country, who used to meet together in synods, and maintain a very
   regular discipline. The protestant church of France was a great part of
   the glory of the Reformation. But now it is far otherwise: this church
   is all broken and scattered, and there are now but very few protestant
   assemblies in all that kingdom. The protestant interest is also greatly
   diminished in Germany. There were formerly several sovereign protestant
   princes, whose successors are now papists; as, particularly the Elector
   Palatine, and the Elector of Saxony. The kingdom of Bohemia was
   formerly a protestant kingdom, but is now in the hands of the papists.
   Hungary was formerly a protestant country; but the protestants there
   have been greatly reduced, and in a great measure subdued, by
   persecutions. And the protestant interest has no way of late remarkably
   gained ground of the church of Rome.

   (2.) Another thing wherein the state of things is altered for the worse
   compared with the former times of the Reformation, is the prevailing of
   licentiousness in principles and opinions.--There is not now that
   spirit of orthodoxy which then prevailed: there is very little
   appearance of zeal for the mysterious and spiritual doctrines of
   Christianity; and they never were so held in contempt, as they are in
   the present age; and especially in England, the principal kingdom of
   the Reformation. In this kingdom, those principles on which the power
   of godliness depends, are in a great measure exploded, and Arianism,
   Socinianism, Arminianism, and Deism, prevail, and carry almost all
   before them. History gives no account of any age wherein there was so
   great an infidel apostacy of those who had been brought up under the
   light of the gospel; never was there such a disavowal of all revealed
   religion; never any age wherein there was so much scoffing at and
   ridiculing the gospel of Christ by those who have been brought up under
   the gospel-light.

   (3.) Another thing wherein things are altered for the worse, is, that
   there is much less of the prevalency of the power of godliness, than
   there was at the beginning of the Reformation. A glorious out-pouring
   of the Spirit of God accompanied the first Reformation, not only to
   convert multitudes in so short a time from popery to the true religion,
   but to turn many to God and true godliness. But now there is an
   exceeding great decay of vital piety; yea, it seems to be despised,
   called enthusiasm, and fanaticism. Those who are truly religious, are
   commonly looked upon to be beside their right mind; and vice and
   profaneness dreadfully prevail, like a flood which threatens to bear
   down all before it.--But I proceed now to show,

   2. In what respects things are altered for the better from what they
   were in the first Reformation.

   (1.) The power and influence of the pope is much diminished. Although,
   since the former times of the Reformation, he has gained ground in
   extent of dominion; yet he has lost in degree of influence. The vial
   which in the beginning of the Reformation was poured out on the throne
   of the beast, to the great diminishing of his power and authority in
   the world, has continued running ever since. The pope, soon after the
   Reformation, became less regarded by the princes of Europe than he had
   been before; and so he has been since less and less. Many of the popish
   princes themselves seem now to regard him very little more than they
   think will serve their own designs; of which there have been several
   remarkable proofs and instances of late.

   (2.) There is far less persecution now than there was in the first
   times of the reformation. Some parts of the protestant church are at
   this day under persecution, and so probably will be till the day of the
   church's suffering and travail is at an end, which will not be till the
   fall of Antichrist. But it is now in no measure as it was heretofore.
   There does not seem to be the same spirit of persecution prevailing; it
   is become more out of fashion even among the popish princes. The
   wickedness of the enemies of Christ, and the opposition against his
   cause, seem to run in another channel. The humour now is to despise and
   laugh at all religion; and there seems to be a spirit of indifferency
   about it. However, so far the state of things is better than it has
   been, that there is so much less of persecution.

   3. There is a great increase of learning. In the dark times of popery,
   before the Reformation, learning was so far decayed, that the world
   seemed to be overrun with barbarous ignorance. Their very priests were
   many of them grossly ignorant. Learning began to revive with the
   Reformation, owing very much to the art of printing which was invented
   a little before this period. Since then, learning has increased more
   and more, and at this day is undoubtedly raised to a vastly greater
   height than ever it was before: and though no good use is made of it by
   the greater part of learned men, yet the increase of learning in itself
   is a thing to be rejoiced in, because it is a good, and, if duly
   applied, an excellent handmaid to divinity. It is a talent which, if
   God gives men a heart, affords them great advantage to do great things
   for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, and the good of the souls
   of men. That learning and knowledge should greatly increase before the
   glorious times, seems to be foretold, Dan. xii. 4."But thou, O Daniel,
   shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many
   shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased." And however
   little now learning is applied to the advancement of religion; yet we
   may hope that the days are approaching wherein God will make great use
   of it for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ.

   God in his providence now seems to be acting over again the same part
   which he did a little before Christ came. When Christ came into the
   world, learning greatly prevailed; and yet wickedness never prevailed
   more than then. God was pleased to suffer human learning to come to
   such a height before he sent forth the gospel into the world, that the
   world might see the insufficiency of all their own wisdom for the
   obtaining the knowledge of God, without the gospel of Christ, and the
   teaching of his Spirit. When, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom
   knew not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching, to save
   them that believe. And when the gospel came to prevail first without
   the help of man's wisdom, then God was pleased to make use of learning
   as a handmaid. So now, learning is at a great height in the world, far
   beyond what it was in the age when Christ appeared; and now the world,
   by their learning and wisdom, do not know God; and they seem to wander
   in darkness, are miserably deluded, stumble and fall in matters of
   religion, as in midnight darkness. Trusting to their learning, they
   grope in the day-time as in the night. Learned men are exceedingly
   divided in their opinions concerning the matters of religion, running
   into all manner of corrupt opinions, pernicious and foolish errors.
   They scorn to submit their reason to divine revelation, to believe
   anything that is above their comprehension; and so being wise in their
   own eyes, they become fools, and even vain in their imaginations; they
   turn the truth of God into a lie, and their foolish hearts are
   darkened. See Rom. i. 21, &c.

   But yet, when God has sufficiently shown men the insufficiency of human
   wisdom and learning for the purposes of religion, and when the
   appointed time comes for that glorious outpouring of the Spirit of God,
   when he will himself by his own immediate influence enlighten men's
   minds; then may we hope that God will make use of the great increase of
   learning as a handmaid of religion, as a means of the glorious
   advancement of the kingdom of his Son. Then shall human learning be
   subservient to the understanding of the Scriptures, and to a clear
   explanation and a glorious defence of the doctrines of Christianity.
   And there is no doubt, that God in his providence has of late given the
   world the art of printing, and such a great increase of learning, to
   prepare for what he designs to accomplish for his church in the
   approaching days of its prosperity. And thus the wealth of the wicked
   is laid up for the just, Prov. xiii. 22.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [636] Rev xvi. 10-11.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART VI.

   IMPROVEMENT OF PAST EVENTS

   Having now shown how the work of redemption has been carried on from
   the fall of man to the present time, before I proceed any further, I
   would make some application.

   I. From what has been said, we may see great evidence of the truth of
   the christian religion, and that the Scriptures are the word of God.
   There are three arguments of this, which may be drawn from what has
   been said.

   1. It may be argued from that violent and inveterate opposition there
   has always appeared of the wickedness of the world against this
   religion. The religion that the church of God has professed from the
   first, has always been the same. Though the dispensations have been
   altered, yet the religion which the church has professed has always, as
   to its essentials, been the same. The church of God, from the
   beginning, has been one society. The christian church is manifestly the
   same society continued, that was before Christ came; grafted on the
   same root, built on the same foundation. The revelation on which both
   have depended, is essentially the same: for as the christian church is
   built on the Holy Scriptures, so was the Jewish church. Though now the
   Scriptures are enlarged by the addition of the New Testament, still it
   is essentially the same revelation with that which was given in the Old
   Testament, only the subjects of divine revelation are now more clearly
   revealed in the New Testament than they were in the Old. The sum of
   both the Old Testament and New, is Christ and his redemption. The
   ground-work of the religion of the church of God, both before and since
   Christ has appeared, is the same great scheme of redemption by the Son
   of God. The church that was before the Israelitish church, was still
   the same society, and it was essentially the same religion that was
   professed and practised in it. Thus it was from Noah to Abraham, and
   thus it was before the flood; for this also was built on the foundation
   of those revelations of Christ which were given to Adam, and Enoch. So
   that the church of God has always been built on those divine
   revelations, and were always essentially the same, and they are
   summarily comprehended in the Holy Scriptures. Ever since Moses's time
   the church has been built on the Scriptures themselves.

   So that the opposition which has been made to the church of God in all
   ages, has always been against the same religion, and the same
   revelation. Now therefore the violent and perpetual opposition that has
   ever been made by the corruption and wickedness of mankind against this
   church, is a strong argument of the truth of this religion, and this
   revelation, upon which this church has always been built. Contraries
   are well argued one from another. We may well and safely argue, that a
   thing is good, according to the degree of opposition in which it stands
   to evil, or the degree in which evil opposes it, and is an enemy to it.
   Now it is evident by the things which you have heard concerning the
   church of Christ, and that holy religion of Jesus Christ which it has
   professed, that the wickedness of the world has had a perpetual hatred
   to it, and has made most violent opposition against it.

   That the church of God has always met with great opposition in the
   world, none can deny. This is plain by profane history as far as that
   reaches; and before that, divine history gives us the same account. The
   church of God, its religion and worship, began to be opposed in the
   time of Cain and Abel; and was so when the earth was filled with
   violence in Noah's time. After this, how was the church opposed in
   Egypt! and how was Israel always hated by the nations round about,
   agreeable to Jer. xii. 9. "Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird,
   the birds round about are against her." And after the Babylonish
   captivity, how was this church persecuted by Antiochus Epiphanes and
   others! How was Christ persecuted when he was on earth! and how were
   the apostles and other Christians persecuted by the Jews, before the
   destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans! How violent were that people
   against the church! and how dreadful was the opposition of the heathen
   world against the Christian church after this before Constantine! How
   great was their spite against the true religion! And since that, how
   yet more violent, and spiteful, and cruel, has been the opposition of
   Antichrist against the church!

   There is no other such instance of opposition. History gives no account
   of any other body of men that have been so hated, and so maliciously
   and insatiably pursued and persecuted, nor any thing like it. No other
   religion ever was so maligned age after age. The nations of other
   professions have enjoyed their religions in peace and quietness,
   however they have differed from their neighbours. One nation has
   worshipped one sort of gods, and others another, without molesting or
   disturbing one another about it. All the spite and opposition has been
   against this religion, which the church of Christ has professed. All
   other religions have seemed to show an implacable enmity to this; and
   men have seemed to have, from one age to another, such a spite against
   it, that they have seemed as though they could never satisfy their
   cruelty. They put their inventions upon the rack to find out torments
   that should be cruel enough; and yet, after all, never seemed to be
   satisfied. Their thirst has never been satisfied with blood.

   So that it is out of doubt, that this religion, and these Scriptures,
   have always been malignantly opposed in the world. The only question
   that remains is, What it is that has made this opposition? whether or
   not it has been good or bad? whether it be the wickedness and
   corruption of the world, or not, that has done this? But of this there
   can be no greater doubt than that of the other, if we consider how
   causeless this cruelty has always been, who the opposers have been, and
   the manner in which they have opposed. The opposition has chiefly been
   from heathenism and popery; which are the fruits of the blindness,
   corruption, and wickedness of men, as the very deists themselves
   confess. The light of nature shows, that the religion of heathens,
   consisting in the worship of idols, and sacrificing their children to
   them, and in obscene and abominable rites and ceremonies, is
   wickedness. And the superstitions, idolatries, and usurpations of the
   church of Rome, are no less contrary to the light of nature. By this
   appears, that this opposition which has been made against the church of
   God, has been made by wicked men. And with regard to the opposition of
   the Jews in Christ's and the apostles' time, it was in a most corrupt
   time of that nation, when the people were generally become exceeding
   wicked, as some of the Jewish writers themselves, Josephus and others,
   who lived about that time, expressly declare. And that it has been mere
   wickedness that has made this opposition, is manifest from the manner
   of opposition; the extreme violence, injustice, and cruelty, with which
   the church of God has been treated. It seems to show the hand of
   malignant infernal spirits.

   Now what reason can be assigned, why the corruption and wickedness of
   the world should so implacably set itself against this religion of
   Jesus Christ, and against the Scriptures, but only that they are
   contrary to wickedness, and consequently are good and holy? Why should
   the enemies of Christ, for so many thousand years together, manifest
   such a mortal hatred of this religion, but only that it is the cause of
   God? If the Scriptures be not the word of God, and the religion of the
   church of Christ be not the true religion, then it must follow, that it
   is a most wicked religion; nothing but a pack of lies and abominable
   delusions, invented by the enemies of God. And if so, it is not likely
   that the enemies of God, and the wickedness of the world, would have
   maintained such a perpetual and implacable enmity against it.

   2. It is a great argument that the christian church and its religion is
   from God, that it has been upheld hitherto through all opposition and
   dangers. That the church of God and the true religion, which has been
   so continually and violently opposed, with so many endeavours to
   overthrow it--and which has so often been brought to the brink of ruin,
   through the greatest part of six thousand years-- has yet been upheld,
   most remarkably shows the hand of God in favour of the church. If duly
   considered, it will appear one of the greatest wonders and miracles
   that ever came to pass. There is nothing like it upon the face of the
   earth. There is no other society of men that has stood as the church
   has. As to the old world before the flood, that was overthrown by a
   deluge of waters; but yet the church of God was preserved. Satan's
   visible kingdom on earth was then once entirely overthrown; but the
   visible kingdom of Christ never has been overthrown. All those ancient
   human kingdoms and monarchies of which we read, are long since come to
   an end; the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Edomites, &c. The great empire
   of proud Babylon was overthrown by the Persians; then the Persian
   empire was overthrown by the Greeks; after this the Grecian empire was
   overthrown by the Romans; and, finally, the Roman empire fell a
   sacrifice to various barbarous nations. Here is a remarkable fulfilment
   of the text, "The moth has eaten them up like a garment, and the worm
   has eaten them like wool; but God's church remains. [637] "

   Never were there so many and so potent endeavours to destroy anything
   else, as there has been to destroy the church. Other kingdoms and
   societies of men, which have appeared to be ten times as strong as the
   church, have been destroyed with a hundredth part of the opposition
   which the church of God has met with: which shows, that it is God who
   has been its protector. For it is most plain, that it has not upheld
   itself by its own strength. For the most part, it has been a very weak
   society. The children of Israel were but a handful of people, in
   comparison of the many who often sought their overthrow. So in Christ's
   time, and in the beginning of the christian church, they were but a
   remnant: whereas the whole multitude of the Jewish nation were against
   them. And so in the beginning of the Gentile church, they were but a
   small number in comparison with the heathen, who sought their
   overthrow. In the dark times of Antichrist, before the Reformation,
   they were but a handful; and yet their enemies could not overthrow
   them. And commonly, the enemies of the church have not only had the
   greatest number on their side, but they have had the strength in other
   respects. They have commonly had all the civil authority on their side.
   So in Egypt, the civil authority was for the Egyptians, and the church
   were only their slaves, and in their hands; and yet they could not
   overthrow them. And so it was in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and
   Julian the apostate, the authority was all on the side of the
   persecutors, and the church was under their dominion; yet all their
   cruelty could not extirpate it. And for a great many ages, the civil
   authority was all on the side of Antichrist, and the church seemed to
   be in their hands.

   And not only has the strength of its enemies been greater than that of
   the church, but ordinarily the church has not used what strength they
   have had in their own defence, but have committed themselves wholly to
   God. In the time of the Jewish persecutions before the destruction of
   Jerusalem by the Romans, and of the heathen persecutions before
   Constantine, the Christians did not pretend to make any forcible
   resistance to their heathen persecutors. So it has been for the most
   part under the popish persecutions; and yet they have never been able
   to overthrow the church of God; but it stands to this very day.

   And this is still the more exceeding wonderful, if we consider how
   often the church has been brought to the brink of ruin, and the case
   seemed to be desperate. In the time of the old world, when wickedness
   so prevailed as that but one family was left, yet God wonderfully
   appeared, and overthrew the wicked world with a flood, and preserved
   his church. At the Red sea, when Pharaoh and his host thought they were
   quite sure of their prey, God appeared, destroyed them, and delivered
   his church. Under the tenth and last heathen persecution, their
   persecutors boasted that now they had done the business for the
   Christians, and overthrown the christian church; yet in the midst of
   their triumph, the christian church rises out of the dust and prevails,
   and the heathen empire totally falls before it. So when the christian
   church seemed ready to be swallowed up by the Arian heresy, when
   Antichrist rose and prevailed, and all the world wondered after the
   beast; when the church for many hundred years was reduced to a small
   number, and the power of the world was engaged to destroy those little
   remnants; yet they could never fully accomplish their design, and at
   last God wonderfully revived his church by the Reformation, made it to
   stand as it were on its feet in the sight of its enemies, and raised it
   out of their reach. And when the popish powers plotted the overthrow of
   the Reformed church, and seemed just about to bring their matters to a
   conclusion, then God wonderfully appeared for the deliverance of his
   church, as at the Revolution by King William. Presently after the
   darkest times, God has made his church most gloriously to flourish.

   If such a preservation of the church of God, from the beginning of the
   world hitherto, attended with such circumstances, is not sufficient to
   show a divine hand in favour of it, what can be devised that would be
   sufficient? But if this be from the divine hand, then God owns the
   church, and owns that revelation and those Scriptures on which she is
   built; and so it will follow, that their religion is the true religion,
   or God's religion, and that the Scriptures, which they make their rule,
   are his word.

   3. We may draw this further argument for the divine authority of the
   Scriptures from what has been said, viz. that God has fulfilled those
   things which are foretold in the Scriptures.--I have already observed
   in general, as I went along, how the prophecies of Scripture were
   fulfilled: I shall now single out but two instances of the fulfilment
   of scripture prophecy.

   (1.) One is in preserving his church from being ruined. I have just now
   shown what an evidence this is of the divine authority of the
   Scriptures in itself considered; I now speak of it as a fulfilment of
   scripture prophecy. This is abundantly foretold and promised in the
   Scriptures; particularly in the text. There it is foretold, that other
   things shall fail, other kingdoms and monarchies, which set themselves
   in opposition, should come to nothing: "The moth should eat them up
   like a garment, and the worm should eat them like wool. [638] " It is
   here foretold, that God's covenant mercy to his church should continue
   for ever; and so it hath hitherto proved, though the church has passed
   through so many dangers. The same is promised, Isa. liv. 17. "No weapon
   that is formed against thee, shall prosper; and every tongue that shall
   rise against thee in judgment, thou shalt condemn." And again, Isa.
   xlix. 14-16. "But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord
   hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she
   should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may
   forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the
   palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me." The same is
   promised in Isa. lix. 21; xliii. 1, 2. and Zech. xii. 2, 3. So Christ
   promised the same, when he says, "On this rock will I build my church,
   and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. [639] " Now if this
   be not from God, and the Scriptures be not the word of God, and the
   church of Christ built on the foundation of this word be not of God,
   how could the persons who foretold this, know it? for if the church
   were not of God, it was a very unlikely thing ever to come to pass. For
   they foretold great opposition and dangers, that other kingdoms should
   come to nought, and that the church should often be almost swallowed
   up; and yet that the church should remain. Now how could they foresee
   so unlikely a thing but by divine inspiration?

   (2.) The other remarkable instance is, the fulfilment of scripture
   prophecy, concerning Antichrist. The way that this Antichrist should
   arise, is foretold, viz. by the falling away of the christian church
   into a corrupt state: 2 Thess. ii. 3. "For that day shall not come,
   except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
   revealed, the son of perdition."--And it is prophesied, that this man
   of sin should set himself up in the temple or visible church of God,
   pretending to be vested with divine power, as head of the church, (2
   Thess. ii. 4.) And all this is exactly come to pass in the church of
   Rome. Again, it is intimated, that the rise of Antichrist should be
   gradual, (2 Thess. ii. 7.) "For the mystery of iniquity doth already
   work: only he who now letteth, will let, until he be taken out of the
   way." This also came to pass--Again, it is prophesied of this mighty
   enemy of the christian church, that he should be a great prince or
   monarch of the Roman empire: so he is represented in Daniel as a horn
   of the fourth beast, or fourth monarchy, as the angel himself explains
   it, (Daniel vii.) This also came to pass.--Yea it is prophesied, that
   the seat of this pretended vicar of God, and head of the church, should
   be the city of Rome itself. It is said expressly, that the spiritual
   whore, or false church, should have her seat on seven mountains or
   hills; Rev. xvii. 9. "The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the
   woman sitteth:" and (Rev. xvii. 18.) "The woman which thou sawest, is
   that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth;" which it
   is certain was at that time the city of Rome. This prophecy also has
   come to pass.

   Further, it was prophesied, that this Antichrist should reign over
   peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, Rev. xvii. 15. and
   that all the world should wonder after the beast, Rev. xiii. 3. This
   also was verified in the church of Rome. It was foretold that this
   Antichrist should be remarkable for the sin of pride, pretending to
   great things, and assuming very much to himself: (2 Thess. ii. 4.)
   "That he should exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is
   worshipped." So Rev. xiii. 5. "And there was given unto him a mouth
   speaking great things, and blasphemies." Dan. vii. 8, 20. the little
   horn is said to have a mouth speaking very great things, and his look
   to be more stout than his fellows. This also was verified in the pope,
   and the church of Rome.--It was also prophesied, that Antichrist should
   be an exceeding cruel persecutor, Dan. vii. 21. The same horn "made war
   with the saints, and prevailed against them: [640] " Rev. xiii. 7. "And
   it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome
   them." Rev. xvii. 6. "And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the
   saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus." This also came to
   pass in the church of Rome.--It was foretold, that Antichrist should
   excel in craft and policy: Dan. vii. 8. "In this horn were eyes like
   the eyes of a man." And "Even of that horn that had eyes. "This also
   marks the church of Rome.--It was foretold, that the kings of
   Christendom should he subject to antichrist: Rev. xvii. 12, 13. "And
   the ten horns which thou sawest, are ten kings, which have received no
   kingdom as yet; but received power as kings one hour with the beast.
   These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
   beast." This also came to pass with respect to the Romish church.--It
   was foretold, that he should perform pretended miracles and lying
   wonders: 2 Thess. ii. 9. "Whose coming is after the working of Satan,
   with all power, and signs, and lying wonders." Rev. xiii. 13,14. "And
   he doth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on
   the earth, in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the
   earth, by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the
   sight of the beast." This also designates the church of Rome. Fire
   coming down from heaven, seems to have reference to their
   excommunications, which were dreaded like fire from heaven.--It was
   foretold that he should forbid to marry, and to abstain from meats: 1
   Tim. iv. 3. "Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats,
   which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving." This also is
   exactly fulfilled in the church of Rome.--It was foretold that he
   should be very rich, and arrive at a great degree of earthly splendour
   and glory: Rev. xvii. 4. "And the woman was arrayed in purple, and
   scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls,
   having a golden cup in her hand." And so Rev. xviii. 7, 12, 13, 16.
   What can more expressly describe the church of Rome?--It was foretold,
   that he should forbid any to buy or sell, but those that had his mark:
   Rev. xiii. 17. "And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
   mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name." This also
   is fulfilled in the church of Rome--It was foretold that he should sell
   the souls of men, Rev. xviii. 13. where, in enumerating the articles of
   his merchandise, the souls of men are specifically mentioned as one. Is
   not this also exactly fulfilled in the same church?--It was foretold,
   that Antichrist would not suffer the bodies of God's people to be
   buried: Rev. xi. 8, 9. "And their dead bodies shall lie in the street
   of the great city, --and they--shall not suffer their dead bodies to be
   put in graves." How literally has this come to pass with respect to the
   church of Rome!--I might mention many other things which were foretold
   of Antichrist, and show that they were fulfilled most exactly in the
   pope and the church of Rome. How strong an argument is this, that the
   Scriptures are the word of God!

   II. From what has been said, we may learn what the spirit of true
   Christians is, viz. a spirit of suffering. Seeing God has so ordered it
   in his providence, that his church should for so long a time be in a
   suffering state, yea, often in a state of extreme suffering, we may
   conclude, that the spirit of the true church is a suffering spirit,
   otherwise God never would have ordered for it so much suffering; for
   doubtless God accommodates the state and circumstances of the church to
   the spirit that he has given her. No wonder therefore that Christ so
   much inculcated upon his disciples, that they must deny themselves, and
   take up their cross, if they would follow him.

   And what spirit has the church shown and exercised under her
   sufferings? She has actually, under those terrible persecutions through
   which she has passed, rather chosen to undergo those dreadful torments,
   and to sell all for the pearl of great price, to suffer all that her
   bitterest enemies could inflict, than to renounce Christ and his
   religion. History affords a great number of remarkable instances, sets
   in view a great cloud of witnesses. This abundantly confirms the
   necessity of possessing a spirit to sell all for Christ, to renounce
   our own ease, our own worldly profit, our honour, and our all, for him,
   and for the gospel.

   Let us inquire whether we are of such a spirit. How does it prove upon
   trial? Does it prove in fact that we are willing to deny ourselves, and
   renounce our own worldly interest, and to pass through the trials to
   which we are called in providence? Alas, how small are our trials,
   compared with those of many of our fellow-Christians in former ages!
   And I would on this occasion apply that in Jer. xii. 5. "If thou hast
   run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou
   contend with horses?" If you have not been able to endure the light
   trials to which you have been called, how would you be able to endure
   the far greater trials to which the church has been called in former
   ages? Every true Christian has the spirit of a martyr, and would suffer
   as a martyr, if he were called to it in providence.

   III. Hence we learn what great reason we have assuredly to expect the
   fulfilment of what yet remains to be fulfilled of things foretold in
   Scripture. The Scriptures foretell many great things yet to be
   fulfilled before the end of the world; but what great difficulties seem
   to be in the way! We seem at present to be very far from such a state
   as is foretold in the Scriptures; but yet we have abundant reason to
   expect, that these things, however seemingly difficult, will be
   accomplished in their season. We see the faithfulness of God to his
   promises hitherto; how true he has been to his church, and how he has
   remembered his mercy from generation to generation. We may say
   concerning what God has done hitherto for his church, as Joshua said to
   the children of Israel, Josh. xxiii. 14. "That not one thing hath
   failed of all that the Lord our God hath spoken concerning his church;"
   but all things are hitherto come to pass agreeable to the divine
   prediction. This should strengthen our faith in those promises, and
   encourage us, and stir us up to earnest prayer to God for the
   accomplishment of the great and glorious things which yet remain to be
   fulfilled.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [637] Isa. li. 8.

   [638] Isa. li. 8.

   [639] Matt. xvi. 18.

   [640] Dan. vii. 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART VII.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION FROM THE PRESENT TIME TO THE FALL OF
   ANTICHRIST.

   I come now to show how the success of Christ's redemption will be
   carried on from the present time, till Antichrist is fallen, and
   Satan's visible kingdom on earth is destroyed.--With respect to this
   space of time, we have nothing to guide us but the prophecies of
   Scripture. Through most of the time from the fall of man to the
   destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, we had scripture history to
   guide us; and from thence to the present time we had prophecy, together
   with the accomplishment of it in providence, as related in human
   histories. But henceforward we have prophecy alone to guide us. And
   here I would pass by those things that are only conjectured, or that
   are surmised by some from those prophecies which are doubtful in their
   interpretation, and shall insist only on those things which are more
   evident.

   We know not what particular events are to come to pass before that
   glorious work of God's Spirit begins, by which Satan's kingdom is to be
   overthrown. By the consent of most divines, there are but few things,
   if any at all, foretold to be accomplished before the beginning of that
   glorious work of God. But some think that the slaying of the witnesses,
   (Rev. xi. 7, 8.) is not yet accomplished; and there is a difference of
   opinion with respect to the pouring out of the seven vials, (Rev. xvi.)
   how many are already, or how many remain to be poured out. A late
   expositor, indeed, whom I have before mentioned, seems to make it
   evident, that all are already poured out but two, viz. the sixth on the
   river Euphrates, and the seventh into the air. I will not now stand to
   inquire, what is intended by the pouring out of the sixth vial on the
   river Euphrates, that the way of the kings of the east may he prepared;
   but would only say, that it seems to be something immediately
   preparatory to the destruction of spiritual Babylon, as the drying up
   of the river Euphrates, which ran through the midst of old Babylon, was
   what prepared the way of the kings of the Medes and Persians, (the
   kings of the east,) to come in under the walls, and destroy that city.

   But whatever this be, it does not appear that it is any thing which
   shall be accomplished before that work of God's Spirit is begun, by
   which, as it goes on, Satan's visible kingdom on earth shall be utterly
   overthrown. And therefore I would proceed directly to consider what the
   Scripture reveals concerning the work of God itself, by which he will
   bring about this great event, as being the next thing to be
   accomplished that we are certain of from the prophecies of Scripture.

   I. I would observe some things in general concerning it.

   1. We have all reason to conclude from the Scriptures, that just before
   this work of God begins, it will be a very dark time with respect to
   the interests of religion in the world. It has been so before preceding
   glorious revivals of religion: when Christ came, it was an exceeding
   degenerate time among the Jews; and so it was a very dark time before
   the Reformation. And not only so, but it seems to be foretold in
   Scripture, that it shall be a time of but little religion, when Christ
   shall come to set up his kingdom in the world. Thus when Christ spake
   of his coming, to encourage his elect, who cry to him day and night, in
   Luke xviii. 8 he adds, "Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall
   he find faith on the earth?" Which seems to denote a great prevalency
   of infidelity just before Christ's coming to avenge his suffering
   church.--Though Christ's coming at the last judgment is not here to be
   excluded, yet there seems to be a special respect to his coming to
   deliver his church from their long-continued suffering, persecuted
   state, which is accomplished only at his coming at the destruction of
   Antichrist. Then will be accomplished the following passages, Rev. vi.
   10. "How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge
   our blood on them that dwell on the earth." and Rev. xviii. 20.
   "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles, and prophets, for
   God hath avenged you on her."

   It is now a very dark time with respect to the interests of religion,
   wherein there is but a little faith, and a great prevailing of
   infidelity on the earth. There is now a remarkable fulfilment of that
   in 2 Pet. iii. 3. "Knowing this, that there shall come in the last days
   scoffers, walking after their own lusts." And so Jude 17, 18. "But,
   beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles
   of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be
   mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly
   lusts." Whether the times shall be any darker still, or how much
   darker, before the beginning of this glorious work of God, we cannot
   tell.

   2. There is no reason from the word of God to think any other, than
   that this great work of God will be wrought, though very swiftly, yet
   gradually. As the children of Israel were gradually brought out of the
   Babylonish captivity, first one company, and then another, and
   gradually rebuilt their city and temple; and as the heathen Roman
   empire was destroyed by a gradual, though a very swift, prevalency of
   the gospel; so, though there are many things which seem to hold forth
   that the work of God would be exceeding swift,--and many great and
   wonderful events should very suddenly be brought to pass, and some
   great parts of Satan's visible kingdom should have a very sudden
   fall,--yet all will not be accomplished at once, as by some great
   miracle, like the resurrection of the dead. But this work will be
   accomplished by means, by the preaching of the gospel, and the use of
   the ordinary means of grace, and so shall be gradually brought to pass.
   Some shall be converted, and be the means of others' conversion. God's
   Spirit shall be poured out first to raise up instruments, and then
   those instruments shall be used with success. And doubtless one nation
   shall be enlightened and converted, and one false religion and false
   way of worship exploded, after another. By the representation in Dan.
   ii. 3, 4. the stone cut out of the mountain without hands gradually
   grows. So Christ teaches us, that the kingdom of heaven is like a grain
   of mustard seed. Matt. xiii. 31, 32. and like leaven hid in three
   measures of meal, Matt. xiii. 33. The same representation we have in
   Mark iv. 26, 27, 28. and in the vision of the waters of the sanctuary,
   Ezek. xlvii.--The Scriptures hold forth, that there should be several
   successive great and glorious events by which this glorious work should
   be accomplished. The angel speaking to the prophet Daniel of those
   glorious times, mentions two glorious periods, at the end of which
   glorious things shall be accomplished: Dan. xii. 11. "And from the time
   that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that
   maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and
   ninety days." But then he adds in the next verse, Dan. xii. 12.
   "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred
   and five and thirty days;" intimating, that something very glorious
   should be accomplished at the end of the former period, but something
   much more glorious at the end of the latter.

   II. I now proceed to show how this glorious work shall be accomplished.

   1. The Spirit of God shall be gloriously poured out for the wonderful
   revival and propagation of religion. This great work shall he
   accomplished, not by the authority of princes, nor by the wisdom of
   learned men, but by God's Holy Spirit: Zech. iv. 6, 7. "Not by might,
   nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. Who art thou,
   O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain, and he
   shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace,
   grace unto it." So the prophet Ezekiel, speaking of this great work of
   God, says, Ezekiel xxxix. 29. "Neither will I hide my face any more
   from them; for I have poured out my Spirit on the house of Israel,
   saith the Lord God." We know not where this pouring out of the Spirit
   shall begin, or whether in many places at once; or whether, what hath
   already taken place, be not some forerunner and beginning of it.

   This pouring out of the Spirit of God, when it is begun, shall soon
   bring great multitudes to forsake that vice and wickedness which now so
   generally prevails; and shall cause that vital religion, which is now
   so despised and laughed at in the world, to revive. The work of
   conversion shall break forth, and go on in such a manner as never has
   been hitherto; agreeable to Isa. xliv. 3, 4, 5.--God, by pouring out
   his Holy Spirit, will furnish men to be glorious instruments of
   carrying on this work; will fill them with knowledge and wisdom, and
   fervent zeal for the promoting the kingdom of Christ, and the salvation
   of souls, and propagating the gospel in the world. The gospel shall
   begin to be preached with abundantly greater clearness and power than
   had heretofore been. This great work of God shall be brought to pass by
   the preaching of the gospel, as is represented in Rev. xiv. 6, 7, 8
   that before Babylon falls, the gospel shall be powerfully preached and
   propagated in the world.

   This was typified of old by the sounding of the silver trumpets in
   Israel in the beginning of their jubilee: Lev. xxv. 9. "Then shalt thou
   cause the trumpet of the jubilee to sound on the tenth day of the
   seventh month; on the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound
   throughout all your land." The glorious times which are approaching,
   are the church's jubilee, which shall be introduced by the sounding of
   the silver trumpet of the gospel, as is foretold in Isa. xxvii. 13.
   "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall be
   blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of
   Assyria, and the outcasts of the land of Egypt, and shall worship the
   Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem." And there shall be a glorious
   pouring out of the Spirit with this clear and powerful preaching of the
   gospel, to make it successful for reviving those holy doctrines of
   religion which are now chiefly ridiculed in the world, and turning many
   from heresy, from popery, and from other false religions; and also for
   turning many from their vice and profaneness, and for bringing vast
   multitudes savingly home to Christ.

   The work of conversion shall go on in a wonderful manner, and spread
   more and more. Many shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord,
   one multitude after another continually, as in Isa. lx. 4, 5. "Lift up
   thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves together,
   they come to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters
   shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see and flow together."
   And so Isa. lx. 8. "Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves
   to their windows?" And as the gospel shall be preached to every tongue,
   and kindred, and nation, and people, before the fall of Antichrist; so
   we may suppose, that it will be gloriously successful to bring in
   multitudes from every nation: and shall spread more and more with
   wonderful swiftness. (See Isa. lxvi. 7-9..)

   2. This pouring out of the Spirit of God will not affect the overthrow
   of Satan's visible kingdom, till there has first been a violent and
   mighty opposition made. In this the Scripture is plain, that when
   Christ is thus gloriously coming forth, when the destruction of
   Antichrist is ready at hand, and Satan's kingdom begins to totter, the
   powers of the kingdom of darkness will rise up, and mightily exert
   themselves. Thus after the pouring out of the sixth vial, which was to
   dry up the river Euphrates, to prepare the way for the destruction of
   spiritual Babylon, (Rev. xvi.) the powers of hell will be mightily
   alarmed, and will stir up themselves to oppose the kingdom of Christ,
   before the seventh vial shall be poured out, which shall give them a
   final and complete overthrow. The beloved disciple informs us (Rev.
   xvi. 13, 14.) that "three unclean spirits like frogs shall go forth
   unto the kings of the earth, to gather them together to the battle of
   the great day of God Almighty." This seems to be the last and greatest
   effort of Satan to save his kingdom from being overthrown; though
   perhaps he may make as great towards the end of the world to regain it.

   When the Spirit begins to be so gloriously poured forth, when the devil
   sees such multitudes flocking to Christ in one nation and another, when
   the foundations and pillars of his kingdom are ready to come to swift
   and sudden destruction, all hell will be greatly alarmed. Satan has
   ever had a dread of having his kingdom overthrown, and has been doing
   great works to prevent it, especially since the day of Constantine the
   Great. To this end he set up those mighty kingdoms of Antichrist and
   Mahomet, and brought in all the heresies, superstitions, and corrupt
   opinions in the world. But when he sees all begin to fail, it will
   rouse him exceedingly. If Satan of old dreaded being cast out of the
   Roman empire, how much more does he dread being cast out of the whole
   world!

   It seems, in this last great opposition, all the forces of Antichrist,
   and Mahometanism, and heathenism, will be united; all the forces of
   Satan's visible kingdom through the whole world of mankind. And
   therefore it is said, that "spirits of devils shall go forth unto the
   kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them together to
   the battle of the great day of God Almighty. [641] " And these spirits
   are said to come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth
   of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet; i. e. there
   shall be the spirit of popery, the spirit of Mahometanism, and the
   spirit of heathenism all united. By the beast is meant Antichrist; by
   the dragon, in this book, is commonly meant the devil, as he reigns
   over his heathen kingdom: by the false prophet, is sometimes meant the
   pope and his clergy; but here an eye seems to be had to Mahomet, whom
   his followers call the great prophet of God. This will be as it were
   the dying struggles of the old serpent; a battle wherein he will fight
   as one that is almost desperate.

   We know not particularly in what manner this opposition shall be made.
   It is represented as a battle; it is called the battle of the great day
   of God Almighty. There will be some way or other a mighty struggle
   between Satan's kingdom and the church, and probably in all ways of
   opposition that can be; and doubtless great opposition by external
   force. The princes of the world who are on the devil's side shall join
   hand in hand; for it is said, "The kings of the earth are gathered
   together to battle," Rev. xix. 19. And probably there will be great
   opposition by subtle disputers and carnal reasoning, persecution,
   virulent reproaches, craft, and subtlety. The devil now doubtless will
   ply his skill, as well as strength, to the utmost; and those who belong
   to his kingdom, will every where be stirred up, and engaged to make an
   united violent opposition against this holy religion, which they see
   prevailing so mightily in the world.--But,

   3. Christ and his church shall in this battle obtain a complete and
   entire victory over their enemies. They shall be totally routed and
   overthrown in this their last effort. When the powers of hell and earth
   are thus gathered together against Christ, and his armies shall come
   forth against them by his word and Spirit, in how august and glorious a
   manner is this advance of Christ with his church described, Rev. xix.
   11. &c. And to represent how great the victory they should obtain, and
   how mighty the overthrow of their enemies, it is said, (Rev. xix. 17,
   18.) that " all the fowls of heaven are called together, to eat the
   great supper given them, of the flesh of kings, and captains, and
   mighty men," &c. and then, in the following verses, we have a distinct
   account of the victory and overthrow.

   In this victory, the seventh vial shall be poured out. It is said, Rev.
   xvi. 16 of the great army that should be gathered together against
   Christ: "And he gathered them together into a place called in the
   Hebrew tongue, Armageddon ," then it is said, "And the seventh angel
   poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of
   the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. [642] " Now
   the business is done for Satan and his adherents. When this victory is
   obtained, all is in effect done. Satan's last and greatest opposition
   is conquered; all his measures are defeated; the pillars of his kingdom
   broken asunder, and will fall of course. The devil is utterly baffled
   and confounded, and knows not what else to do. He now sees his
   antichristian, Mahometan, and heathenish kingdoms through the world,
   all tumbling down. He and his most powerful instruments are taken
   captive. Now that is in effect done, for which the church of God had
   been so long waiting and hoping, and so earnestly crying to God,
   saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and true? [643] "

   The angel who set his right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the
   earth, lift up his hand to heaven, and swore by him that liveth for
   ever and ever, &c. that when the seventh angel should come to sound,
   the time should be no longer.--And now the time is come; now the
   seventh trumpet sounds, and the seventh vial is poured out, both
   together; intimating, that now all is finished as to the overthrow of
   Satan's visible kingdom on earth. This victory shall be by far the
   greatest that ever was obtained over Satan and his adherents. By this
   blow, with which the stone cut out of the mountain without hands shall
   strike the image of gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, and clay, it
   shall all be broken to pieces. This will be a finishing blow to the
   image, so that it shall become as the chaff of the summer
   threshing-floor.

   In this victory will be a most glorious display of divine power. Christ
   shall therein appear in the character of King of kings, and Lord of
   lords, as in Rev. xix. 16. Now Christ shall dash his enemies, even the
   strongest and proudest of them, in pieces; as a potter's vessel shall
   they be broken to shivers.--Then shall strength be shown out of
   weakness, and Christ shall cause his church to thresh the mountains, as
   in Isa. xli. 15. "Behold, I will make thee a new sharp
   threshing-instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and
   beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff." And then shall be
   fulfilled Isa. xlii. 13-15.

   III. Consequent on this victory, Satan's visible kingdom on earth shall
   be destroyed. When Satan is conquered in this last battle, the church
   of Christ will have easy work of it; as when Joshua and the children of
   Israel had obtained that great victory over the five kings of the
   Amorites. When God sent great hail-stones on their enemies, they had
   easy work of subduing the cities and country to which they belonged. So
   it was also after the other great battle that Joshua had with a great
   multitude at the waters of Merom. After this glorious victory of Christ
   and his church over their enemies, the chief powers of Satan's kingdom,
   they shall destroy that kingdom in all those cities and countries to
   which they belonged. After this the word of God shall have a speedy and
   swift progress through the earth; as it is said, that on the pouring
   out of the seventh vial, "the cities of the nations fell, and every
   island fled away, and the mountains were not found," Rev. xvi. 19, 20.
   When once the stone cut out of the mountain without hands had broken
   the image in pieces, it was easy to abolish all the remains of it. The
   very wind will carry it away as the chaff of the summer
   threshing-floor. Because Satan's visible kingdom on earth shall now be
   destroyed, therefore it is said, that the seventh vial by which this
   shall be done, shall be poured out into the air; which is represented
   in Scripture as the special seat of his kingdom; for he is called "the
   prince of the power of the air," Eph. ii. 2. Now is come the time for
   punishing leviathan, that piercing serpent, of which we read in Isa.
   xxvii. 1. "In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong
   sword, shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan,
   that crooked serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea."

   Concerning this overthrow of Satan's visible kingdom on earth, I would
   show wherein it will chiefly consist, with its extent and universality.

   1. I would show wherein this overthrow of Satan's kingdom will chiefly
   consist. I shall mention the particular things in which it will
   consist, without pretending to determine in what order they shall come
   to pass, or which shall be accomplished first, or whether they shall be
   accomplished together.

   (1.) Heresies, infidelity, and superstition, among those who have been
   brought up under the light of the gospel, will then be abolished; and
   particularly deism, which is now so bold and confident in infidelity,
   shall be driven away, and vanish to nothing. All shall agree in the
   same great and important doctrines of the gospel; Zech. xiv. 9. "And
   the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be
   one Lord, and his name one." Then shall be abolished all superstitions
   modes of worship, and all shall cordially agree in worshipping God in
   his own way: Jer. xxxii. 39. "And I will give them one heart, and one
   way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their
   children after them "

   (2.) The kingdom of Antichrist shall be utterly overthrown. His
   dominion has been much brought down already by the vial poured out on
   his throne in the Reformation; but then it shall be utterly destroyed.
   Then shall be proclaimed, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen. [644] " When
   the seventh angel sounds, "the time, times, and half a time, shall be
   out; and the time shall be no longer." Then shall be accomplished
   concerning Antichrist the things which are written (Rev. xviii.) of the
   spiritual Babylon, the idolatrous Roman government, that has for so
   many ages been the great enemy of the christian church, first under
   heathenism, then under popery.--That proud city which lifted herself up
   to heaven, in her pride and haughtiness; that cruel, bloody city, shall
   come down to the ground. Then shall that be fulfilled, Isa. xxvi. 5.
   "For he bringeth down them that dwell on high, the lofty city he layeth
   it low, he layeth it low; even to the ground, he bringeth it even to
   the dust." She shall be thrown down with violence, like a great
   millstone cast into the sea, and shall be found no more at all, and
   shall become a habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit,
   and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Now shall she be stripped
   of all her glory, and riches, and ornaments, and shalt be cast out as
   an abominable branch, and shall be trodden down as the mire of the
   streets. All her policy and craft, in which she so abounded, shall not
   save her. All the strength and wisdom of this great whore shall fail
   her, and there shall be none to help her. The kings of the earth, who
   before gave their power and strength to the beast, shall now hate the
   whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
   and burn her with fire, Rev. xvii. 16.

   (3.) Satan's Mahometan kingdom shall be utterly overthrown. The locusts
   and horsemen in the 9th of Revelation, have their appointed and limited
   time set them there, and the false prophet shall be taken and
   destroyed. And then--though Mahometanism has been so vastly propagated
   in the world, and is upheld by such a great empire--this smoke, which
   has ascended out of the bottomless pit, shall be utterly scattered
   before the light of that glorious day, and the Mahometan empire shall
   fall at the sound of the great trumpet which shall then be blown.

   (4.) Jewish infidelity shall then be overthrown. However obstinate they
   have been now for above seventeen hundred years in their rejection of
   Christ, and however rare have been the instances of individual
   conversions, ever since the destruction of Jerusalem--but they have,
   against the plain teachings of their own prophets, continued to approve
   of the cruelty of their forefathers in crucifying Christ--yet, when
   this day comes, the thick vail that blinds their eyes shall be removed,
   2 Cor. iii. 16. and divine grace shall melt and renew their hard
   hearts, "and they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they
   shall mourn for him as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in
   bitterness as one that is in bitterness for his first-born," Zech. xii.
   10, &c. And then shall the house of Israel be saved: the Jews in all
   their dispersions shall cast away their old infidelity, and shall have
   their hearts wonderfully changed, and abhor themselves for their past
   unbelief and obstinacy. They shall flow together to the blessed Jesus,
   penitently, humbly, and joyfully owning him as their glorious King and
   only Saviour, and shall with all their hearts, as with one heart and
   voice, declare his praises unto other nations.

   Nothing is more certainly foretold than this national conversion of the
   Jews, in Rom. xi. There are also many passages of the Old Testament
   which cannot be interpreted in any other sense, which I cannot now
   stand to mention. Besides the prophecies, of the calling of the Jews,
   we have a remarkable providential seal of the fulfilment of this great
   event, by a kind of continual miracle, viz. their being preserved a
   distinct nation in such a dispersed condition for above sixteen hundred
   years. The world affords nothing else like it. There is undoubtedly a
   remarkable hand of providence in it. When they shall be called, that
   ancient people, who alone were God's people for so long a time, shall
   be his people again, never to be rejected more. They shall then be
   gathered into one fold together with the Gentiles; and so also shall
   the remains of the ten tribes, wherever they be, and though they have
   been rejected much longer than the Jews, be brought in with their
   brethren. The prophecies of Hosea especially seem to hold this forth,
   that in the future glorious times of the church, both Judah and
   Ephraim, or Judah and the ten tribes, shall be brought in together, and
   shall be united as one people, as they formerly were under David and
   Solomon; (Hos. i. 11, &c.)--Though we do not know the time in which
   this conversion of Israel will come to pass; yet thus much we may
   determine by Scripture, that it will be before the glory of the Gentile
   part of the church shall be fully accomplished; because it is said,
   that their coming in shall be life from the dead to the Gentiles, (Rom.
   xi. 12, 15.)

   (5.) Then shall also Satan's heathenish kingdom be overthrown. Gross
   heathenism now possesses a great part of the earth, and there are
   supposed to be more heathens now in the world, than of all other
   professions taken together. But then the heathen nations shall be
   enlightened with the glorious gospel. There will be a wonderful spirit
   of pity towards them, and zeal for their instruction and conversion put
   into multitudes, and many shall go forth and carry the gospel unto
   them. Then shall the joyful sound be heard among them, and the Sun of
   righteousness shall arise with his glorious light shining on those vast
   regions of the earth that have been covered with heathenish darkness
   for many thousand years. Many of them doubtless ever since the times of
   Moses and Abraham, have lain thus in a miserable condition, under the
   cruel tyranny of the devil, who has all this while blinded and befooled
   them, domineered over them, and made a prey of them. Now the glad
   tidings of the gospel shall sound there, and they shall be brought out
   of darkness into marvellous light.

   It is promised, that heathenism shall thus be destroyed in many places.
   God has said, That the gods that have not made these heavens and this
   earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens, Jer.
   x. 11. and that he will utterly abolish idols, Isa. ii. 18.--Then shall
   the many nations of Africa, who now seem to be in a state but little
   above the beasts, and in many respects much below them, be visited with
   glorious light, and delivered from all their darkness, and shall become
   a civil, christian, understanding, and holy people.--Then shall the
   vast continent of America, which now in great part is covered with
   barbarous ignorance and cruelty, be every where covered with glorious
   gospel-light and christian love; and instead of worshipping the devil
   as now they do, they shall serve God, and; praises shall be sung every
   where to the Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed Saviour of the world. So we
   may expect it will be in that great and populous part of the world, the
   East Indies, which are now mostly inhabited by the worshippers of the
   devi1. Then the kingdom of Christ will be established in those
   continents which have been more lately discovered towards the north and
   south poles, where men differ very little from the wild beasts, except
   in impiety. The same will be the case with respect to those countries
   which have never yet been discovered. Thus will be gloriously fulfilled
   Isa. xxxv 1. "The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for
   them: and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose." (See also
   Isa. 6, 7.)

   2. Having thus shown wherein this overthrow of Satan's kingdom will
   consist, I come now to observe its universal extent. The visible
   kingdom of Satan shall be overthrown, and the kingdom of Christ set up
   on the ruins of it, every where throughout the whole habitable globe.
   Now shall the promise made to Abraham be fulfilled, That in him and in
   his seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed; and Christ now
   shall become the desire of all nations, agreeable to Haggai ii. 7.--Now
   the kingdom of Christ shall in the most strict and literal sense be
   extended to all nations, and the whole earth. There are many passages
   of Scripture that can be understood in no other sense. What can be more
   universal than Isa. xi. 9. "For the earth shall be full of the
   knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." As much as to say,
   As there is no part of the channel or cavity of the sea, but what is
   covered with water; so there shall be no part of the world of mankind
   but what shall be covered with the knowledge of God. So it is foretold
   in Isa. xlv. 22. that all the ends of the earth shall look to Christ,
   and be saved. And to show that the words are to be understood in the
   most universal sense, it is said in the next verse, "I have sworn by
   myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall
   not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
   swear. [645] "--So the most universal expression is used, Dan. vii. 27.
   "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
   the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the
   most high God."

   When the devil was cast out of the Roman empire, because that was the
   highest and principal part of the world, and the other nations that
   were left were low and mean in comparison, it was represented as
   Satan's being cast out of heaven to the earth, Rev. xii. 9.; but it is
   represented that he shall be cast out of the earth too, and shut up in
   hell, Rev. xx. 1, 2, 3.--This is the greatest revolution by far that
   ever came to pass: therefore it is said in Rev. xvi. 17, 18. that on
   the pouring out of the seventh vial, "there was a great earthquake,
   such as was not since men were upon earth, so mighty an earthquake and
   so great. [646] " And this is the third great dispensation of
   Providence which is in Scripture compared to Christ's coming to
   judgment, Rev. xvi. 15. There, after the sixth vial, and after the
   devil's armies were gathered together to their great battle, and just
   before Christ's glorious victory over them, it is said, "Behold I come
   quickly; blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments. [647] "
   So it is called Christ's coming, 2 Thess. ii. 8. Speaking of Antichrist
   it is said, "And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord
   shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
   brightness of his coming. [648] " See also Dan. vii. 13, 14. where
   Christ's coming to set up his kingdom on earth, and to destroy
   Antichrist, is called coming with clouds of heaven. And this is more
   like Christ's last coming to judgment, than any of the preceding
   dispensations which are so called. The dispensation is so much greater
   and more universal, and so more like the day of judgment, which
   respects the whole world. The great spiritual resurrection of the
   church of God accompanying it, resembles the general resurrection at
   the end of the world more than any other. (See Rev. xx. 4.)

   Terrible judgments and fearful destruction shall now be executed on
   God's enemies. There will doubtless at the introducing of this
   dispensation be a visible and awful hand of God against blasphemers,
   deists, obstinate heretics, and other enemies of Christ, terribly
   destroying them, with remarkable tokens of wrath and vengeance. More
   especially will this dispensation be attended with terrible judgments
   on Antichrist; the cruel persecutors who belong to the church of Rome,
   shall in a most awful manner be destroyed; which is compared to a
   casting of Antichrist into the burning flame, Dan. vii. 11. and to
   casting him alive into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
   Rev. xix. 20.

   Then shall this cruel persecuting church suffer those judgments from
   God, which shall be far more dreadful than her persecutions of the
   saints, agreeable to Rev. xviii. 6, 7.--The judgments which God shall
   execute on the enemies of the church, are so great, that they are
   compared to God's sending great hail-stones from heaven upon them,
   every one of the weight of a talent, as it is said on the pouring out
   of the seventh vial, Rev. xvi. 21. "And there fell upon men a great
   hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men
   blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail; for the plague
   thereof was exceeding great." And now shall be that treading of the
   wine-press spoken of, Rev. xiv. 19, 20.

   This shall put an end to the church's suffering state, and shall be
   attended with their glorious and joyful praises. The church's afflicted
   state has been continued, excepting some short intermissions, from the
   resurrection of Christ to this time; but now shall a final end be put
   to her suffering state. Indeed after this, near the end of the world,
   the church shall be greatly threatened; but it is said, it shall be but
   for a little season, Rev. xx. 3. for as the times of the church's rest
   have been but short, before the long day of her afflictions are at an
   end; so whatever affliction she may suffer after this, will be very
   short. In every other respect, the day of the church's afflictions and
   persecution shall now come to a final end. The Scriptures, in many
   places, speak of this time as the end of the suffering state of the
   church. So Isa. li. 22. "Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup
   of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury, thou shalt no more
   drink it again." Then shall be proclaimed to the church, Isa. xl. 1, 2.
   "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably
   to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that
   her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord's hand
   double for all her sins." Also Isa liv. 8, 9. and Isa lx. 20. belong to
   this time. Isa. lx. 20. "The Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and
   the days of thy mourning shall be ended." And so Zeph. iii. 15. "The
   Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the
   King of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not
   see evil any more."

   The time before this, had been the church's sowing-time, wherein she
   sowed in tears and in blood; but now is her harvest, wherein she will
   come again rejoicing, bringing her sheaves with her. Now the time of
   travail of the woman clothed with the sun is at an end; now she hath
   brought forth her son: for this glorious setting up of the kingdom of
   Christ through the world, is what the church had been in travail for,
   with such terrible pangs, for so many ages: Isa. xxvi. 17. "Like as a
   woman with child that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in
   pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O
   Lord." (See Isa. lx. 20. and Isa. lxi. 10, 11.) And now the church
   shall forget her sorrow, since a man-child is born into the world: now
   succeed her joyful praise and triumph. Her praises shall then go up to
   God from all parts of the earth; (as Isa. xlii. 10-12.) and praise
   shall not only fill the earth, but also heaven. The church on earth,
   and the church in heaven, shall both gloriously rejoice and praise God,
   as with one heart, on that occasion. Without doubt it will be a time of
   very distinguished joy and praise among the holy prophets and apostles,
   and the other saints in heaven: Rev. xviii. 20. "Rejoice over her, thou
   heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for God hath avenged you on
   her." See how universal these praises will be in Isa. xliv. 23. "Sing,
   O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the
   earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree
   therein: for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in
   Israel." See what joyful praises are sung to God on this occasion by
   the universal church in heaven and earth, in the beginning of the 19th
   chapter of Revelation.

   This dispensation is above all preceding ones like Christ's coming to
   judgment, in that it so puts an end to the former state of the world,
   and introduces the everlasting kingdom of Christ. Now Satan's visible
   kingdom shall be overthrown, after it had stood ever since the building
   of Babel; the old heavens and the old earth shall in a greater measure
   pass away, and the new heavens and new earth be set up in a far more
   glorious manner, than ever before.--Thus I have shown how the success
   of Christ's purchase has been carried on through the times of the
   afflicted state of the christian church, from Christ's resurrection
   till Antichrist is fallen, and Satan's visible kingdom on earth is
   overthrown.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [641] Rev. xvi. 14.

   [642] Rev. xvi. 17.

   [643] Rev. vi. 10.

   [644] Rev. xiv. 8.

   [645] Isa. xlv 23.

   [646] Rev. xvi. 18.

   [647] Rev. xxii. 7.

   [648] 2 Thess. ii. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART VIII.

   THE SUCCESS OF REDEMPTION THROUGH THAT SPACE WHEREIN THE CHRISTIAN
   CHURCH SHALL, FOR THE MOST PART, BE IN A STATE OF PEACE AND PROSPERITY.

   In order to describe this part, I would speak, first, of the prosperous
   state of the church through the greatest part of this period; and,
   secondly, of the great apostacy there shall be towards the close of it.

   I. I would speak of the prosperous state of the church through the
   greater part of this period. And in the general, I would observe two
   things,

   1. That this is most properly the time of the kingdom of heaven upon
   earth. Though the kingdom of heaven was in a degree set up soon after
   Christ's resurrection, and in a further degree in the time of
   Constantine; and though the christian church in all ages of it is
   called the kingdom of heaven; yet this is the principal time of the
   kingdom of heaven upon earth, the time principally intended by the
   prophecies of Daniel whence the Jews took the name of the kingdom of
   heaven.

   2. Now is the principal fulfilment of all the prophecies of the Old
   Testament which speak of the glorious times of the gospel in the latter
   days. Though there has been a glorious fulfilment of those prophecies
   already, in the times of the apostles, and of Constantine; yet the
   expressions are too high to suit any other time entirely, but that
   which is to succeed the fall of Antichrist. This is most properly the
   glorious day of the gospel. Other times are only forerunners and
   preparatory to this: those were the seed-time, but this is the harvest.
   But more particularly,

   (1.) It will be a time of great light and knowledge. The present, are
   days of darkness, in comparison of those days.--The light of that
   glorious time shall be so great, that it is represented as though there
   should then be no night, but only day; no evening nor darkness. So
   Zech. xiv 6, 7. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light
   shall not be clear, nor dark. But it shall be one day, which shall be
   known to the Lord, not day, nor night; but it shall come to pass, that
   at evening-time it shall be light."--It is further represented, as
   though God would then give such light to his church, that it should so
   much exceed the glory of the light of the sun and moon, that they
   should be ashamed: Isa. xxiv. 23. "Then the moon shall be confounded,
   and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion,
   and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously."

   There is a kind of vail now cast over the greater part of the world,
   which keeps them in darkness; but then this vail shall be destroyed:
   Isa. xxv. 7. "And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the
   covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
   nations." Then all countries and nations, even those which are now most
   ignorant, shall be full of light and knowledge. Great knowledge shall
   prevail every where. It may be hoped, that then many of the Negroes and
   Indians will be divines, and that excellent books will be published in
   Africa, in Ethiopia, in Tartary, and other now the most barbarous
   countries; and not only learned men, but others of more ordinary
   education, shall then be very knowing in religion: Isa. xxxii. 3, 4.
   "The eyes of them that see, shall not be dim; and the ears of them that
   hear, shall hearken. The heart also of the rash shall understand
   knowledge." Knowledge then shall be very universal among all sorts of
   persons; Jer. xxxi. 34. "And they shall teach no more every man his
   neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they
   shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them."

   There shall then be a wonderful unravelling of the difficulties in the
   doctrines of religion, and clearing up of seeming inconsistencies: Isa.
   xl. 4."So crooked things shall be made straight, and rough places shall
   be made plain, and darkness shall become light before God's people."
   Difficulties in Scripture shall then be cleared up, and wonderful
   things shall be discovered in the word of God, which were never
   discovered before. The great discovery of those things in religion
   which had been before kept hid, seems to be compared to removing the
   vail, and discovering the ark of the testimony to the people, which
   before used to be kept in the secret part of the temple, and was never
   seen by them. Thus at the sounding of the seventh angel, when it is
   proclaimed, "that the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
   our Lord and of his Christ, [649] " it is added, that "the temple of
   God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of
   his testament. [650] " So great shall be the increase of knowledge in
   this time, that heaven shall be as it were opened to the church of God
   on earth.

   (2.) It shall be a time of great holiness. Now vital religion shall
   every where prevail and reign. Religion shall not be an empty
   profession, as it now mostly is, but holiness of heart and life shall
   abundantly prevail. Those times shall be an exception from what Christ
   says of the ordinary state of the church, viz. that there shall be but
   few saved; for now holiness shall become general: Isa. lx. 21. "Thy
   people also shall be all righteous." Not that there will be none
   remaining in a Christless condition; but that visible wickedness shall
   be suppressed every where, and true holiness shall become general,
   though not universal. It shall be a wonderful time, not only for the
   multitude of godly men, but for eminency of grace: Isa. lxv. 20. "There
   shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not
   filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old, but the
   sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed." Zech. xii. 8.
   "He that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the
   house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them."
   And holiness shall then be as it were inscribed on every thing, on all
   men's common business and employments, and the common utensils of life:
   all shall be dedicated to God, and applied to holy purposes: every
   thing shall then be done to the glory of God: Isa. xxiii. 18. "And her
   merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord." (And so Zech.
   xiv. 20, 21.)--And as God's people then shall be eminent in holiness of
   heart, so they shall be also in holiness of life and practice.

   (3.) It shall be a time wherein religion shall in every respect be
   uppermost in the world. It shall be had in great esteem and honour. The
   saints have hitherto for the most part been kept under, and wicked men
   have governed. But now they will be uppermost. The kingdom shall be
   given into the hands of the saints of the "most high God," Dan. vii.
   27. And "they shall reign on earth," Rev. v. 10. They shall live and
   "reign with Christ a thousand years," Rev. xx. 4. In that day, such
   persons as are eminent for true piety and religion, shall be chiefly
   promoted to places of trust and authority. Vital religion shall then
   take possession of kings' palaces and thrones; and those who are in
   highest advancement shall be holy men: Isa. xlix. 23. "And kings shall
   be thy nursing-fathers, and their queens thy nursing-mothers." Kings
   shall employ all their power, and glory, and riches, for the
   advancement of the honour and glory of Christ, and the good of his
   church: Isa. lx. 16. "Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles,
   and shalt suck the breasts of kings." And the great men of the world,
   and the rich merchants, and others who have great wealth and influence,
   shall devote all to Christ and his church: Psalm xlv. 12. "The daughter
   of Tyre shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the people
   shall entreat thy favour."

   (4.) Those will be times of great peace and love. There shall then be
   universal peace and a good understanding among the nations of the
   world, instead of confusion, wars, and bloodshed. Isa. ii. 4. "And he
   shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they
   shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into
   pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither
   shall they learn war any more." It is represented as if all instruments
   of war should be destroyed, having become useless: Psal. xlvi. 9. "He
   maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaketh the bow,
   and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burneth the chariot in the fire."
   (See also Zech. ix. 10.) Then shall all nations dwell quietly and
   safely, without fear of any enemy. Isa. xxxii. 18. "And my people shall
   dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
   resting-places." (Also Zech. viii. 10, 11.)

   Then shall malice, and envy, and wrath, and revenge, be suppressed
   every where; and peace and love shall prevail between one man and
   another; which is most elegantly set forth in Isa. xi. 6-10. Then shall
   there be peace and love between rulers and ruled. Rulers shall love
   their people, and with all their might seek their best good; and the
   people shall love their rulers, shall joyfully submit to them, and give
   them that honour which is their due. So shall there be happy love
   between ministers and their people: Mal. iv. 6. "And he shall turn the
   heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to
   their fathers." Then shall flourish in an eminent manner those
   christian virtues of meekness, forgiveness, long-suffering, gentleness,
   goodness, and brotherly-kindness, those excellent fruits of the Spirit.
   Men, in their temper and disposition, shall then be like the Lamb of
   God, the lovely Jesus. The body shall be conformed to the head.

   Then shall all the world be united in one amiable society. All nations,
   in all parts of the world, on every side of the globe, shall then be
   knit together in sweet harmony. All parts of God's church shall assist
   and promote the spiritual good of one another. A communication shall
   then be upheld between all parts of the world to that end; and the art
   of navigation, which is now applied so much to favour men's
   covetousness and pride, and is used so much by wicked debauched men,
   shall then be consecrated to God, and applied to holy uses. (See Isa.
   lx. 5-9.) And then men will be abundant in expressing their love one to
   another, not only in words, but in deeds of charity, Isa. xxxii. 5.
   "The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to
   be bountiful;" but (Isa. xxxii. 8.) "the liberal deviseth liberal
   things, and by liberal things shall he stand."

   (5.) It will be a time of excellent order in the church of Christ. The
   true government and discipline of the church will then be settled and
   put into practice. All the world shall then be as one church, one
   orderly, regular, beautiful society. And as the body shall be one, so
   the members shall be in beautiful proportion to each other. Then shall
   that be verified in Psalm cxxii. 3. "Jerusalem is builded as a city
   that is compact together."

   (6.) The church of God shall then be beautiful and glorious on these
   accounts; yea, it will appear in the perfection of beauty: Isa. lx. 1.
   "Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
   risen upon thee. Isa. lxi. 10. "He hath covered me with the robe of
   righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a
   bride adorneth herself with her jewels." On these accounts, the church
   will then be the greatest image of heaven itself.

   (7.) That will be a time of the greatest temporal prosperity. Such a
   spiritual state as we have just described, has a natural tendency to
   health and long life; and that this will actually be the case, is
   evident by Zech. viii. 4. "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, There shall
   yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every
   man with his staff in his hand for very age." It has also a natural
   tendency to procure ease, quietness, pleasantness, and cheerfulness of
   mind, also wealth, and a great increase of children; as is intimated in
   Zech. viii. 5. "And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and
   girls playing in the streets thereof."--But further, the temporal
   prosperity of the people of God will also be promoted by a remarkable
   blessing from heaven: Isa. lxv. 21. "They shall build houses, and
   inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
   them." And in Mic. iv. 4. "But they shall sit every man under his vine,
   and under his fig-tree, and none shall make them afraid." Zech. vii.
   12. "For the seed shall be prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit,
   and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give
   their dew, and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all
   these things." (See also Jer. xxxi. 12, 13. and Amos ix 13.) Yea then
   they shall receive all manner of tokens of God's presence, acceptance,
   and favour: Jer. xxxiii. 9 "And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
   praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall
   hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble
   for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto
   it." Even the days of Solomon were but an image of those days, as to
   the temporal prosperity which shall be obtained in them.

   (8.) It will also be a time of great rejoicing: Isa. xxxv. 10. "And the
   ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs, and
   everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness,
   and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Isa. lv. 12. "For ye shall go
   out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills
   shall break forth before you." Isa. lxvi. 11. "That ye may suck, and be
   satisfied with the breasts of her consolations: that ye may milk out,
   and be delighted with the abundance of her glory." Isa. xii. 3. "With
   joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." That will be
   the church's glorious wedding-day with Christ upon earth: Rev. xix. 7.
   "Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him; for the marriage
   of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready." Rev. xix.
   9. "Blessed are they which are called to the marriage-supper of the
   Lamb."

   The Scriptures every where represent this prosperity to be of long
   continuance. The former intervals of rest and prosperity, as we before
   observed, are represented to be but short; but the representations of
   this state are quite different: Rev. xx. 4. "And I saw the souls of
   them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,--and they lived and
   reigned with Christ a thousand years." Isa. lx. 15. "Whereas thou hast
   been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make
   thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations."--This may
   suffice as to the prosperous state of the church through the greater
   part of the period from the destruction of Satan's visible kingdom in
   the world to Christ's appearing in the clouds of heaven to judgment.

   II. I now come to speak of the great apostacy there should be towards
   the close of this period, and how the church should, for a short time,
   be threatened by her enemies. And this I shall do under three
   particulars.

   1. A little before the end of the world, a great part of the world
   shall fall away from Christ and his church. It is said, Rev. xx. 3.
   that Satan should be cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up, and
   have a seal set upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more
   till the thousand years should be fulfilled; and that afterward he must
   be loosed out of his prison for a little season. Accordingly we are
   told, (Rev. xx. 7, 8.) that when the thousand years are expired, Satan
   shall be loosed out of his prison, and go forth to deceive the nations,
   which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog. This
   intimates, that the apostacy would be very general. The nations of the
   four quarters of the earth shall be deceived; and the number of those
   who shall now turn enemies to Christ shall be vastly great, as the army
   of Gog and Magog is represented in Ezek. It is said, (Rev. xx. 8.) that
   the number of them is as the sand of the sea, and that they went up on
   the breadth of the earth, as if they were an army large enough to reach
   from one side of the earth to the other.

   Thus after a happy and glorious season, such a long day of light and
   holiness, of love and peace, and joy, it shall again be a dark time.
   Satan shall begin to set up his dominion again in the world; and this
   world shall again become a scene of darkness and wickedness. The
   bottomless pit shall be opened, and devils shall come up again out of
   it, and a dreadful smoke shall ascend to darken the world. And the
   church of Christ, instead of extending to the utmost bounds of the
   world, as it did before, shall be reduced to narrow limits. The world
   of mankind being continued so long in a state of great prosperity shall
   now begin to abuse their prosperity, to serve their lust and
   corruption. This we learn from Luke xvii. 26. &c.

   2. Those apostates shall make great opposition to the church of God.
   The church shall be threatened with a sudden and entire overthrow by
   them. It is said, Satan shall gather them together to battle, as the
   sand on the seashore; and they went up on the breadth of the earth, and
   compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city. So that
   this beloved city shall seem just ready to be swallowed up by them: for
   her enemies shall not only threaten her, but shall actually have
   gathered together against her; and not only so, but shall have besieged
   her, shall have compassed her about on every side.--However, there is
   nothing in the prophecy which seems to hold forth, that the church had
   actually fallen into their hands, as it had fallen into the hands of
   Antichrist, to whom it was given to make war with the saints, and to
   overcome them. God will never suffer this to take place after the fall
   of Antichrist; for then the day of her mourning shall be ended,
   alarmingly threatened with utter and sudden destruction.

   3. Now the state of things will seem most remarkably to call for
   Christ's immediate appearance to judgment. For then the world shall be
   filled with the most aggravated wickedness. For much the greater part
   of the world shall have become visibly wicked and open enemies to
   Christ, and their wickedness shall be dreadfully aggravated by their
   apostacy. Before the fall of Antichrist, most of the world was full of
   visibly wicked men. But the greater part of these are poor heathens,
   who never enjoyed the light of the gospel; and others are those that
   have been bred up in the Mahometan or popish darkness. But these have
   apostatized from the christian church, the visible kingdom of Christ,
   in which they enjoyed the great light and privileges of glorious times,
   which shall be incomparably greater than the light and privileges which
   the church of God enjoys now. This apostacy will be most like the
   apostacy of the devils of any that ever had before been: for the devils
   apostatized, and turned enemies to Christ, though they enjoyed the
   light of heaven; and these will apostatize, and turn enemies to him,
   though they have enjoyed the light and privileges of the glorious times
   of the church. That such should turn open and avowed enemies to Christ,
   and should seek the ruin of his church, will cry aloud for such
   immediate vengeance as was executed on the devils when they fell.

   The wickedness of the world will remarkably call for Christ's immediate
   appearing in flaming fire to take vengeance on them, because of the way
   in which they shall manifest their wickedness. This will be by scoffing
   and blaspheming Christ and his holy religion; and particularly, they
   will scoff at the notion of Christ's coming to judgment, of which the
   church shall be in expectation. For now doubtless will be the greatest
   fulfilment of 2 Pet. iii. 3, 4. "Knowing this first, that there shall
   come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and
   saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell
   asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
   creation." They shall be in no expectation of the coming of Christ to
   judgment, and shall laugh at the notion. They shall trample all such
   things under foot, and shall give up themselves to their lusts, or to
   eat and drink, and wallow in sensual delights, as though they were to
   be here for ever. They shall despise the warnings the church shall give
   them of the coming of Christ to judgment, as the people of the old
   world despised what Noah told them of the approaching flood, and as the
   people of Sodom did when Lot said to them, The Lord will destroy this
   city. Their wickedness on this account will cry aloud to heaven for
   Christ's appearing in flaming fire to take vengeance of his enemies;
   and because they shall exercise their wickedness in a wicked design and
   violent attempt against the holy city of God, wherein, for so long a
   time, so much of the religion of Christ had been seen.

   And the great number of the wicked is another thing which shall
   especially call for Christ's coming: for the world then will doubtless
   be exceeding full of people, having continued so long in so great a
   state of prosperity, without such terrible desolating extremities, as
   wars, pestilences, and the like, to diminish them. And the major part
   of this world, which shall be so populous, will be wicked contemptuous
   apostates from God. Undoubtedly the world then will be by far fuller of
   wickedness than ever it was before, from its foundation. And if the
   wickedness of the old world, when men began to multiply on the earth,
   called for the destruction of the world by a deluge of water, this
   wickedness will as much call for its destruction by a deluge of fire.

   Again, the circumstances of the church at that day will also eminently
   call for the immediate appearing of Christ, as they will be compassed
   about by their blasphemous murderous enemies, just ready to be
   swallowed up by them. And it will be a most distressing time with the
   church, excepting the comfort they will have in the hope of deliverance
   from God: for all other help will seem to fail. The case will be come
   to the last extremity, and there will be an immediate need that Christ
   should come to their deliverance. And though the church shall be so
   eminently threatened, yet so will Providence order it, that it shall be
   preserved till Christ shall appear in his immediate presence, coming in
   the glory of his Father with all his holy angels. And then will come
   the time when all the elect shall be gathered in. That work of
   conversion which has been carried on from the beginning of the church
   after the fall through all those ages, shall be carried on no more.
   There never shall another soul be converted. Every one of those many
   millions, whose names were written in the book of life before the
   foundation of the world, shall be brought in; not one soul shall be
   lost. And the mystical body of Christ, which has been growing since it
   first began in the days of Adam, will be complete as to the number of
   parts, having every one of its members. In this respect, the work of
   redemption will now be finished. And now the end for which the means of
   grace have been instituted shall be obtained.--All that effect which
   was intended, shall now be accomplished.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [649] Rev. xi. 15.

   [650] Rev. xi. 19.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART IX.

   THE GENERAL JUDGEMENT

   Thus I have shown how the success of Christ's redemption has been
   accomplished during the continuance of the christian church under the
   means of grace. We have seen what great revolutions there have been,
   and are to be, during this space of time; how the great wheels of
   Providence have gone round for the accomplishment of that kind of
   success of Christ's purchase, which consists in the bestowment of grace
   on the elect. In the prosecution of the subject, we are come to the
   time when all the wheels have gone round; the course of things in this
   state of it is finished, and all things are ripe for Christ's coming to
   judgment.

   The success of Christ's purchase is of two kinds, consisting either in
   grace or glory. The success consisting in the former of these, is to be
   seen in those works of God which are wrought during those ages that the
   church is continued under the means of grace; and the success,
   consisting in the latter, will chiefly be accomplished at the day of
   judgment. Having already shown how the former kind of success has been
   accomplished, I come now to the latter, viz. that kind of success which
   is accomplished in the bestowment of glory on the church at the day of
   judgment. And here I would mention two or three things in general,
   concerning this kind of success of Christ's purchase.

   1. How great the success of Christ's purchase is, appears chiefly in
   this very thing. The success of Christ's purchase summarily consists in
   the salvation of the elect. But this bestowment of glory is eminently
   called their salvation: Heb. ix. 28. "To them that look for him, shall
   he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation." So it is called
   redemption, being eminently that wherein the redemption of the church
   consists. So in Eph. iv. 30. "Sealed unto the day of redemption;" and
   Luke xxi. 28. and Eph.i. 14. "Redemption of the purchased possession."

   2. All that precedes this, while the church is under the means of
   grace, is only to make way for the success which is to be accomplished
   in the bestowment of glory. The means of grace, and God's grace itself,
   is bestowed on the elect to make them meet for glory.

   3. All those glorious things which were brought to pass for the church
   while under the means of grace, are but images and shadows of this. So
   were those glorious things which were accomplished for the church in
   the days of Constantine the Great; and so is all that glory which is to
   succeed the fall of Antichrist. However great, it is all but a shadow
   of what will be bestowed at the day of judgment. But I hasten more
   particularly to show how this kind of success will be accomplished.

   I. Christ will appear in the glory of his Father, with all his holy
   angels, coming in the clouds of heaven. When the world is thus
   revelling in their wickedness, and compassing the holy city, just ready
   to destroy it, then shall the glorious Redeemer make his appearance. He
   through whom this redemption has all along been carried on, shall
   appear in the sight of the world; the light of his glory shall break
   forth; the whole world shall immediately have notice of it, and they
   shall lift up their eyes and behold this wonderful sight. Every eye
   shall see him, (Rev. i. 7.) Christ shall appear coming in his human
   nature, in that same body (now glorified) which was brought forth in a
   stable, and laid in a manger, which afterwards was so cruelly used, and
   nailed to the cross.

   Men shall now lift up their eyes, and see him coming in such majesty
   and glory as now is to us utterly inconceivable. The glory of the sun
   in a clear firmament, will be but darkness in comparison of it; and all
   the glorious angels and archangels shall attend him; thousand thousands
   ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand round about
   him. How different a person will he then appear from what he did at his
   first coming, when he was as a root out of a dry ground, a poor,
   despised, afflicted man! How different now is his appearance, in the
   midst of those glorious angels, principalities, and powers, in heavenly
   places, attending him as his ordinary servants, from what it was when
   in the midst of a ring of soldiers, with his mock robe and his crown of
   thorns, buffeted and spit upon, or hanging on the cross between two
   thieves, with a multitude of his enemies triumphing over him!

   This will be a most unexpected sight to the wicked world: it will come
   as a cry at midnight: they shall be taken in the midst of their
   wickedness, and it will give them a dreadful alarm. It will at once
   break up their revels, their eating, and drinking, and carousing. It
   will put a quick end to the design of. the great army that will then be
   compassing the camp of the saints: it will make them let drop their
   weapons out of their hands. The world, which will then be very full of
   people, most of whom will be wicked men, will then be filled with
   dolorous shrieking and crying; for all the kindreds of the earth shall
   wail because of him, (Rev. i. 7.) And where shall they hide themselves?
   How will the sight of that awful majesty terrify them when taken in the
   midst of their wickedness! Then they shall see who he is, what kind of
   a person he is, whom they have mocked and scoffed at, and whose church
   they have been endeavouring to overthrow. This sight will change their
   voice. The voice of their laughter and singing, while they are marrying
   and giving in marriage, and the voice of their scoffing, shall be
   changed into hideous, hellish yelling. Their countenances shall be
   changed from a show of carnal mirth, haughty pride, and contempt of
   God's people; they shall put on ghastly terror and amazement; and
   trembling and chattering of teeth shall seize upon them.

   But with respect to the saints, it shall be a joyful and most glorious
   sight to them: for this sight will at once deliver them from all fear
   of their enemies, who were before compassing them about, just ready to
   swallow them up. Deliverance shall come in their extremity: the
   glorious Captain of their salvation shall appear for them, at a time
   when no other help appeared. Then shall they lift up their heads, and
   their redemption shall be drawing nigh, (Luke xxi. 28.) Christ will
   appear with infinite majesty, yet at the same time they shall see
   infinite love in his countenance. And thus to see their Redeemer coming
   in the clouds of heaven, will fill their hearts full of gladness. Their
   countenances also shall be changed, not as the countenances of the
   wicked, but from being sorrowful, to be exceedingly joyful and
   triumphant. And now the work of redemption will be finished in another
   sense, viz. that the whole church shall be completely and eternally
   freed from all persecution and molestation from wicked men and devils.

   II. The last trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, and the
   living changed. God sent forth his angels with a great sound of a
   trumpet, to gather together his elect from the four corners of the
   earth in a mystical sense, before the destruction of Jerusalem; i.e. he
   sent forth the apostles, and others, to preach the gospel all over the
   world. And so in a mystical sense the great trumpet was blown at the
   beginning of the glorious times of the church. But now the great
   trumpet is blown in a more literal sense, with a mighty sound which
   shakes the earth. There will be a great signal given by a mighty sound
   made, which is called the voice of the archangel, as being the angel of
   greatest strength, 1 Thess. iv. 16. "For the Lord himself shall descend
   from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
   trump of God." On the sound of the great trumpet, the dead shall be
   raised every where. Now the number of the dead is very great. How many
   has death cut down since the world has stood. But then the number will
   be much greater, the world shall have stood longer, and through most of
   the remaining time it will doubtless be much fuller of inhabitants than
   ever it has been. All these shall now rise from the dead. The graves
   shall be opened in all parts of the world, and the sea shall give up
   the innumerable dead that are in it, (Rev. xx. 13.)

   And now all the inhabitants that ever shall have been upon the face of
   the earth, shall all appear upon earth at once. Among these will be
   Adam and Eve, the first parents of mankind, Abel, and Seth, and
   Methuselah, and all the saints who were their contemporaries; Noah and
   Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the prophets of Israel and holy confessors.
   Among them will appear all the holy apostles of Jesus Christ, and all
   the saints of their times; all the holy martyrs who fell under furious
   persecutions. There will be found all who belonged to the church in its
   wilderness-state, during the dark times of Antichrist, and all who have
   suffered under his persecuting cruelty, with all the saints of past and
   the present time, and that shall be to the end of the world. Now also
   all the enemies of the church in all the ages shall appear again; all
   the wicked heathens, and Jews, and Mahometans, and papists. Sinners of
   all sorts; demure hypocrites, profane sensualists, heretics, deists,
   and all cruel persecutors, and all who shall have died in sin, shall
   come together.

   And at the same time that the dead are raised, the living shall be
   changed. The bodies of the wicked who shall then be living, shall be so
   changed as to fit them for eternal torment; and the bodies of all the
   living saints shall be changed to be like unto Christ's glorious body,
   1 Cor. xv. 51, 52, 53. The bodies of the saints shall be so changed as
   to render them for ever incapable of pain, or affliction, or
   uneasiness; and all that dulness and heaviness, and all that deformity,
   which their bodies had before, shall be put off; and they shall put on
   strength and beauty, activity, and incorruptible unfading glory. And in
   such glory shall the bodies of all the risen saints appear.

   And now the work of redemption shall be finished in another respect,
   viz. that all the elect shall now be actually redeemed both in soul and
   body. Before this, the work of redemption, as to its actual success,
   was but incomplete; for only the souls of the redeemed were actually
   saved and glorified, excepting in some few instances: but now all the
   bodies of the saints shall be saved and glorified together; all the
   elect shall be glorified in the whole man, the soul and body in union.

   III. Now shall the saints be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord
   in the air, and all wicked men and devils shall be arraigned before the
   judgment-seat. When the dead saints are raised, then the whole church,
   consisting of all the elect through all ages, will stand together on
   the earth, at least all excepting those few whose bodies were glorified
   before; and then they shall all mount up as with wings to meet Christ.
   It seems that Christ, when he comes to judgment, will not come quite to
   the ground, but his throne will be fixed in the airy region, whence he
   may be seen by all that vast multitude that shall be gathered before
   him. The saints therefore shall ascend up to their Saviour. Thus the
   apostle tells us, that when the dead in Christ are raised, and the
   living changed, then those who are alive and remain, shall be caught up
   together with them, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be
   ever with the Lord, 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17. What a wonderful sight will
   that be, when all the many millions of saints are thus mounting up.

   Then shall the work of redemption be finished in another respect: then
   shall the whole church be perfectly and for ever delivered from this
   present evil world; shall take their everlasting leave of this earth,
   where they have been strangers, and which has been for the most part a
   scene of trouble and sorrow: where the devil has reigned as god, and
   has greatly molested them, and which has been such a scene of
   wickedness and abomination, where Christ their Lord has been cruelly
   used; and where they have been so hated, reproached, and persecuted.
   They shall leave it, and shall never set foot on it again. And there
   shall be an everlasting separation made between them and wicked men.
   Before, they were mixed together, and it was impossible in many
   instances to determine their characters; but now all shall become
   visible; both saints and sinners shall appear in their true characters
   and forms. Then shall all the church be seen ascending to the right
   hand of Christ. What a mighty cloud of them will there be!

   And then also the work of redemption will be finished in another
   respect, viz. that then the church shall all be gathered together. They
   all belonged to one society before, but yet were greatly separated with
   respect to the place of their habitation. Some were in heaven, and some
   on earth; and those who were on earth were separated, many of them by
   wide oceans, and vast continents. But now they shall all be gathered
   together, never to be separated any more. And not only shall all the
   members of the church now be gathered together, but all shall be
   gathered unto their Head, into his immediate glorious presence, never
   to be separated from him any more.

   At the same time, all wicked men and devils shall be brought before the
   judgment-seat of Christ. These shall be gathered to the left hand of
   Christ, and, as it seems, will still remain upon the earth, and shall
   not be caught up into the air, as the saints shall be. The devil, that
   old serpent, shall now be dragged up out of hell. He, that first
   procured the fall and misery of mankind, and has so set himself against
   their redemption, and has all along shown himself such an inveterate
   enemy to the Redeemer, shall never more have any thing to do with the
   church of God, nor be suffered in the least to afflict or molest any
   member of it for ever. Instead of that, now he must be judged, and
   receive the due reward of his deeds. Now is come the time which he has
   always dreaded; the time wherein he must be judged, and receive his
   full punishment. He who by his temptation maliciously procured Christ's
   crucifixion, and triumphed as though he had obtained the victory, even
   he shall see the consequences of that death which he procured. Now he
   must stand before that same Jesus, to be judged, condemned, and
   eternally destroyed by him. If Satan, the prince of hell, trembles at
   the thought of it thousands of years beforehand, how much more will he
   tremble, proud and stubborn as he is, when he comes to stand at
   Christ's bar!

   Then shall he also stand at the bar of the saints, whom he has so
   hated, afflicted, and molested: for the saints shall judge him with
   Christ: 1 Cor. vi. 3. "Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" Now
   shall he be as it were subdued under the church's feet, agreeable to
   Rom. xvi. 20. Satan, when he first tempted our first parents to sin,
   deceitfully and lyingly told them, that they should be as gods: but
   little did he think that they should indeed be so far as gods, as to be
   assessors with God to judge him. Much less did he think, that one of
   that nature which he then tempted, one of the posterity of those very
   persons whom he tempted, should actually be united to God; that as God
   he should judge the world, and that he himself must stand trembling and
   astonished before his judgment-seat. But thus all the devils in hell,
   who have so opposed Christ and his kingdom, shall now at last stand in
   utmost amazement and horror before Christ and his church, who shall
   appear to condemn them.

   Now also shall all Christ's other enemies be brought to appear before
   him. Now shall proud scribes and Pharisees, who had such a malignant
   hatred of Christ while in his state of humiliation, and who persecuted
   him to death, be made to come. Now those before whose judgment-seat
   Christ once stood, as a malefactor at their bar, and those who mocked
   him, buffeted him, and spit in his face, shall see Christ in his awful
   glory, as forewarned, Matt. xxvi. 64, 65. Then Christ was before their
   judgment-seat; but now it is their turn to stand before his
   judgment-seat with inconceivable horror and amazement, with ghastly
   countenances, quaking limbs, chattering teeth, and knees smiting one
   against another.

   Now also all the cruel enemies and persecutors of the church that have
   been in all ages, shall come in sight together. Pharaoh and the
   Egyptians, Antiochus Epiphanes, the malignant scribes and Pharisees,
   the persecuting heathen emperors, Julian the apostate, the cruel
   persecuting popes and papists, Gog and Magog, shall all appear at once
   before the judgment-seat of Christ. They and the saints who have in
   every age been persecuted by them, shall come in sight, and must now
   confront one another before the great Judge. And now shall the saints
   on their glorious thrones be made the judges of those unjust kings and
   rulers who before judged and condemned them, and put them to cruel
   death. Now shall those persecutors behold the glory to which they are
   arrived, whom they before so cruelly despised, and so cruelly treated.
   Thus wonderfully will the face of things be altered; now will all
   things be coming to rights.

   IV. The righteousness of the church shall be manifested, and all the
   wickedness of their enemies shall be brought to light. Those saints who
   had been the objects of hatred, reproach, and contempt in the world;
   reviled and condemned - by their persecutors without a cause, shall now
   be fully vindicated. They shall now appear clothed with the glorious
   robe of Christ's righteousness. It shall be most manifest before the
   world, that Christ's righteousness is theirs, and they shall gloriously
   shine forth in it. Then shall their inherent holiness be made manifest,
   and all their good works be brought to light. The good things which
   they did in secret shall now be manifested openly. Those holy ones of
   God, who had been treated as the filth and offscouring of the earth, as
   if not fit to live, as worse than beasts or devils, shall now appear to
   have been the excellent of the earth. Now God will bring forth their
   righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the noon-day. And now
   it shall appear who indeed were those wicked persons that were not fit
   to live; when all the wickedness of the enemies of Christ and his
   church, their pride, their malice, their cruelty, their hatred of true
   religion, shall be set forth in all its horrid acts, in its proper
   colours.

   And now the righteous may be heard before this great Judge, who could
   not be heard before those unjust judges. Now they shall declare their
   cause, and rise up in judgment against their persecutors, and shall
   declare how they had been treated by them. And now all the wickedness
   of the wicked shall be brought to light; even all their secret
   wickedness, and their very hearts shall be opened to view, and as it
   were turned inside out, before the bright light of that great day.
   Things which have been spoken in the ear, in the closet, and done in
   the dark, shall be manifested in the light, and proclaimed before
   angels and men.

   V. The sentence shall be pronounced on the righteous and the wicked.
   Christ, the glorious Judge, shall pass that blessed sentence on the
   church at his right hand, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. [651] " This
   sentence shall be pronounced with infinite love, and the voice will
   cause every heart to flow with joy. Thus Christ shall pronounce a
   sentence of justification on millions, who before had a sentence of
   condemnation passed upon them by their persecuting rulers. He will thus
   put honour upon those who have been before despised: he will own them
   for his, and will put a crown of glory upon their heads before the
   world; and then shall they shine forth as the sun with Jesus Christ in
   glory and joy, in the sight of all their enemies.

   And then shall the sentence of condemnation be passed on the wicked,
   "Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
   his angels. [652] " Thus shall the church's enemies be condemned; in
   which sentence of condemnation, the holy martyrs, who have suffered
   from them, shall concur. When the words of this sentence are
   pronounced, they will strike every heart of those at the left hand with
   inconceivable horror and amazement. Every syllable of it will be more
   terrible than a stream of lightning through their hearts. What horrible
   shrieking, quaking, gnashing of teeth, distortions of countenance,
   hideous looks, hideous actions, and hideous voices, will be seen
   through all that vast throng!

   VI. Upon this, Christ and all his saints, and all the holy angels
   ministering to them, shall leave this lower world, and ascend towards
   the highest heavens. Christ shall ascend in as great glory as he
   descended, and in some respects greater: for now he shall ascend with
   his elect church with him, glorified in body and soul. Christ's first
   ascension to heaven soon after his own resurrection was very glorious.
   But this his second ascension, with his mystical body, his whole
   church, shall be far more glorious. The redeemed church shall all
   ascend with him in a most joyful and triumphant manner: and all their
   enemies and persecutors, who shall be left behind to be consumed, shall
   see the sight, and hear their songs. And thus Christ's church shall for
   ever leave this accursed world, to go into the highest heavens, the
   paradise of God, the kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of
   the world.

   VII. When they are gone, this world shall be set on fire, and be turned
   into a great furnace, wherein all the enemies of Christ and his church
   shall be tormented for ever and ever. This is manifest by 2 Pet. iii.
   7. "But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
   kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and
   perdition of ungodly men." When Christ and his church are ascended to a
   distance from this world--that miserable company of the wicked being
   left behind, to have their sentence executed upon them here-- then,
   this whole lower world shall be set on fire, either from heaven, or by
   fire breaking out of the bowels of the earth, or both, as it was with
   the water in the time of the deluge. However, this lower world shall be
   set all on fire.--How will it strike the wicked with horror, when the
   fire begins to lay hold upon them, and they find no way to escape from
   it! What shrieking and crying will there be among those many millions,
   when they begin to enter into this great furnace, when the whole world
   shall be a furnace of the fiercest and most raging heat! insomuch that
   the apostle Peter says, () that "the heavens shall pass away with a
   great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth
   also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up; and the
   heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
   with fervent heat." And so fierce shall be its heat, that it shall burn
   the earth into its very centre; which seems to be what is meant, Deut.
   xxxii. 22. "For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the
   lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
   fire the foundations of the mountains."

   And here shall all the persecutors of the church of God burn in
   everlasting fire, who had before burnt the saints at the stake; and
   shall suffer torments far beyond all that their utmost wit and malice
   could inflict on the saints. And here the bodies of all the wicked
   shall burn, and be tormented to all eternity, and never be consumed;
   and the wrath of God shall be poured out on their souls. Though the
   souls of the wicked in hell do now suffer dreadful punishment, yet
   their punishment will be so increased at the day of judgment, that what
   they suffered before, is, in comparison of it, as an imprisonment to
   the execution which follows it. And now the devil, that old serpent,
   shall receive his full punishment; now that for fear of which he before
   trembled, shall fully come upon him. This world, which formerly used to
   be the place of his kingdom, where he set up himself as God, shall now
   be the place of his complete punishment, of full and everlasting
   torment.--And in this, one design of the work of redemption, viz.
   putting Christ's enemies under his feet, shall be perfectly
   accomplished. His enemies shall now be made his footstool, in the
   fullest degree. Now shall be the most perfect fulfilment of Gen. iii.
   15. "It shall bruise thy head."

   VIII. At the same time, all the church shall enter with Christ, their
   glorious Lord, into the highest heavens, and there shall enter on the
   state of their highest and eternal blessedness and glory. While the
   lower world, which they have left under their feet, is seized with the
   fire of God's vengeance, and flames are kindling upon it, and the
   wicked are entering into everlasting fire, the whole church shall
   enter, with their glorious Head, and all the holy angels attending, in
   a joyful manner, into the eternal paradise of God, the palace of the
   great Jehovah, their heavenly Father. The gates shall open wide for
   them to enter, and there Christ will bring them into his chambers in
   the highest sense. Here Christ will bring them, and present them in
   glory to his Father, saying, " Here am I, and the children which thou
   hast given me;" as much as to say, Here am I, with every one of those
   whom thou gavest me from eternity to take the care of, that they might
   be redeemed and glorified, and to redeem whom I have done and suffered
   so much, and to make way for whose redemption I have for so many ages
   been accomplishing such great changes. Here they are now perfectly
   redeemed in body and soul; I have delivered them from all the ill
   fruits of the fall, and freed them from all their enemies; I have
   brought them all together into one glorious society, and united them
   all in myself; I have openly justified them before all angels and men,
   and here I have brought them all away from that accursed world where
   they have suffered so much, and have brought them before thy throne: I
   have done all that for them which thou hast appointed me: I have
   perfectly cleansed them in my blood, and here they are in perfect
   holiness, shining with thy perfect image.

   And then the Father will accept of them, own them all for his children,
   and welcome them to the eternal and perfect inheritance and glory of
   his house, and will on this occasion give more glorious manifestations
   of his love than ever before, and will admit them to a more full and
   perfect enjoyment of himself.

   How shall be the marriage of the Lamb in the most perfect sense. The
   commencement of the glorious times of the church on earth, after the
   fall of Antichrist, is represented as the marriage of the Lamb; but
   after this we read of another marriage of the Lamb, at the close of the
   day of judgment.--After the beloved disciple had given an account of
   the day of judgment, (Rev. xx. xxi.) he gives an account, that he saw
   the holy city, the new Jerusalem, prepared as a bride adorned for her
   husband. Christ shall bring his church into his Father's house in
   heaven, as his bride, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

   The bridegroom and the bride shall then enter into heaven, both having
   on their wedding-robes, attended with all the glorious angels. And
   there they enter on the feast and joys of their marriage before the
   Father; they shall then begin an everlasting wedding-day. This shall be
   the day of the gladness of Christ's heart, wherein he will greatly
   rejoice, and all the saints shall rejoice with him. Christ shall
   rejoice over his bride, and the bride shall rejoice in her husband, in
   the state of her consummate and everlasting blessedness, of which we
   have a particular description in the 21st and 22d chapters of
   Revelation.

   And now the whole work of redemption is finished. Now the top-stone of
   the building is laid. In the progress of our discourse, we have
   followed the church of God in all her great changes, all her tossings
   to and fro, all her storms and tempests through the many ages of the
   world. We have seen her enter the harbour, and landed in the highest
   heavens, in complete and eternal glory. We have gone through the
   several ages of time, as the providence and word of God have led us. We
   have seen all the church's enemies fixed in endless misery, and have
   seen the church presented in her perfect redemption before her Father
   in heaven, there to enjoy this most unspeakable and inconceivable glory
   and blessedness; and there we leave her to enjoy this glory throughout
   the never-ending ages of eternity.

   Now all Christ's enemies will be perfectly put under his feet, and he
   shall have his most perfect triumph over sin and Satan, and all his
   instruments, and death, and hell. Now shall all the promises made to
   Christ by God the Father before the foundation of the world, the
   promises of the covenant of redemption, be fully accomplished. Christ
   shall now perfectly have obtained the joy set before him, for which he
   undertook those great sufferings in his state of humiliation. Now shall
   all the hopes and expectations of the saints be fulfilled. The state of
   the church before, was progressive and preparatory: but now she is
   arrived to her most perfect state of glory. All the glory of the church
   on earth, is but a faint shadow of this her consummate glory in heaven.

   Now Christ the great Redeemer shall be most perfectly glorified, God
   the Father shall be glorified in him, and the Holy Ghost shall be most
   fully glorified in the perfection of his work on the hearts of all the
   church.--And now shall that new heaven and new earth, or the renewed
   state of things, be completely finished, after the material frame of
   the old heavens and old earth is destroyed: Rev. xxi. 1. "And I saw a
   new heaven, and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth
   were passed away."--And now will the great Redeemer have perfected
   every thing that appertains to the work of redemption, which he began
   so soon after the fall of man. And who can conceive of the triumph of
   those praises which shall be sung in heaven on this great occasion, so
   much greater than that on the fall of Antichrist. The beloved disciple
   John Rev. xix. seems to want expressions to describe those praises, and
   says, Revelation xix. 6."It was as the voice of many waters, and as the
   voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God
   omnipotent reigneth." But much more inexpressible will those praises
   be, which will be sung in heaven after the final consummation of all
   things. How shall the praises of that vast and glorious multitude be as
   mighty thunderings indeed!

   How are all the former things passed away, and what a glorious state
   are things fixed in to remain to all eternity! --And as Christ, when he
   first entered upon the work of redemption, had the kingdom committed to
   him of the Father, and as he took on himself the administration of the
   affairs of the universe, to manage all so as to subserve the purposes
   of this affair; so now, the work being finished, he will deliver up the
   kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. xv. 24. "Then cometh the end,
   when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;
   when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power." Not
   that Christ shall cease to reign after this; for it is said, Luke i.
   33." He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom
   there shall be no end;" and Dan. vii. 14. "His dominion is an
   everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that
   which shall not be destroyed." But the meaning is, that Christ shall
   deliver up that kingdom or dominion which he has over the world, as the
   Father's delegate or vicegerent, which the Father committed to him, to
   be managed in subserviency to this great design of redemption. The end
   of this commission, or delegation, which he had from the Father, seems
   to be to subserve this particular design of redemption; and therefore,
   when that design is fully accomplished, the commission will cease, and
   Christ will deliver it up to the Father, from whom he received it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [651] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [652] Matt. xxv. 41.
     __________________________________________________________________

    PART X

   IMPROVEMENT OF THE WHOLE

   I proceed now to enter upon some improvement of the whole that has been
   said from this doctrine.

   I. Hence we may learn how great a work is this of redemption. We have
   now had it, though in a very imperfect manner, set forth, in its whole
   progress, from its first beginning after the fall, to its consummation.
   We have seen how God has carried on this building, by a long succession
   of wonderful works, advancing it higher and higher from one age to
   another, till the top-stone is laid. And now let us consider how great
   a work this is. Do men, when they behold some great edifices, admire
   their magnificence; how well may we admire the greatness of this
   building of God, which he builds up age after age! There are three
   things exhibited to us in what has been said, which especially show the
   greatness of the work of redemption.

   1. The greatness of those particular events, and dispensations of
   Providence, by which it is accomplished. How great are those things
   which God has done, which are but so many parts of this great work!
   What great things were done in the world to prepare the way for
   Christ's coming to purchase, and what great things were done in the
   actual purchase of redemption! What a wonderful thing was accomplished
   to put Christ in an immediate capacity for this purchase, viz. his
   incarnation, that God should become man! And what great things were
   done in that purchase, that a person, who is the eternal Jehovah,
   should live upon earth for four or five and thirty years together, in a
   mean, despised condition, that he should spend his life in such labours
   and sufferings, and that at last he should die upon the cross! And what
   great things have been done to accomplish the success of Christ's
   redemption! what great things to put him into a capacity to accomplish
   this success! For this purpose he rose from the dead, and ascended into
   heaven, and all things were made subject to him. How many miracles have
   been wrought, what mighty revolutions have been brought to pass in the
   world already, and how much greater shall be brought to pass, in order
   to it!

   2. The number of those great events by which God carries on this work,
   shows the greatness of the work. Those mighty revolutions are so many
   as to fill up many ages. The particular wonderful events by which the
   work of creation was carried on filled up six days; but the great
   dispensations by which the work of redemption is carried on, are so
   many, that they fill up six or seven thousand years at least, as we
   have reason to conclude from the word of God.--There were great things
   wrought in this affair before the flood, and in the flood the world was
   once destroyed by water, and God's church was so wonderfully preserved
   from it in order to carry on this work. And after the flood, what great
   things did God work relating to the resettling of the world, to the
   building of Babel, the dispersing of the nations, the shortening of the
   days of man's life, the calling of Abraham, the destruction of Sodom
   and Gomorrah, and that long series of wonderful providences relating to
   Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph; and those wonders in Egypt, and at
   the Red sea, in the wilderness, and in Canaan in Joshua's time, and by
   a long succession of wonderful providences from age to age towards the
   nation of the Jews.

   What great things were wrought by God, in so often overturning the
   world before Christ came, to make way for his coming ! What great
   things were done also in Christ's time, and after that, in overturning
   Satan's kingdom in the heathen empire, and in so preserving his church
   in the dark times of popery, and in bringing about the
   Reformation!--How many great and wonderful things will be effected in
   accomplishing the glorious times of the church, and at Christ's last
   coming on the day of judgment, in the destruction of the world, and in
   carrying the whole church into heaven!

   3. The glorious issue of this whole affair, in the perfect and eternal
   destruction of the wicked, and in the consummate glory of the
   righteous. And now let us once more take a view of this building, now
   all is finished and the top-stone laid. It appeared in a glorious
   height in the apostle's time, and much more glorious in the time of
   Constantine, and will appear much more glorious still after the fall of
   Antichrist; but at the consummation of all things, it appears in an
   immensely more glorious height than ever before. Now it appears in its
   greatest magnificence, as a complete lofty structure, whose top reaches
   to the heaven of heavens; a building worthy of the great God, the King
   of kings.

   And from what has been said, one may argue, that the work of redemption
   is the greatest of all God's works of which we have any notice, and it
   is the end of all his other works.--It appears plainly from what has
   been said, that this is the principal of all God's works of providence,
   and that all are subordinate to the great affair of redemption. We see
   that all the revolutions in the world are to subserve this grand
   design. This shows how much greater the work of redemption is, than the
   work of creation: because it is the end of it; as the use of a house is
   the end of the building it. But the work of redemption, is the sum of
   all God's works of providence: all are subordinate to it: so the work
   of the new creation is more excellent than the old. So it ever is, that
   when one thing is removed by God to make way for another, the new one
   excels the old. Thus the temple excelled the tabernacle; the new
   covenant the old; the new dispensation of the gospel the dispensation
   of Moses; the throne of David the throne of Saul; the priesthood of
   Christ the priesthood of Aaron; the new Jerusalem the old; and so the
   new creation far excels the old.

   God has used the creation for no other purpose, but to subserve the
   designs of this affair. To answer this end, he hath created and
   disposed of mankind, to this the angels, to this the earth, to this the
   highest heavens. God created the world to provide a spouse and a
   kingdom for his Son: and the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, and
   the spiritual marriage of the spouse to him, is what the whole creation
   labours and travails in pain to bring to pass. This work of redemption
   is so much the greatest of all the works of God, that all other works
   are to be looked upon either as parts of it, or appendages to it, or
   are some way reducible to it; and so all the decrees of God some way or
   other belong to that eternal covenant of redemption which was between
   the Father and the Son before the foundation of the world. Every decree
   of God is some way or other reducible to that covenant. And seeing this
   work of redemption is so great, we need not wonder that the angels
   desire to look into it. And we need not wonder that so much is made of
   it in Scripture, that it is so much insisted on in the histories, and
   prophecies, and songs of the Bible; for the work of redemption is the
   great subject of the whole, its doctrines, its promises, its types, its
   songs, its histories, and its prophecies.

   II. Hence we may learn how God is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning
   and ending of all things. Such are the characters and titles we find
   often ascribed to him in Scripture. Isa. xli. 4."Who hath wrought and
   done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the
   first, and with the last, I am he." And particularly does the Scripture
   ascribe such titles to God, where it speaks of providence, as it
   relates to, and is summed up in, the great work of redemption; as Isa.
   xliv. 6, 7and xlviii. 9-12.) Therefore, when Christ reveals the future
   great events of providence relating to his church and people, to his
   disciple John, he often reveals himself under this character. Rev. i.
   8. "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord,
   which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty." So again,
   ver. 10, 11. "I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet, saying,
   I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last." Alpha and Omega being
   the names of the first and the last letters of the Greek alphabet, it
   signifies the same as his being the first and the last, and the
   beginning and the ending: as Rev. xxi. 6. "And he said unto me, It is
   done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end." And so chapter
   xxii. 12, 13. "And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to
   give every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega,
   the beginning and the end, the first and the last."

   We have seen on what design God began the course of his providence in
   the beginning of the generations of men; and how he has all along
   carried things on agreeably to the same design without ever failing;
   and how at last the conclusion and final issue of things are to God;
   and therefore may well now cry out with the apostle, Rom. xi. 33. "O
   the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
   unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" and
   ver. 36. "For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to
   whom be glory for ever. Amen."

   We have seen how other things came to an end one after another; how
   states and kingdoms, and empires, fell, and came to nothing, even the
   greatest and strongest of them; we have seen how the world has been
   often overturned, and will be more remarkably yet; we have seen how it
   was first destroyed by water, and how at last it shall be utterly
   destroyed by fire: but yet God remains the same through all ages. He
   was before the beginning of this course of things, and he will be after
   the end of them; (Psal. cii. 25, 26.) Thus God is he who is, and who
   was, and who is to come.

   We have seen, in a variety of instances, how all other gods perish.
   Those in the nations about Canaan, and throughout the Roman empire, are
   all destroyed, and their worship long since overthrown. We have heard
   how Antichrist, who has called himself a god on earth; how Mahomet, who
   claims religious honours; how all the gods of the heathen through the
   world, will come to an end; and how Satan, the great dragon, that old
   serpent, who has set up himself as god of this world, will be cast into
   the lake of fire, there to suffer his complete punishment: but Jehovah
   remains, his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and of his dominion
   there is no end. We have seen what mighty changes there have been in
   the world; but God is unchangeable, the same yesterday, to-day, and for
   ever.

   We began at the head of the stream of divine providence, and have
   traced it through its various windings, till we are come to the end
   where it issues. As it began in God, so it ends in him. God is the
   infinite ocean into which it empties itself.--Providence is like a
   mighty wheel, whose circumference is so high that it is dreadful, with
   the glory of the God of Israel above upon it; as it is represented in
   Ezekiel's vision. We have seen the revolution of this wheel, and how as
   it was from God, its return has been to God again. All the events of
   divine providence are like the links of a chain; the first link is from
   God, and the last is to him.

   III. We may see by what has been said, how Christ has in all things the
   pre-eminence. For he is the great Redeemer; and therefore the work of
   redemption being the sum of God's works of providence, shows the glory
   of our Lord Jesus Christ, as being above all, and through all, and in
   all. That God intended the world for his Son's use in the affair of
   redemption is one reason why he created the world by him, Eph. iii.
   9-12. What has been said, shows how all the purposes of God are
   purposed in Christ; and how he is before all, and above all. All things
   consist in him, are governed by him, and are for him, Colos. i. 15-18.
   God makes him his first-born, higher than the kings of the earth, and
   sets his throne above their thrones. God has always upheld his kingdom,
   when others have come to an end; that appears at last above all,
   however greatly opposed for so many ages. All other kingdoms fall, but
   his kingdom is the last, and never gives place to any other.

   We see, that whatever changes there are, and however highly Christ's
   enemies exalt themselves, yet he reigns in uncontrolled power and
   immense glory: in the end, his people are all perfectly saved and made
   happy, and all his enemies become his footstool. And thus God gives the
   world to his Son for his inheritance.

   IV. The consideration of what has been said, may greatly serve to show
   us the consistency, order, and beauty, of God's works of providence. If
   we behold events in any other view, all will look like confusion, like
   the tossing of waves; things will look as though one confused
   revolution came to pass after another, merely by blind chance, without
   any regular or certain end. But if we consider the events of providence
   in the light in which they have been set before us, and in which the
   Scriptures set them before us, they appear an orderly series of events,
   all wisely directed in excellent harmony and consistence, tending all
   to one end. The wheels of providence are not turned round by blind
   chance, but are full of eyes round about, (as Ezekiel represents them,)
   and are guided by the Spirit of God: where the Spirit goes, they go.
   All God's works of providence, through all ages, meet at last, as so
   many lines meeting in one centre.

   God's work of providence, like that of creation, is but one. The events
   of providence are not so many distinct, independent works; but rather
   so many different parts of one work, one regular scheme. They are all
   united, just as the several parts of one building: there are many
   stones, many pieces of timber, but all are so joined, and fitly formed
   together, that they make but one building; they have all but one
   foundation, and are united at last in one top-stone.

   God's providence may not unfitly be compared to a large and long river,
   having innumerable branches, beginning in different regions, and at a
   great distance one from another, and all conspiring to one common
   issue. After their very diverse and apparent contrary courses, they all
   collect together, the nearer they come to their common end, and at
   length discharge themselves at one mouth into the same ocean. The
   different streams of this river are apt to appear like mere confusion
   to us, because of our limited sight, whereby we cannot see the whole at
   once. A man who sees but one or two streams at a time, cannot tell what
   their course tends to. Their course seems very crooked, and different
   streams seem to run for a while different and contrary ways: and if we
   view things at a distance, there seem to be innumerable obstacles and
   impediments in the way, as rocks and mountains, and the like; to hinder
   their ever uniting, and coming to the ocean; but yet if we trace them,
   they all unite at last, all come to the same issue, disgorging
   themselves in one into the same great ocean. Not one of all the streams
   fail.

   V. From the whole that has been said, we may strongly argue, that the
   Scriptures are the word of God, because they alone inform us what God
   aims at, in his works. God doubtless is pursuing some design, and
   carrying on some scheme, in the various changes and revolutions which
   from age to age came to pass in the world. It is most reasonable to
   suppose, that there is some certain great design to which Providence
   subordinates all great successive changes in affairs. It is reasonable
   to suppose, that all revolutions, from the beginning of the world to
   the end of it, are but the various parts of the same scheme, all
   conspiring to bring to pass that great event which the great Creator
   and Governor of the world has ultimately in view; and that the scheme
   will not be finished, nor the design fully accomplished, and the great
   and ultimate event fully brought to pass, till the end of the world,
   and the last revolution is brought about.

   Now there is nothing else that informs us what this scheme and design
   of God in his works is, but the Holy Scriptures. Nothing else pretends
   to set in view the whole series of God's works of providence from
   beginning to end, and to inform us how all things were from God at
   first, for what end they are, how they were ordered from the beginning,
   how they will proceed to the end of the world, what they will come to
   at last, and how then all things shall be to God. Nothing else but the
   Scriptures has any pretence for showing any manner of regular scheme or
   drift in those revolutions which God orders from age to age. Nothing
   else pretends to show what God would effect by the things which he has
   done, is doing, and will do; what he seeks and intends by them. Nothing
   else pretends to show, with any distinctness or certainty, how the
   world began, or to tell us the true original of things. Nothing but the
   Scriptures set forth how God governed the world from the beginning of
   the generations of men upon the earth, in an orderly history; and
   nothing else sets before us how he will govern it to the end, by an
   orderly prophecy of future events; agreeable to the challenge which God
   makes to the gods, and prophets, and teachers of the heathen, in Isa.
   xli. 22, 23. "Let them bring them forth, and show us what shall happen:
   let them show the former things what they be, that we may consider
   them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to
   come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that
   ye are gods."

   Reason shows, that it is fit and requisite, that the intelligent and
   rational beings of the world should know something of God's scheme and
   design in his works: for they doubtless are principally concerned.
   God's great design in his works, is doubtless concerning his reasonable
   creatures, rather than brute beasts and lifeless things. The
   revolutions by which God's great design is brought to pass, are
   doubtless chiefly among them, and concern their state, and not the
   state of things without life or reason. And therefore surely it is
   requisite, that they should know something of it; especially since
   reason teaches, that God has given his rational creatures a capacity of
   seeing him in his works; for this end, that they may see God's glory in
   them, and give him that glory. But how can they see God's glory in his
   works, if they do not know what his design in them is, and what he aims
   at by what he is doing in the world?

   Further, it is fit that mankind should be somewhat informed of God's
   design in the government of the world, because they are made capable of
   actively falling in with that design, of promoting it, and acting
   herein as his friends and subjects. It is therefore reasonable to
   suppose, that God has given mankind some revelation to inform them of
   this: but there is nothing else that does it but the Bible. In the
   Bible this is done. Here we may learn the first original of things, and
   have an orderly account of the scheme of God's works from the
   beginning, through those ages that are beyond the reach of all other
   histories. Here we are told what God aims at in the whole, what is the
   great end, how he has contrived the grand design, and the great things
   he would accomplish. Here we have a most rational excellent account of
   this matter, worthy of God, and exceedingly showing forth the glory of
   his perfections, his majesty, his wisdom, his glorious holiness, grace,
   and love; and his exaltation above all, as the first and the last.

   Here we are shown the various parts of the work of providence, and how
   all are connected together in a regular, beautiful, and glorious frame.
   In the Bible, we have an account of the whole scheme of providence,
   from the beginning of the world to the end of it, either in history or
   prophecy, and are told what will become of things at last; how they
   will issue in the subduing of God's enemies, and in the salvation and
   glory of his church, and setting up of the everlasting kingdom of his
   Son.

   How rational, worthy, and excellent a revelation is this! and how
   excellent a book is the Bible, which contains so much beyond all other
   books in the world! and what characters are here of its being indeed a
   divine book! a book that the great Jehovah has given to mankind for
   their instruction, without which we should be left in miserable
   darkness and confusion.

   VI. From what has been said, we may see the glorious majesty and power
   of God in this affair of redemption. His glorious power appears in
   upholding his church for so long a time, and carrying on this work;
   upholding it oftentimes when it was but as a little spark, or as
   smoking flax, in which the fire was almost extinct, and the powers of
   earth and hell combined to destroy it. Yet God has never suffered them
   to quench it, and finally will bring forth judgment unto victory. God
   glorifies his strength in his church's weakness; in causing his people,
   who are like a number of little infants, finally to triumph over all
   earth and hell; so that they shall tread on the lion and adder; the
   young lion and dragon shall they trample under foot. The glorious power
   of God appears in conquering his many and mighty enemies by that person
   who was once an infant in a manger, and appeared as a poor, weak,
   despised man. He conquers them, and triumphs over them in their own
   weapon, the cross.

   The glorious majesty of God appears in conquering all those mighty
   enemies of the church one age after another; in conquering Satan, that
   proud and strong spirit, and all his hellish host; in bringing him down
   under foot, long after he had vaunted himself as god of this world, and
   when he did his utmost to support himself in his kingdom. Christ, our
   Michael, has overcome him, the devil was cast out, and there was found
   no more place for him in heaven; but he was cast out into the earth,
   and his angels were cast out with him. He is conquered in that kingdom
   wherein his pride, and subtlety, and cruelly, above all appears, viz.
   the kingdom of Antichrist. And the glorious power of God appears in
   thus conquering the devil, and bringing him under foot, after long time
   given him to strengthen himself to his utmost. He was once overthrown
   in his heathen Roman empire, after he had been making himself strong in
   those parts of the world, ever since the building of Babel. It appears
   also in overthrowing his kingdom more fatally and universally all over
   the world, after he had another opportunity to strengthen himself to
   his utmost for many ages, by setting up those two great kingdoms of
   Antichrist and Mahomet, and to establish his interest in the heathen
   world. We have seen how these kingdoms of God's enemies look strong, as
   though it was impossible to overthrow them; yet, when God appears, they
   seem to melt away, as the fat of lambs before the fire, and are driven
   away as the chaff before the whirlwind.

   Those mighty kingdoms of Antichrist and Mahomet, which have made such a
   figure for so many ages, and have trampled the world under foot, when
   God comes to appear, will vanish away like a shadow, and will disappear
   of themselves, as the darkness in a room does, when the light is
   brought in. What are God's enemies in his hands? How is their greatest
   strength weakness when he rises up! and how weak will they all appear
   together at the day of judgment! Thus we may apply those words in the
   song of Moses, Exod. xv. 6. 'Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious
   in power: thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy." And
   how great doth the majesty of God appear in overturning the world from
   time to time, to accomplish his designs, and at last in causing the
   earth and heavens to flee away, for the advancement of the glory of his
   kingdom !

   VII. From what has been said, we may see the glorious wisdom of God. It
   shows the wisdom of God in creating the world, in that he has created
   it for such an excellent use, to accomplish in it so glorious a work.
   And it shows the wisdom of Divine Providence, that he brings such great
   good out of such great evil, in making the fall and ruin of mankind,
   which in itself is so sorrowful and deplorable, an occasion of
   accomplishing such a glorious work as redemption, and of erecting such
   a glorious building, whose top should reach unto heaven, and of
   bringing his elect to a state of such unspeakable happiness. And how
   glorious doth the wisdom of God appear in that long course and series
   of great changes in the world, in bringing such order out of confusion,
   in so frustrating the most subtle machinations, and in causing the
   greatest works of Satan, those in which he has most glorified himself,
   to be wholly turned into occasions of so much the more glorious triumph
   of his Son Jesus Christ! And how wonderful is the wisdom of God, in
   bringing all such manifold and various changes and overturnings in the
   world to such a glorious period at last, and in so directing all the
   wheels of Providence by his skilful hand, that every one of them
   conspires, as the manifold wheels of a most curious machine, at last to
   strike out such an excellent issue, such a manifestation of the divine
   glory, such happiness to his people, and such a glorious and
   everlasting kingdom to his Son!

   VIII. From what has been said, we may see the stability of God's mercy
   and faithfulness to his people; how he never forsakes his inheritance,
   and remembers his covenant to them through all generations. Now we may
   see what reason there was for the words of the text, "The moth shall
   eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; but
   my righteousness shall endure for ever and ever, and my salvation from
   generation to generation." And now we may see abundant reason for that
   name of God which he reveals to Moses, Exod. iii. 14. "And God said
   unto Moses, I am that I am:" i.e. I am the same that I was when I
   entered into covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and ever shall be
   the same: I shall keep covenant for ever: I am self-sufficient, all
   sufficient, and immutable.

   And now we may see the truth of Psalm xxxvi. 5, 6. "Thy mercy, O Lord,
   is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds. Thy
   righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great
   deep." And if we consider what has been said, we need not wonder that
   the psalmist, in the 136th Psalm, so often repeats this, "For his mercy
   endureth for ever;" as if he were in an ecstasy at the consideration of
   the perpetuity of God's mercy to his church, delighted to think of it,
   and knew not how but continually to express it. Let us with like
   pleasure and joy celebrate the everlasting duration of God s mercy and
   faithfulness to his church and people, and let us be comforted by it
   under all the dark circumstances of the church of God, and all the
   uproar and confusions that are in the world, and all the threatenings
   of the church's enemies. And let us take encouragement earnestly to
   pray for those glorious things which God has promised to accomplish for
   his church.

   IX. Hence we may learn how happy a society the church of Christ is. For
   all this great work is for them. Christ undertook it for their sakes,
   and for their sakes he carries it on; it is because he has loved them
   with an everlasting love. For their sakes he overturns states and
   kingdoms. For their sakes he shakes heaven and earth. He gives men for
   them, and people for their life. Since they have been precious in God s
   sight, they have been honourable; and therefore he first gives the
   blood of his own Son, and then gives the blood of all their enemies,
   many thousands and millions, all nations that stand in their way, as a
   sacrifice to their good.

   For their sakes he made the world, and for their sakes he will destroy
   it; for their sakes he built heaven, and for their sakes he makes his
   angels ministering spirits. Therefore the apostle says, 1 Cor. iii. 21,
   &c. "All things are yours: whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
   world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are
   yours." How blessed is this people who are redeemed from among men, and
   are the first-fruits unto God, and to the Lamb; who have God in all
   ages for their protection and help! Deut. xxxiii. 29. "Happy art thou,
   O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield
   of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies
   shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high
   places."

   Let who will prevail now, let the enemies of the church exalt
   themselves as much as they will, these are the people that shall
   finally prevail. The last kingdom shall finally be theirs; the kingdom
   shall finally be given into their hands, and shall not be left to other
   people. We have seen to what a blessed issue things shall finally be
   brought, and what glory they shall arrive at, and remain in possession
   of, after all the kingdoms of the world are come to an end, and the
   earth is removed, and mountains are carried into the depth of the sea,
   or where the sea was, and this lower earth shall all be dissolved. O
   happy people, and blessed society! Well may they spend an eternity in
   praises and hallelujahs to him who hath loved them, and will love them
   to eternity.

   X. And, lastly, hence all wicked men, all that are in a Christless
   condition, may see their exceeding misery. You that are such, whoever
   you are, shall have no part or lot in this matter. You are never the
   better for any of these things: yea, your guilt is but so much the
   greater, and the misery you are exposed to so much the more dreadful.
   You are some of those against whom God, in the progress of the work,
   exercises so much manifest wrath; some of those enemies who are liable
   to be made Christ's footstool, to be ruled with a rod of iron, and to
   be dashed in pieces. You are some of the seed of the serpent, to bruise
   the head of which is one great design of all this work. Whatever
   glorious things God accomplishes for his church, they will not be
   glorious to you. The most glorious times of the church are always the
   most dismal to the wicked and impenitent. (Isa. Ixvi. 14.) And so we
   find, wherever glorious things are foretold concerning the church,
   there terrible things are foretold concerning the wicked, its enemies.
   So it ever has been in remarkable deliverances wrought for the church,
   there has been also a remarkable execution of wrath on its enemies.
   When God delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt; at the same
   time he remarkably poured out his wrath on Pharaoh and the Egyptians.
   When he brought them into Canaan by Joshua, and gave them that good
   land, he remarkably executed wrath upon the Canaanites. When they were
   delivered out of their Babylonish captivity, signal vengeance was
   inflicted on the Babylonians. When the Gentiles were called, and the
   elect of God were saved by the preaching of the apostles, Jerusalem and
   the persecuting Jews were destroyed in a most awful manner.

   I might observe the same concerning the glory accomplished to the
   church in the days of Constantine, at the overthrow of Satan's visible
   kingdom in the downfall of Antichrist, and at the day of judgment. In
   all these instances, and especially in the last, there have been, or
   will be, exhibited most awful tokens of the divine wrath against the
   wicked.

   God will indeed make use of you in this affair; but it will be for the
   glory of his justice, and not of his mercy. The enemies of God are
   reserved for the triumph of Christ's glorious power in overcoming and
   punishing them. You are some of those who shall be consumed with this
   accursed world after the day of judgment, when Christ and his church
   shall triumphantly and gloriously ascend to heaven. Therefore let all
   who are in a Christless condition seriously consider these things, and
   not be like the foolish people of the old world, who would not take
   warning, when Noah told them, that the Lord was about to bring a flood
   of waters upon the earth; or like the people of Sodom, who would not
   regard, when Lot told them, that God would destroy that city, and would
   not flee from the wrath to come, and so were consumed in that terrible
   destruction.

   And now I would say, to conclude my whole discourse on this subject,
   "These sayings are faithful and true, and blessed is he that keepeth
   these sayings. Behold Christ cometh quickly, and his reward is with
   him, to render to every man according as his work shall be. And he that
   is unjust, shall be unjust still; and he that is filthy, shall be
   filthy still; and he that is holy, shall be holy still. Blessed are
   they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
   life, and may enter in through the gates into the city: for without are
   dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters,
   and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. He that testifieth these things,
   saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

FIVE DISCOURSES,

        ON

  IMPORTANT SUBJECTS

    NEARLY CONCERNING THE GREAT AFFAIR

        OF THE

SOUL'S ETERNAL SALVATION,

   viz.

   i. justification by faith alone.

   ii. pressing into the kingdom of god.

   iii. ruth's resolution.

   iv. the justice of god in the damnation of sinners.

   v. the excellency of jesus christ.

      DELIVERED AT NORTHAMPTON,

        CHIEFLY AT THE TIME OF THE LATE WONDERFUL POURING OUT OF THE SPIRIT OF
        GOD THERE.

   Deut. iv. 9.-Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest
   thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart
   from thy heart all the days of thy life.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PREFACE.

   the following discourses were all, excepting the last, delivered in the
   time of the late wonderful work of God's power and grace in this place,
   and are now published [653] on the earnest desire of those to whom they
   were preached. These particular discourses are fixed upon, and designed
   for the press, rather than others that were delivered in that
   remarkable season, by their election. What has determined them in their
   choice, is the experience they hope they have had of special benefit to
   their souls from these discourses. Their desire to have them in their
   hands from the press has been long manifested, and often expressed to
   me; their earnestness in it is evident from this, that though it be a
   year of the greatest public charge of them that ever has been, by
   reason of the expense of building a new meeting-house, yet they chose
   rather to be at this additional expense now, though it be very
   considerable, than to have it delayed another year. I am fully sensible
   that their value for these discourses has arisen more from the frame in
   which they hear them, and the good which, through the sovereign
   blessing of God, they have received, than any real worth in them. And
   whatever the discourses are in themselves, yet those who heard them are
   not to be blamed or wondered at, if that is dear to them, which they
   hope God has made a means of saving and everlasting benefit. They have
   much insisted on this argument with me, to induce me to comply with
   their desire, viz. that they hoped the reading of these discourses
   would have a tendency in some measure to renew the same effect in them
   that was wrought in the hearing, and revive the memory of that great
   work of God, which this town has so much cause ever to remember; which
   argument has been of principal weight with me, to incline me to think
   it to be my duty to comply with their desire; though I cannot say there
   are no other considerations concurring to induce me to it.

   With respect to the discourse on justification, besides the desire of
   my people to make it public, I have been advised to it by certain
   reverend gentlemen, my fathers, that happened to be the hearers of it
   (or, at least, part of it) when preached, whose opinions and advice, in
   such an affair, I thought should be of as great weight with me as of
   most that I was acquainted with.

   The beginning of the late work of God in this place was so
   circumstanced, that I could not but look upon it as a remarkable
   testimony of God's approbation of the doctrine of justification by
   faith alone, here asserted and vindicated.-By the noise that had a
   little before been raised in this country concerning that doctrine,
   people here seemed to have their minds put into an unusual ruffle; some
   were brought to doubt of that way of acceptance with God, which from
   their infancy they had been taught to be the only way; and many were
   engaged more thoroughly to look into the grounds of those doctrines in
   which they had been educated.-The following discourse of justification,
   that was preached (though not so fully as it is here printed) at two
   public lectures, seemed to be remarkably blessed, not only to establish
   the judgments of many in this truth, but to engage their hearts in a
   more earnest pursuit of justification, in that way that had been
   explained and defended; and at that time, while I was greatly
   reproached for defending this doctrine in the pulpit, and just upon my
   suffering a very open abuse for it, God's work wonderfully brake forth
   amongst us, and souls began to flock to Christ, as the Saviour in whose
   righteousness alone they hoped to be justified. So that this was the
   doctrine on which this work in its beginning was founded, as it
   evidently was in the whole progress of it.

   A great objection that is made against the old protestant doctrine of
   justification by faith alone, and the scheme of those divines that have
   chiefly defended it, by those that value themselves upon the new
   fashioned divinity, is, that the scheme is too much incumbered with
   speculative niceties, and subtle distinctions, that, they say, serve
   only to involve the subject in endless controversy and dispute;
   whereas, their scheme, they suppose, is a plain, easy, and natural
   account of things. But their prejudice against distinctions in
   divinity, I humbly conceive, is carried to a great extreme. So great,
   so general, and loud a cry has been raised by modern philosophers and
   divines against the subtle distinctions of the schoolmen, for their
   learned impertinence, that many are ready to start at any thing that
   looks like nice distinction, and to condemn it for nonsense without
   examination. Upon the same account, we might expect to have St. Paul's
   epistles, that are full of very nice distinctions, called nonsense and
   unintelligible jargon, had not they the good luck to be universally
   received by all Christians as part of the Holy Scriptures.

   Our discovering the absurdity of the impertinent and abstruse
   distinctions of the school divines, may justly give us a distaste of
   such distinctions as have a show of learning in obscure words, but
   convey no light to the mind; but I can see no reason why we should also
   discard those that are clear and rational, and can be made out to have
   their foundation in truth, although they may be such as require some
   diligence and attention of mind clearly to apprehend them. So much of
   the Scripture scheme of justification as is absolutely necessary to
   salvation, may be very plain, and level with the understandings of the
   weakest Christians; but it does not therefore follow, that the
   Scripture teaches us no more about it that would be exceeding
   profitable for us to know, and by gaining the knowledge of which, we
   may obtain a more full and clear understanding of this doctrine, and be
   better able to solve doubts that may arise concerning it, and to defend
   it from the sophistry and cavils of subtle opposers.

   It is so in most of the great doctrines of Christianity, that are
   looked upon as first principles of the christian faith, that though
   they contain something that is easy, yet they also contain great
   mysteries; and there is room for progress in the knowledge of them, and
   doubtless will be to the end of the world. But it is unreasonable, to
   expect that this progress should be made in the knowledge of things
   that are high and mysterious, without accurate distinction and close
   application of thought: and it is also unreasonable, to think that this
   doctrine, of the justification of a sinner by a mediator, should be
   without mysteries. We all own it to be a matter of pure revelations,
   above the light of natural reason, and that it is what the infinite
   wisdom of God revealed in the gospel mainly appears in, that he hath
   found out such a way of reconciliation of which neither men nor angels
   could have thought. And after all, shall we expect that this way, when
   found out and declared, shall contain nothing but what is obvious to
   the most cursory and superficial view, and may be fully and clearly
   comprehended without some diligence, accuracy, and careful distinction?

   If the distinctions I have made use of in handling this subject are
   found to be inconsistent, trivial, and unscriptural niceties, tending
   only to cloud the subject, I ought to be willing that they should be
   rejected; but if on due examination they are found both scriptural and
   rational, I humbly conceive that it will be unjust to condemn them,
   merely because they are distinctions, under a notion that niceness in
   divinity never helps it, but always perplexes and darkens it. It is to
   God's own revelation that I make my appeal, by which alone we can know
   in what way he will be pleased again to receive into favour those who
   have offended him and incurred his displeasure. If there be any part of
   the scheme here laid down, or any distinction here used, not warranted
   by Scripture, let it be rejected; and if any opposite scheme can be
   found that is more easy and plain, having fewer and more rational
   distinctions, and not demonstrably inconsistent with itself, and with
   the word of God, let it be received. Let the Arminian scheme of
   justification by our own virtue be as plain and natural as it will, if
   at the same time it is plainly contrary to the certain and demonstrable
   doctrine of the gospel, as contained in the Scriptures, we are bound to
   reject it, unless we reject the Scriptures themselves as perplexed and
   absurd, and make ourselves wiser than God, and pretend to know his mind
   better than himself.

   This discourse on justification is printed much larger than it was
   preached; but the practical discourse that follow have but little added
   to them, and now appear in that very plain and unpolished dress in
   which they were first prepared and delivered; which was mostly at a
   time when the circumstances of the auditory they were preached to, were
   enough to make a minister neglect, forget, and despise such ornaments
   as politeness and modishness of style and method, when coming as a
   messenger from God to souls deeply impressed with a sense of their
   danger of God's everlasting wrath, to treat with them about their
   eternal salvation.--However unable I am to preach or write politely, if
   I would, yet I have this to comfort me under such a defect, that God
   has showed us he does not need such talents in men to carry on his own
   work, and that he has been pleased to smile upon and bless a very plain
   unfashionable way of preaching. And have we not reason to think, that
   it ever has been, and ever will be, God's manner, to bless the
   foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, let the elegance of
   language and excellency of style be carried to never so great a height,
   by the learning and wit of the present and future ages?

   What is published at the end, concerning the excellency of Christ, is
   added on my own motion; thinking that a discourse on such an
   evangelical subject would properly follow others that were chiefly
   awakening, and that something of the excellency of the Saviour was
   proper to succeed those things that were to show the necessity of
   salvation. I pitched upon that particular discourse, partly because I
   had been earnestly importuned for a copy of it for the press, by some
   in another town in whose hearing it was occasionally preached.

   I request every reader's candid acceptance and due improvement of what
   is here offered; and especially would earnestly beseech the people of
   my own charge, not to fail of improving these discourses to those
   purposes that they have mentioned to me as the ends for which they
   desired to have them published, that I may have no cause to repent of
   my labour in transcribing, nor they of their cost in printing them.
   Happy would it be for us, and an unspeakable mercy of heaven, if God
   should bless what is here printed, so to revive the memory of the past
   great work of God amongst us, and the lively impressions and sense of
   divine things that persons then had on their minds, and to cause us to
   lament our declensions, so that the same work might renewedly break
   forth and go on amongst us! Surely we have seen much to excite our
   longings after such a mercy, and to encourage us to cry to God for it!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [653] Viz. at Boston 1738.
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE I

   justification by faith alone

   Rom. iv. 5.

   But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the
   ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

   The following things may be noted in this verse:

   1. That justification respects a man as ungodly. This is evident by
   these words,--that justifieth the ungodly; which cannot imply less,
   than that God, in the act of justification, has no regard to any thing
   in the person justified, as godliness, or any goodness in him; but that
   immediately before this act, God beholds him only as an ungodly
   creature; so that godliness in the person to be justified is not so
   antecedent to his justification as to be the ground of it. When it is
   said that God justifies the ungodly, it is absurd to suppose that our
   godliness, taken as some goodness in us, is the ground of our
   justification; as, when it is said that Christ gave sight to the blind,
   to suppose that sight was prior to, and the ground of, that act of
   mercy in Christ; or as, if it should be said that such an one by his
   bounty has made a poor man rich, to suppose that it was the wealth of
   this poor man that was the ground of this bounty towards him and was
   the price by which it was procured.

   2. It appears, that by him that worketh not, in this verse, is not
   meant one who merely does not comform to the ceremonial law; because he
   that worketh not and the ungodly, are evidently synonymous expressions,
   or what signify the same, as appears by the manner of their connexion;
   if not, to what purpose is the latter expression, the ungodly, brought
   in? The context gives no other occasion for it, but to show, that by
   the grace of the gospel, God in justification has no regard to any
   godliness of ours. The foregoing verse is, "Now to him that worketh, is
   the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." In that verse, it is
   evident, gospel grace consists in the reward being given without works;
   and in this verse, which immediately follows it, and in sense is
   connected with it, gospel-grace consists in a man's being justified as
   ungodly. By which it is most plain, that by him that worketh not, and
   him that is ungodly, are meant the same thing; and that therefore not
   only works of the ceremonial law are excluded in this business of
   justification, but works of morality and godliness.

   3. It is evident in the words, that by the faith here spoken of, by
   which we are justified, is not meant the same thing as a course of
   obedience or righteousness, since the expression by which the faith is
   here denoted, is believing on him that justifies the ungodly.--They
   that oppose the Solifidians, as they call them, greatly insist on it,
   that we should take the words of Scripture concerning this doctrine in
   their most natural and obvious meaning; and how do they cry out, of our
   clouding this doctrine with obscure metaphors, and unintelligible
   figures of speech? But is this to interpret Scripture according to its
   most obvious meaning, when the Scripture speaks of our believing on him
   that justifies the ungodly, or the breakers of his law, to say, that
   the meaning of it is performing a course of obedience to his law, and
   avoiding the breaches of it? Believing on God as a justifer, certainly
   is a different thing from submitting to God as a lawgiver; especially
   believing on him as a justifier of the ungodly, or rebels against the
   lawgiver.

   4. It is evident that the subject of justification is looked upon as
   destitute of any righteousness in himself, by that expression, it is
   counted or imputed to him for righteousness.--The phrase, as the
   apostle uses it here and in the context, manifestly imports, that God
   of his sovereign grace is pleased, in his dealings with the sinner, so
   to regard one that has no righteousness, that the consequence shall be
   the same as if he had. This however may be from the respect it bears to
   some thing that is indeed righteous. It is plain that this is the force
   of the expression in the preceding verses. In the last verse but one,
   it is manifest, the apostle lays the stress of his argument for the
   free grace of God--from that text of the Old Testament about
   Abraham--on the word counted or imputed; and this is the thing that he
   supposed God to show his grace in, viz. in this counting something for
   righteousness, in his consequential dealings with Abraham, that was no
   righteousness in itself. And in the next verse which immediately
   precedes the text, "Now to him that worketh, is the reward not reckoned
   of grace, but of debt," and word there translated reckoned, is the same
   that in the other verses is rendered imputed, and counted: and it is as
   much as if the apostle had said, "As to him that works, there is no
   need of any gracious reckoning or counting it for righteousness, and
   causing the reward to follow as if it were a righteousness; for if he
   has works, he has that which is a righteousness in itself, to which the
   reward properly belongs." This if further evident by the words that
   follow, Rom. iv. 6., "Even as David also described the blessedness of
   the man unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works." What can
   here be meant by imputing righteousness without works, but imputing
   righteousness to him that has none of his own? Rom. iv. 7, 8. "Saying,
   Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
   covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin." How
   are these words of David to the apostle's purpose? or how do they prove
   any such thing, as that righteousness is imputed without works, unless
   it be because the word imputed is used, and the subject of the
   imputation is mentioned as a sinner, and consequently destitute of a
   moral righteousness? For David says no such thing, as that he is
   forgiven without the works of the ceremonial law; there is no hint of
   the ceremonial law, or reference to it, in the words.---I will
   therefore venture to infer this doctrine from the words, for the
   subject of my present discourse, viz.

   That we are justified only by faith in Christ, and not by any manner of
   virtue or goodness of our own.

   Such an assertion as this, I am sensible, many would be ready to call
   absurd, as betraying a great deal of ignorance, and containing much
   inconsistence; but I desire every one's patience till I have done.

   In handling this doctrine, I would,

   I. Explain the meaning of it, and show how I would be understood by
   such an assertion.

   II. Proceed to the consideration of the evidence of the truth of it.

   III. Show how evangelical obedience is concerned in this affair.

   IV. Answer objections.

   V. Consider the importance of the doctrine.

   I. I would explain the meaning of the doctrine, or show in what sense I
   assert it, and would endeavor to evince the truth of it: which may be
   done in answer to these two inquiries, viz. 1. What is meant by being
   justified? 2. What is meant when it is said, that this is, "by faith
   alone, without any manner of virtue or goodness of our own?"

   First, I would show what justification is, or what I suppose is meant
   in Scripture by being justified.

   A person is said to be justified, when he is approved of God as free
   from the guilt of sin and its deserved punishment, and as having that
   righteousness belonging to him that entitles to the reward of life.
   That we should take the word in such a sense, and understand it as the
   judge's accepting a person as having both a negative and positive
   righteousness belonging to him, and looking on him therefore as not
   only free from any obligation to punishment, but also as just and
   righteous, and so entitled to a positive reward, is not only most
   agreeable to the etymology and natural import of the word, which
   signifies to pass one for righteousness in judgment, but also
   manifestly agreeable to the force of the word as used in Scripture.

   Some suppose that nothing more is intended in Scripture by
   justification, than barely the remission of sins. If so, it is very
   strange, if we consider the nature of the case; for it is most evident,
   and none will deny, that it is with respect to the rule or law of God
   we are under, that we are said in Scripture to be either justified or
   condemned. Now what is it to justify a person as the subject of a law
   or rule, but to judge him as standing right with respect to that rule?
   To justify a person in a particular case, is to approve of him as
   standing right, as subject to the law in that case; and to justify in
   general is to pass him in judgment, as standing right in a state
   correspondent to the law or rule in general: but certainly, in order to
   a person's being looked on as standing right with respect to the rule
   in general, or in a state corresponding with the law of God, more is
   needful than not having the guilt of sin; for whatever that law is,
   whether a new or an old one, doubtless something positive is needed in
   order to its being answered. We are no more justified by the voice of
   the law, or of him that judges according to it, by a mere pardon of
   sin, that Adam, our first surety, was justified by the law, at the
   first point of his existence, before he had fulfilled the obedience of
   the law, or had so much as any trial whether he would fulfill it or no.
   If Adam had finished his course of perfect obedience, he would have
   been justified: and certainly his justification would have implied
   something more than what is merely negative; he would have been
   approved of, as having fulfilled the righteousness of the law, and
   accordingly would have been adjudged to the reward of it. So Christ,
   our second surety, (in whose justification all whose surety he is, are
   virtually justified,) was not justified till he had done the work the
   Father had appointed him, and kept the Father's commandments through
   all trials; and then in his resurrection he was justified. When he had
   been put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, 1 Pet.
   iii. 18., then he that was manifest in the flesh was justified in the
   spirit, 1 Tim. iii. 16.; but God, when he justified him in raising him
   from the dead, did not only release him from his humiliation for sin,
   and acquit him from any further suffering or abasement for it, but
   admitted him to that eternal and immortal life, and to the beginning of
   that exaltation that was the reward of what he had done. And indeed the
   justification of a believer is no other than his being admitted to
   communion in the justification of this head and surety of all
   believers; for as Christ suffered the punishment of sin, not as a
   private person, but as our surety; so when after this suffering he was
   raised from the dead, he was therein justified, not as a private
   person, but as the surety and representative of all that should believe
   in him. So that he was raised again not only for his own, but also for
   our justification, according to the apostle, Rom. iv. 25. "Who was
   delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification."
   And therefore it is that the apostle says, as he does in Rom. viii. 34.
   "Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
   risen again."

   But that a believer's justification implies not only remission of sins,
   or acquittance from the wrath due to it, but also an admittance to a
   title to that glory which is the reward of righteousness, is more
   directly taught in the Scripture, particularly in Rom. v.1, 2. where
   the apostle mentions both these as joint benefits implied in
   justification: "Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
   God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access into
   this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God."
   So remission of sin, and inheritance among them that are sanctified,
   are mentioned together as what are jointly obtained by faith in Christ,
   Acts xxvi. 18. "That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
   inheritance among them that are sanctified, through faith that is in
   me." Both these are without doubt implied in that passing from death to
   life, which Christ speaks of as the fruit of faith, and which he
   opposes to condemnation, John v. 24. "Verily I say unto you, he that
   heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting
   life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
   unto life." I proceed now,

   Secondly, To show what is meant when it is said, that this
   justification is by faith only, and not by any virtue or goodness of
   our own.

   This inquiry may be subdivided into two, viz.

   1. How it is by faith. 2. How it is by faith alone, without any manner
   of goodness of ours.

   1. How justification is by faith.--Here the great difficulty has been
   about the import and force of the particle by, or what is that
   influence that faith has in the affair of justification that is
   expressed in Scripture by being justified by faith.

   Here, if I may humbly express what seems evident to me, though faith be
   indeed the condition of justification so as nothing else is, yet this
   matter is not clearly and sufficiently explained by saying that faith
   is the condition of justification; and that because the word seems
   ambiguous, both in common use, and also as used in divinity. In one
   sense, Christ alone performs the condition of our justification and
   salvation; in another sense, faith is the condition of justification;
   in another sense, other qualifications and acts are conditions of
   salvation and justification too. There seems to be a great deal of
   ambiguity in such expressions as are commonly used, (which yet we are
   forced to use,) such as condition of salvation, what is required in
   order to salvation or justification, the terms of the covenant, and the
   like; and I believe they are understood in very different sense by
   different persons. And besides, as the word condition is very often
   understood in the common use of language, faith is not the only thing
   in us that is the condition of justification; for by the word
   condition, as it is very often (and perhaps most commonly) used, we
   mean any thing that may have the place of a condition in a conditional
   proposition, and as such is truly connected with the consequent,
   especially if the proposition holds both in the affirmative and
   negative, as the condition is either affirmed or denied. If it be that
   with which, or which being supposed, a thing shall be, and without
   which, or it being denied, a thing shall not be, we in such a case call
   it a condition of that thing. But in this sense faith is not the only
   condition of salvation or justification; for there are many things that
   accompany and flow from faith, with which justification shall be, and
   without which it will not be, and therefore are found to be put in
   Scripture in conditional propositions with justification and salvation
   in multitudes of places; such are love to God, and love to our
   brethren, forgiving men their trespasses, and many other good
   qualifications and acts. And there are many other things besides faith,
   which are directly proposed to us, to be pursued or performed by us, in
   order to eternal life, which if they are done, or obtained, we shall
   have eternal life, and if not done, or not obtained, we shall surely
   perish. And if faith was the only condition of justification in this
   sense, I do not apprehend that to say faith was the condition of
   justification, would express the sense of that phrase of Scripture, of
   being justified by faith. There is a difference between being justified
   by a thing, and that thing universally, necessarily, and inseparably
   attending justification; for so do a great many things that we are not
   said to be justified by. It is not the inseparable connexion with
   justification that the Holy Ghost would signify (or that is naturally
   signified) by such a phrase, but some particular influence that faith
   has in the affair, or some certain dependence that effect has on its
   influence.

   Some, aware of this, have supposed, that the influence or dependence
   might well be expressed by faith's being the instrument of our
   justification; which has been misunderstood, and injuriously
   represented, and ridiculed by those that have denied the doctrine of
   justification by faith alone, as though they had supposed faith was
   used as an instrument in the hand of God, whereby he performed and
   brought to pass that act of his, viz. approving and justifying the
   believer. Whereas it was not intended that faith was the instrument
   wherewith God justifies, but the instrument wherewith we receive
   justification; not the instrument wherewith the justifier acts in
   justifying, but wherewith the receiver of justification acts in
   accepting justification. But yet, it must be owned, this is an obscure
   way of speaking, and there must certainly be some impropriety in
   calling it an instrument wherewith we receive or accept justification;
   for the very persons who thus explain the matter, speak of faith as
   being the reception or acceptance itself; and if so, how can it be the
   instrument of reception or acceptance? Certainly there is a difference
   between the act and the instrument. Besides, by their own descriptions
   of faith, Christ, the mediator by whom, and his righteousness by which,
   we are justified, is more directly the object of this acceptance and
   justification, which is the benefit arising there from more indirectly;
   and therefore, if faith be an instrument, it is more properly the
   instrument by which we receive Christ, than the instrument by which we
   receive justification.

   But I humbly conceive we have been ready to look too far to find out
   what that influence of faith in our justification is, or what is that
   dependence of this effect on faith, signified by the expression of
   being justified by faith, overlooking that which is most obviously
   pointed forth in the expression, viz. that (there being a mediator that
   has purchased justification) faith in this mediator is that which
   renders it a meet and suitable thing, in the sight of God, that the
   believer, rather than others, should have this purchased benefit
   assigned to him.--There is this benefit purchased, which God sees it to
   be a more meet and suitable thing that it should be assigned to some
   rather than others, because he sees them differently qualified; that
   qualification wherein the meetness to this benefit, as the case stands,
   consists, is that in us by which we are justified. If Christ had not
   come into the world and died, &c. to purchase justification, no
   qualification whatever in us could render it a meet or fit thing that
   we should be justified. But the case being as it now stands, viz. that
   Christ has actually purchased justification by his own blood for
   infinitely unworthy creatures, there may be certain qualifications
   found in some persons, which, either from the relation it bears to the
   mediator and his merits, or on some other account, is the thing that in
   the sight of God renders it a meet and condecent thing, that they
   should have an interest in this purchased benefit, and of which if any
   are destitute, it renders it an unfit and unsuitable thing that they
   should have it. The wisdom of God in his constitutions doubtless
   appears much in the fitness and beauty of them, so that those things
   are established to be done that are fit to be done, and that those
   things are connected in his constitution that are agreeable one to
   another. So God justifies a believer according to his revealed
   constitution, without doubt, because he sees something in this
   qualification that, as the case stands, renders it a fit thing that
   such should be justified; whether it be because faith is the
   instrument, or as it were the hand, by which he that has purchased
   justification is apprehended and accepted, or because it is the
   acceptance itself, or whatever else. To be justified, is to be approved
   by God as a proper subject of pardon, with a right to eternal life; and
   therefore, when it is said that we are justified by faith, what else
   can be understood by it, than that faith is that by which we are
   rendered approvable, fitly so, and indeed, as the case stands, proper
   subjects of this benefit?

   This is something different from faith being the condition of
   justification, though inseparably connected with justification. So are
   many other things besides faith; and yet nothing in us but faith
   renders it meet that we should have justification assigned to us; as I
   shall presently show in answer to the next inquiry, viz.

   2. How this is said to be by faith alone, without any manner of virtue
   or goodness of our own. This may seem to some to be attended with two
   difficulties, viz. how this can be said to be by faith alone, without
   any virtue or goodness of ours, when faith itself is a virtue, and one
   part of our goodness, and is not only some manner of goodness of ours,
   but is a very excellent qualification, and one chief part of the
   inherent holiness of a Christian? And if it be a part of our inherent
   goodness or excellency (whether it be this part or any other) that
   renders it a condecent or congruous thing that we should have this
   benefit of Christ assigned to us, what is this less than what they mean
   who talk of a merit of congruity? And moreover, if this part of our
   christian holiness qualifies us, in the sight of God, for this benefit
   of Christ, and renders it a fit or meet thing, in his sight, that we
   should have it, why should not other parts of holiness, and conformity
   of God, which are also very excellent, and have as much of the image of
   Christ in them, and are no less lovely in God's eyes, qualify us as
   much, and have as much influence to render us meet, in God's sight, for
   such a benefit as this? Therefore I answer,

   When it is said, that we are not justified by any righteousness or
   goodness of our own, what is meant is, that it is not out of respect to
   the excellency or goodness of any qualifications or acts in us
   whatsoever, that God judges it meet that this benefit of Christ should
   be ours; and it is not, in any wise, on account of any excellency or
   value that there is in faith, that it appears in the sight of God a
   meet thing, that he who believes should have this benefit of Christ
   assigned to him, but purely from the relation faith has to the person
   in whom this benefit is to be had, or as it unites to that mediator, in
   and by whom we are justified. Here, for the greater clearness, I would
   particularly explain myself under several propositions.

   (1.) It is certain that there is some union or relation that the people
   of Christ stand in to him, that is expressed in Scripture, from time to
   time, by being in Christ, and is represented frequently by those
   metaphors of being members of Christ, or being united to him as members
   to the head, and branches to the stock, [654] and is compared to a
   marriage union between husband and wife. I do not now pretend to
   determine of what sort this union is; nor is it necessary to my present
   purpose to enter into any manner of disputes about it. If any are
   disgusted at the word union, as obscure and unintelligible, the word
   relation equally serves my purpose. I do not now desire to determine
   any more about it, than all, of all sorts, will readily allow, viz.
   that there is a peculiar relation between true Christians and Christ,
   which there is not between him and others; and which is signified by
   those metaphorical expressions in Scripture, of being in Christ, being
   members of Christ, &c. [655]

   (2.) This relation or union to Christ, whereby Christians are said to
   be in Christ, (whatever it be,) is the ground of their right to his
   benefits. This needs no proof; the reason of the thing, at first blush,
   demonstrates it. It is exceeding evident also by Scripture, 1 John
   v.12. "He that hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath not the Son,
   hath not life." 1 Cor. i.30. "Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God
   is made unto us-righteousness." First we must be in him, and then he
   will be made righteousness or justification to us. Eph. i.6. "Who hath
   made us accepted in the beloved." Our being in him is the ground or our
   being accepted. So it is in those unions to which the Holy Ghost has
   thought fit to compare this. The union of the members of the body with
   the head, is the ground of their partaking of the life of the head; it
   is the union of the branches to the stock, which is the ground of their
   partaking of the sap and life of the stock; it is the relation of the
   wife to the husband, that is the ground of her joint interest in his
   estate; they are looked upon, in several respects, as one in law. So
   there is a legal union between Christ and true Christians; so that (as
   all except Socinians allow) one, in some respects, is accepted for the
   other by the Supreme Judge.

   (3.) And thus it is that faith is the qualification in any person that
   renders it meet in the sight of God that he should be looked upon as
   having Christ's satisfaction and righteousness belonging to him, viz.
   because it is that in him which, on his part, makes up this union
   between him and Christ. By what has been just now observed, it is a
   person's being, according to scripture phrase, in Christ, that is the
   ground of having his satisfaction and merits belong to him, and a right
   to the benefits procured thereby. The reason of it is plain; it is easy
   to see how our having Christ's merits and benefits belonging to us,
   following from our having (if I may so speak) Christ himself belonging
   to us, or our being united to him. And if so, it must also be easy to
   see how, or in what manner, that in a person, which on his part makes
   up the union between his soul and Christ, should be the thing on the
   account of which God looks on it as meet that he should have Christ's
   merits belonging to him. It is a very different thing for God to assign
   to a particular person a right to Christ's merits and benefits from
   regard to a qualification in him in this respect, from his doing it for
   him out of respect to the value or loveliness of that qualification, or
   as a reward of its excellency.

   As there is nobody but what will allow that there is a peculiar
   relation between Christ and his true disciples, by which they are in
   some sense in Scripture said to be on; so I suppose there is nobody but
   what will allow, that there may be something that the true Christ does
   on his part, whereby he is active in coming into this relation or
   union; some uniting act, or that which is done towards this union or
   relation (or whatever any please to call it) on the Christian's part.
   Now faith I suppose to be this act.

   I do not now pretend to define justifying faith, or to determine
   precisely how much is contained in it, but only to determine thus much
   concerning it, viz. That it is that by which the soul, which before was
   separate and alienated from Christ, unites itself to him, or ceases to
   be any longer in that state of alienation, and comes into that
   forementioned union or relation to him; or to use the scripture phrase,
   it is that by which the soul comes to Christ, and receives him; and
   this is evident by the Scriptures using these very expressions to
   signify faith. John vi. 35-39. "He that cometh to me, shall never
   hunger; and he that believeth on me, shall never thirst. But I said
   unto you, that ye also have seen me and believe not. All that the
   Father giveth me, shall come to me; and him that cometh to me, I will
   in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own
   will, but the will of him that sent me." Ver. 40. "And this is the will
   of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth
   on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last
   day." . Chap. 5.38-40. "Whom he hath sent, him ye believe not. Search
   the Scriptures, for--they are they which testify of me. And ye will not
   come unto me, that ye might have life." Ver. 43, 44. "I am come in my
   Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own
   name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe, which receive honour one
   of another--?" Chap. i.12. "But as many as received him, to them gave
   he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
   name." If it be said that these are obscure figures of speech, which,
   however, they might be well understood of old among those who commonly
   used such metaphors, are with difficulty understood now. I allow, that
   the expressions of receiving Christ and coming to Christ, are
   metaphorical expressions; and if I should allow them to be obscure
   metaphors, yet thus much at least is certainly plain in them, viz. that
   faith is that by which those who before were separated, and at a
   distance from Christ, (that is to say, were not so related and united
   to him as his people are,) cease to be any longer at such a distance,
   and come into that relation and nearness; unless they are so
   unintelligible, that nothing at all can be understood by them.

   God does not give those that believe an union with or an interest in
   the Saviour as a reward for faith, but only because faith is the soul's
   active uniting with Christ, or is itself the very act of unition, on
   their part. God sees it, that in order to an union being established
   between two intelligent active beings or persons, so as that they
   should be looked upon as one, there should be the mutual act of both,
   that each should receive other, as actively joining themselves one to
   another. God, in requiring this in order to an union with Christ as one
   of his people, treats men as reasonable creatures, capable of act and
   choice; and hence sees it fit that they only who are one with Christ by
   their own act, should be looked upon as one in law. What is real in the
   union between Christ and his people, is the foundation of what is
   legal; that is, it is something really in them, and between them,
   uniting them, that is the ground of the suitableness of their being
   accounted as one by the Judge. And if there be any act or qualification
   in believers of that uniting nature, that it is meet on that account
   the Judge should look upon them and accept them as one, no wonder that
   upon the account of the same act or qualification, he should accept the
   satisfaction and merits of the one for the other, as if these were
   their own satisfaction and merits. This necessarily follows, or rather
   is implied.

   And thus it is that faith justifies, or gives an interest in Christ's
   satisfaction and merits, and a right to the benefits procured thereby,
   viz. as it thus makes Christ and the believer one in the acceptance of
   the Supreme Judge. It is by faith that we have a title to eternal life,
   because it is by faith that we have the Son of God, by whom life is.
   The apostle John in these words, 1 John v.12. "He that hath the Son,
   hath life," seems evidently to have respect to those words of Christ of
   which he gives an account in his gospel, . chap. iii. 36. "He that
   believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not
   the Son, shall not see life." And where the Scripture speaks of faith
   as the soul's receiving or coming to Christ, it also speaks of this
   receiving, coming to, or joining with, Christ, as the ground of an
   interest in his benefits. To as many as received him, "to them gave he
   power to become the sons of God. [656] " Ye will not come unto me that
   ye might have life. [657] " And there is a wide difference between its
   being suitable that Christ's satisfaction and merits should be theirs
   who believe, because an interest in that satisfaction and merit is a
   fit reward of faith--or a suitable testimony of God's respect to the
   amiableness and excellency of that grace--and its being suitable that
   Christ's satisfaction and merits should be theirs, because Christ and
   they are so united, that in the eyes of the Judge they may be looked
   upon and taken as one.

   Although, on account of faith in the believer, it is in the sight of
   God fit and congruous, both that he who believes should be looked upon
   as in Christ, and also as having an interest in his merits, in the way
   that has been now explained; yet it appears that this is very wide from
   a merit of congruity, or indeed any moral congruity at all to either.
   [658] There is a twofold fitness to a state; I know not how to give
   them distinguishing names, otherwise than by calling the one a moral,
   and the other a natural fitness. A person has a moral fitness for a
   state, when his moral excellency commends him to it, or when his being
   put into such a good state is but a suitable testimony of regard to the
   moral excellency, or value, or amiableness of any of his qualifications
   or acts. A person has a natural fitness for a state, when it appears
   meet and condecent that he should be in such a state or circumstances,
   only from the natural concord or agreeableness there is between such
   qualifications and such circumstances; not because the qualifications
   are lovely or unlovely, but only because the qualifications and the
   circumstances are like one another, or do in their nature suit and
   agree or unite one to another. And it is on this latter account only
   that God looks on it fit by a natural fitness, that he whose heart
   sincerely unites itself to Christ as his Saviour, should be looked upon
   as united to that Saviour, and so having an interest in him; and not
   from any moral fitness there is between the excellency of such a
   qualification as faith, and such a glorious blessedness as the having
   an interest in Christ. God's bestowing Christ and his benefits on a
   soul in consequence of faith, out of regard only to the natural concord
   there is between such a qualification of a soul, and such an union with
   Christ, and interest in him, makes the case very widely different from
   what it would be, if he bestowed this from regard to any moral
   suitableness. For, in the former case, it is only from God's love of
   order that he bestows these things on the account of faith; in the
   latter, God doth it out of love to the grace of faith itself. God will
   neither look on Christ's merits as ours, nor adjudge his benefits to
   us, till we be in Christ; nor will he look upon us as being in him,
   without an active unition of our hearts and souls to him; because he is
   a wise being, and delights in order, and not in confusion, and that
   things should be together or asunder according to their nature; and his
   making such a constitution is a testimony of his love of order. [659]
   Whereas if it were out of regard to any moral fitness or suitableness
   between faith and such blessedness, it would be a testimony of his love
   to the act or qualification itself. The one supposes this divine
   constitution to be a manifestation of God's regard to the beauty of the
   act of faith; the other only supposes it to be a manifestation of his
   regard to the beauty of that order that there is in uniting those
   things that have a natural agreement, and congruity, and unition of the
   one with the other. Indeed a moral suitableness or fitness to a state
   includes a natural; for, if there be a moral suitableness that a person
   should be in such a state, there is also a natural suitableness; but
   such a natural suitableness as I have described, by no means
   necessarily includes a moral.

   This is plainly what our divines intend when they say, that faith does
   not justify as a work, or a righteousness, viz. that it does not
   justify as a part of our moral goodness or excellency, or that it does
   not justify as man was to have been justified by the covenant of works,
   which was, to have a title to eternal life given to him of God, in
   testimony of his pleasedness with his works, or his regard to the
   inherent excellency and beauty of his obedience. And this is certainly
   what the apostle Paul means, when he so much insists upon it, that we
   are not justified by works, viz. that we are not justified by them as
   good works, or by any goodness, value, or excellency of our works. For
   the proof of this I shall at present mention but one thing, and that
   is, the apostle from time to time speaking of our not being justified
   by works, as the thing that excludes all boasting, Eph. ii. 9. Rom.
   iii. 27. and chap iv. 2. Now which way do works give occasion for
   boasting, but as good? What do men use to boast of, but of something
   they suppose good or excellent? And on what account to they boast of
   any thing, but for the supposed excellency that is in it?

   From these things we may learn in what manner faith is the only
   condition of justification and salvation. For though it be not the only
   condition, so as alone truly to have the place of a condition in an
   hypothetical proposition, in which justification and salvation are the
   consequent, yet it is the condition of justification in a manner
   peculiar to it, and so that nothing else has a parallel influence with
   it; because faith includes the whole act of unition to Christ as a
   Saviour. The entire active uniting of the soul, or the whole of what is
   called coming to Christ, and receiving of him, is called faith in
   Scripture; and however other things may be no less excellent than
   faith, yet it is not the nature of any other graces or virtues directly
   to close with Christ as a mediator, any further than they enter into
   the constitution of justifying faith, and do belong to its nature.

   Thus I have explained my meaning, in asserting it as a doctrine of the
   gospel, that we are justified by faith only, without any manner of
   goodness of our own.

   I now proceed,

   II. To the proof of it; which I shall endeavour to produce in the
   following arguments.

   First, Such is our case, and the state of things, that neither faith,
   nor any other qualifications, or act or course of acts, does or can
   render it suitable that a person should have an interest in the
   Saviour, and so a title to his benefits, on account of any excellency
   therein, or any other way, than as something in him may unite him to
   the Saviour. It is not suitable that God should give fallen man an
   interest in Christ and his merits, as a testimony of his respect to any
   thing whatsoever as a loveliness in him; and that because it is not
   meet, till a sinner is actually justified, that any thing in him should
   be accepted of God, as any excellency or amiableness of his person; or
   that God, by any act, should in any manner or degree testify any
   pleasedness with him, or favour towards him, on the account of any
   thing inherent in him: and that for two reasons:

   1. The nature of things will not admit of it. And this appears from the
   infinite guilt that the sinner till justified is under; which arises
   from the infinite evil or heinousness of sin. But because that is what
   some deny, I would therefore first establish that point, and show that
   sin is a thing that is indeed properly of infinite heinousness; and
   then show the consequence, that it cannot be suitable, till the sinner
   is actually justified, that God should by any act testify pleasedness
   with or acceptance of any excellency or amiableness of his person.

   That the evil and demerit of sin is infinitely great, is most
   demonstrably evident, because what the evil or iniquity of sin consists
   in, is the violating of an obligation, or doing what we should not do;
   and therefore by how much the greater the obligation is that is
   violated, by so much the greater is the iniquity of the violation. But
   certainly our obligation to love or honour any being is great in
   proportion to the greatness or excellency of that being, or his
   worthiness to be loved and honoured. We are under greater obligations
   to love a more lovely being than a less lovely; and if a being be
   infinitely excellent or lovely, our obligations to love him are therein
   infinitely great. The matter is so plain, it seems needless to say much
   about it.

   Some have argued exceeding strangely against the infinite evil of sin,
   from its being committed against an infinite object, that then it may
   as well be argued, that there is also an infinite value or worthiness
   in holiness and love to God, because that also has an infinite object;
   whereas the argument, from parity of reason, will carry it in the
   reverse. The sin of the creature against God is ill deserving in
   proportion to the distance there is between God and the creature; the
   greatness of the object, and the meanness of the subject, aggravates
   it. But it is the reverse with regard to the worthiness of the respect
   of the creature to God; it is worthless (and not worthy) in proportion
   to the meanness of the subject. So much the greater the distance
   between God and the creature, so much the less is the creature's
   respect worthy of God's notice or regard. The unworthiness of sin or
   opposition to God rises and is great in proportion to the dignity of
   the object and inferiority of the subject; but on the contrary, the
   value of respect rises in proportion to the value of the subject; and
   that for this plain reason, viz. that the evil of disrespect is in
   proportion to the obligation that lies upon the subject to the object;
   which obligation is most evidently increased by the excellency and
   superiority of the object. But on the contrary, the worthiness of
   respect to a being is in proportion to the obligation that lies on him
   who is the object, (or rather the reason he has,) to regard the
   subject, which certainly is in proportion to the subject's value or
   excellency. Sin or disrespect is evil or heinous in proportion to the
   degree of what it denies in the object, and as it were takes from it,
   viz. its excellency and worthiness of respect; on the contrary, respect
   is valuable in proportion to the value of what is given to the object
   in that respect, which undoubtedly (other things being equal) is great
   in proportion to the subject's value, or worthiness of regard; because
   the subject in giving his respect, can give no more than himself: so
   far as he gives his respect, he gives himself to the object; and
   therefore his gift is of greater or lesser value in proportion to the
   value of himself.

   Hence, (by the way,) the love, honour, and obedience of Christ towards
   God, has infinite value, from the excellency and dignity of the person
   in whom these qualifications were inherent; and the reason why we
   needed a person of infinite dignity to obey for us, was because of our
   infinite comparative meanness, who had disobeyed, whereby our
   disobedience was infinitely aggravated. We needed one, the worthiness
   of whose obedience might be answerable to the unworthiness of our
   disobedience; and therefore needed one who was as great and worthy as
   we were unworthy.

   Another objection (that perhaps may be thought hardly worth mentioning)
   is, that to suppose sin to be infinitely heinous, is to make all sins
   equally heinous; for how can any sin be more than infinitely heinous?
   But all that can be argued hence is, that no sin can be greater with
   respect to that aggravation, the worthiness of the object against whom
   it is committed. One sin cannot be more aggravated than another in that
   respect, because the aggravation of every sin is infinite; but that
   does not hinder, that some sins may be more heinous than others in
   other respects: as if we should suppose a cylinder infinitely long, it
   cannot be greater in that respect, viz. with respect to the length of
   it; but yet it may be doubled and trebled, and made a thousand-fold
   more, by the increase of other dimensions. Of sins that are all
   infinitely heinous, some may be more heinous than others; as well as of
   divers punishments that are all infinitely dreadful calamities, so that
   there is no finite calamity, however great, but what is infinitely less
   dreadful, or more eligible, than any of them, yet some of them may be a
   thousand times more dreadful than others. A punishment may be
   infinitely dreadful by reason of the infinite duration of it; and
   therefore cannot be greater with respect to that aggravation of it,
   viz. its length of continuance, but yet may be vastly more terrible on
   other accounts.

   Having thus, as I imagine, made it clear, that all sin is infinitely
   heinous, and consequently that the sinner, before he is justified, is
   under infinite guilt in God's sight; it now remains that I show the
   consequences, or how it follows from hence, that it is not suitable
   that God should give the sinner an interest in Christ's merits, and so
   a title to his benefits, from regard to any qualifications, or act, or
   course of acts in him, on the account of any excellency or goodness
   whatsoever therein, but only as uniting to Christ; or (which fully
   implies it) that it is not suitable that God, by any act, should, in
   any manner or degree, testify any acceptance of, or pleasedness with,
   any thing, as any virtue, or excellency, or any part of loveliness, or
   valuableness in his person, until he is actually already interested in
   Christ's merits. From the premises it follows, that before the sinner
   is already interested in Christ, and justified, it is impossible God
   should have any acceptance of or pleasedness with the person of the
   sinner, as in any degree lovely in his sight, or indeed less the object
   of his displeasure and wrath. For, by the supposition, the sinner still
   remains infinitely guilty in the sight of God; for guilt is not removed
   but by pardon: but to suppose the sinner already pardoned, is to
   suppose him already justified; which is contrary to the supposition.
   But if the sinner still remains infinitely guilty in God's sight, that
   is the same thing as still to be beheld of God as infinitely the object
   of his displeasure and wrath, or infinitely hateful in his eyes; and if
   so, where is any room for any thing in him, to be accepted as some
   valuableness or acceptableness of him in God's sight, or for any act of
   favour of any kind towards him, or any gift whatsoever to him, in
   testimony of God's respect to an acceptance of something of him lovely
   and pleasing? If we should suppose that a sinner could have faith, or
   some other grace in his heart, and yet remain separate from Christ; and
   that he is not looked upon as being in Christ, or having any relation
   to him, it would not be meet that such true grace should be accepted of
   God as any loveliness of his person in the sight of God. If it should
   be accepted as the loveliness of the person as in some degree lovely to
   God; but this cannot be consistent with his still remaining under
   infinite guilt, or infinite unworthiness in God's sight, which that
   goodness has no worthiness to balance. While God beholds the man as
   separate from Christ, he must behold him as he is in himself; and so
   his goodness cannot be beheld by God, but as taken with his guilt and
   hatefulness, and as put in the scales with it; an so his goodness is
   nothing; because there is a finite on the balance against an infinite
   whose proportion to it is nothing. In such a case, if the man be looked
   on as he is in himself, the excess of the weight in one scale above
   another, must be looked upon as the quality of the man. These
   contraries being beheld together, one takes from another, as one number
   is subtracted from another; and the man must be looked upon in God's
   sight according to the remainder. For here, by the supposition, all
   acts of grace or favour, in not imputing the guilt as it is, are
   excluded, because that supposes a degree of pardon, and that supposes
   justification, which is contrary to what is supposed, viz. that the
   sinner is not already justified; and therefore things must be taken
   strictly as they are; and so the man is still infinitely unworthy and
   hateful in God's sight, and he was before, without diminution, because
   his goodness bears no proportion to his unworthiness, and therefore
   when taken together is nothing.

   Hence may be more clearly seen the force of that expression in the
   text, of believing on him that justifieth the ungodly; for though there
   is indeed something in man that is really and spiritually good, prior
   to justification, yet there is nothing that is accepted as any
   godliness or excellency of the person, till after justification.
   Goodness or loveliness of the person in the acceptance of God, in any
   degree, is not to be considered as prior but posterior in the order and
   method of God's proceeding in this affair. Though a respect to the
   natural suitableness between such a qualification, and such a state,
   does go before justification, yet the acceptance even of faith, as any
   goodness or loveliness of the believer, follows justification. The
   goodness is on the forementioned account justly looked upon as nothing,
   until the man is justified; and therefore the man is respected in
   justification, as in himself altogether hateful.-Thus, the nature of
   things will not admit of a man having an interest given him in the
   merits or benefits of a Saviour, on the account of any thing as a
   righteousness, or a virtue, or excellency in him.

   2. A divine constitution antecedent to that which establishes
   justification by a Saviour, (and indeed to any need of a Saviour,)
   stands in the way of it, viz. that original constitution or law which
   man was put under; by which constitution or law the sinner is
   condemned, till he has actually an interest in the Saviour, through
   whom he is set at liberty from that condemnation. But to suppose that
   God gives a man an interest in Christ in reward for his righteousness
   or virtue, is inconsistent with his still remaining under condemnation
   till he has an interest in Christ; because he supposes, that the
   sinner's virtue is accepted, and he accepted for it, before he has an
   interest in Christ; inasmuch as an interest in Christ is given as a
   reward of his virtue. But the virtue must first be accepted, before it
   is rewarded, and the man must first be accepted for his virtue, before
   he is rewarded for it with so great and glorious a reward; for the very
   notion of a reward, is some good bestowed in testimony of respect to
   and acceptance of virtue in the person rewarded. It does not consist
   with the honour of the majesty of the King of heaven and earth, to
   accept of any thing from a condemned malefactor, condemned by the
   justice of his own holy law, till that condemnation be removed. And
   then, such acceptance is inconsistent with, and contradictory to, such
   remaining condemnation; for the law condemns him that violates it, to
   be totally rejected and case off by God. But how can a man continue
   under this condemnation, i.e. continue utterly rejected and case off by
   God. But how can a man continue under this condemnation, i.e. continue
   utterly rejected and case off by God, and yet his righteousness or
   virtue be accepted, and he himself accepted on the account of it, so as
   to have so glorious a reward as an interest in Christ bestowed as a
   testimony of that acceptance?

   I know that the answer will be, that we now are not subject to that
   constitution which mankind were at first put under; but that God, in
   mercy to mankind, has abolished that rigorous constitution, and put us
   under a new law, and introduced a more mild constitution; and that the
   constitution or law itself not remaining, there is no need of supposing
   that the condemnation of it remains, to stand in the way of the
   acceptance of our virtue. And indeed there is no other way of avoiding
   this difficulty. The condemnation of the law must stand in force
   against man, till he is actually interested in the Saviour who has
   satisfied and answered the law, so as effectually to prevent any
   acceptance of his virtue, either before, or even in order to, such an
   interest, unless the law or constitution itself be abolished. But the
   scheme of those modern divines by whom this is maintained, seems to
   contain a great deal of absurdity and self-contradiction: they hold,
   that the old law given to Adam, which requires perfect obedience, is
   entirely repealed, and that instead of it we are put under a new law,
   which requires no more than imperfect sincere obedience, in compliance
   with our poor, infirm, impotent circumstances since the fall, whereby
   we are unable to perform that perfect obedience that was required by
   the first law; for they strenuously maintain, that it would be unjust
   in God to require any thing of us that is beyond our present power and
   ability to perform; and yet they hold, that Christ died to satisfy for
   the imperfections of our obedience, that so our imperfect obedience
   might be accepted instead of perfect. Now, how can these things hang
   together? I would ask, What law these imperfections of our obedience
   are a breach of? If they are not a breach of no law, then they are not
   sins; and if they be not sins, what need of Christ's dying to satisfy
   for them? but if they are sins, and so the breach of some law, what law
   is it? They cannot be a breach of their new law, for that requires no
   other than imperfect obedience, or obedience with imperfections; and
   they cannot be a breach of the old law, for that they say is entirely
   abolished, and we never were under it; and we cannot break a law that
   we never were under. They say it would not be just in God to exact of
   us perfect obedience, because it would not be just in God to require
   more of us than we can perform in our present state, and to punish us
   for failing of it; and therefore, by their own scheme, the
   imperfections of our obedience do not deserve to be punished. What need
   therefore of Christ's dying to satisfy for them? What need of Christ's
   suffering to satisfy for that which is no fault, and in its own nature
   deserves no suffering? What need of Christ's dying to purchase that our
   imperfect obedience should be accepted, when according to their scheme
   it would be unjust in itself that any other obedience than imperfect
   should be required? What need of Christ's dying to make way for God's
   accepting such an obedience, as it would in itself be unjust in him not
   to accept? Is there any need of Christ's dying to persuade God not to
   do unjustly? If it be said, that Christ died to satisfy that law for
   us, that so we might not be under that law, but might be delivered from
   it, that so there might be room for us to be under a more mild law;
   still I would inquire, What need of Christ's dying that we might not be
   under a law that (according to their scheme) it would in itself be
   unjust that we should be under, because in our present state we are not
   able to keep it? What need of Christ's dying that we might not be under
   a law that it would be unjust that we should be under, whether Christ
   died or no?

   Thus far I have argued principally from reason, and the nature of
   things:--I proceed now to the

   Second argument, which is, That this is a doctrine which the Holy
   Scriptures, the revelation that God has given us of his mind and
   will--by which alone we can never come to know how those who have
   offended God can come to be accepted of him, and justified in his
   sight--is exceeding full. The apostle Paul is abundant in teaching,
   that "we are justified by faith alone, without the works of the law!"
   There is no one doctrine that he insists so much upon, and that he
   handles with so much distinctness, explaining, giving reasons, and
   answering objections.

   Here it is not denied by any, that the apostle does assert, that we are
   justified by faith, without the works of the law, because the words are
   express; but only it is said that we take his words wrong, and
   understand that by them that never entered into his heart, in that when
   he excludes the works of the law, we understand him of the whole law of
   God, or the rule which he has given to mankind to walk by; whereas all
   that he intends is the ceremonial.

   Some that oppose this doctrine indeed say, that the apostle sometimes
   means that it is by faith, i.e. a hearty embracing the gospel in its
   first act only, or without any preceding holy life, that persons are
   admitted into a justified state; but, say they, it is by a persevering
   obedience that they are continued in a justified state, and it is by
   this that they are finally justified. But this is the same thing as to
   say, that a man on his first embracing the gospel is conditionally
   justified and pardoned. To pardon sin, is to free the sinner from the
   punishment of it, or from that eternal misery that is due to it; and
   therefore if a person is pardoned, or freed from this misery, on his
   first embracing the gospel, and yet not finally freed, but his actual
   freedom still depends on some condition yet to be performed, it is
   inconceivable how he can be pardoned otherwise than conditionally; that
   is, he is not properly actually pardoned, and freed from punishment,
   but only he has God's promise that he shall be pardoned on future
   conditions. God promises him, that now, if he perseveres in obedience,
   he shall be finally pardoned, or actually freed from hell; which is to
   make just nothing at all of the apostle's great doctrine of
   justification by faith alone. Such a conditional pardon is no pardon or
   justification at all, any more than all mankind have, whether they
   embrace the gospel or no; for they all have a promise of final
   justification on conditions of future sincere obedience, as much as he
   that embraces the gospel. But not to dispute about this, we will
   suppose that there may be something or other at the sinner's first
   embracing the gospel, that may properly be called justification or
   pardon, and yet that final justification, or real freedom from the
   punishment of sin, is still suspended on conditions hitherto
   unfulfilled; yet they who hold that sinners are thus justified on
   embracing the gospel, suppose that they are justified by this, no
   otherwise than as it is a leading act of obedience, or at least as
   virtue and moral goodness in them, and therefore would be excluded by
   the apostle as much as any other virtue or obedience, if it be allowed
   that he means the moral law, when he excludes works of the law. And
   therefore, if that point be yielded, that the apostle means the moral,
   and not only the ceremonial, law, their whole scheme falls to the
   ground.

   And because the issue of the whole argument from those texts in St.
   Paul's epistles depends on the determination of this point, I would be
   particular in the discussion of it.

   Some of our opponents in this doctrine of justification, when they
   deny, that by the law the apostle means the moral law, or the whole
   rule of life which God has given to mankind, seem to choose to express
   themselves thus, that the apostle only intends the Mosaic dispensation.
   But this comes to just the same thing as if they said, that the apostle
   only means to exclude the works of the ceremonial law; for when they
   say, that it is intended only that we are not justified by the works of
   the Mosaic dispensation, if they mean any thing by it, it must be, that
   we are not justified by attending and observing what is Mosaic in that
   dispensation, or by what was peculiar to it, and wherein it differed
   from the christian dispensation; which is the same as that which is
   ceremonial and positive, and not moral, in that administration. So that
   this is what I have to disprove, viz. that the apostle, when he speaks
   of works of the law in this affair, means only works of the ceremonial
   law, or those observances that were peculiar to the Mosaic
   administration.

   And here it must be noted, that nobody controverts it with them,
   whether the works of the ceremonial law be not included, or whether the
   apostle does not particularly argue against justification by
   circumcision, and other ceremonial observances; but all in question is,
   whether, when he denies justification by works of the law, he is to be
   understood only of the ceremonial law, or whether the moral law be not
   also implied and intended; and therefore those arguments which are
   brought to prove that the apostle meant the ceremonial law, are nothing
   to the purpose, unless they prove that the apostle meant those only.

   What is much insisted on is, that it was the judaizing Christians being
   so fond of circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law, and depending
   so much on them, which was the very occasion of the apostle's writing
   as he does against justification by the works of the law. But supposing
   it were so, that their trusting in works of the ceremonial law were the
   sole occasion of the apostle's writing, (which yet there is no reason
   to allow, as may appear afterwards,) if their trusting in a particular
   work, as a work of righteousness, was all that gave occasion to the
   apostle to write, how does it follow, that therefore the apostle did
   not upon that occasion write against trusting in all works of
   righteousness whatsoever? Where is the absurdity of supposing that the
   apostle might take occasion, from his observing some to trust in a
   certain work as a work of righteousness, to write to them against
   persons trusting in any works or righteousness at all, and that it was
   a very proper occasion too? Yea, it would have been unavoidable for the
   apostle to have argued against trusting in a particular work, in the
   quality of a work of righteousness, which quality was general, but he
   must therein argue against trusting in works of righteousness in
   general. Supposing it had been some other particular sort of works that
   was the occasion of the apostle's writing, as for instance, works of
   charity, and the apostle should hence take occasion to write to them
   not to trust in their works, could the apostle by that be understood of
   no other works besides works of charity? Would it have been absurd to
   understand him as writing against trusting in any work at all, because
   it was their trusting to a particular work that gave occasion to his
   writing?

   Another thing alleged, as an evidence that the apostle means the
   ceremonial law--when he says, we cannot be justified by the works of
   the law--is, that he uses this argument to prove it, viz. that the law
   he speaks of was given so long after the covenant with Abraham, in Gal.
   iii. 17. "And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before
   of God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years
   after, cannot disannul." But, say they, it was only the Mosaic
   administration, and not the covenant of works, that was given so long
   after. But the apostle's argument seems manifestly to be mistaken by
   them. The apostle does not speak of a law that began to exist four
   hundred and thirty years after; if he did, there would be some force in
   their objection; but he has respect to a certain solemn transaction,
   well known among the Jews by the phrase "the giving of the law," which
   was at mount Sinai, (Exod. xix. xx.) consisting especially in God's
   giving the ten commandments (which is the moral law) with a terrible
   voice, which law he afterwards gave in tables of stone. This
   transaction the Jews in the apostle's time misinterpreted; they looked
   upon it as God's establishing that law as a rule of justification.
   Against this conceit of theirs the apostle brings this invincible
   argument, viz. that God would never go about to disannul his covenant
   with Abraham, which was plainly a covenant of grace, by a transaction
   with his posterity, that was so long after it, and was plainly built
   upon it. He would not overthrow a covenant of grace that he had long
   before established with Abraham, for him and his seed, (which is often
   mentioned as the ground of God's making them his people,) by now
   establishing a covenant of works with them at mount Sinai, as the Jews
   and judaizing Christians supposed.

   But that the apostle does not mean only works of the ceremonial law,
   when he excludes works of the law in justification, but also of the
   moral law, and all works of obedience, virtue, and righteousness
   whatsoever, may appear by the following things.

   1. The apostle does not only say, that we are not justified by the
   works of the law, but that we are not justified by works, using a
   general term; as in our text, "to him that worketh not, but believeth
   on him that justifieth," &c.; and in the 6th verse, Rom. iv. 6."God
   imputeth righteousness without works;" and chap. xi.6. "And if by
   grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
   but if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no
   more work." So, Eph. ii. 8, 9. "For by grace are ye saved, through
   faith,--not of works;" by which, there is no reason in the world to
   understand the apostle of any other than works in general, as
   correlates of a reward, or good works, or works of virtue and
   righteousness. When the apostle says, we are justified or saved not by
   works, without any such term annexed, as the law, or any other
   addition, to limit the expression, what warrant have any to confine it
   to works of a particular law or institution, excluding others? Are not
   observances of other divine laws works, as well as of that? It seems to
   be allowed by the divines in the Arminian scheme, in their
   interpretation of several of those texts where the apostle only
   mentions works without any addition, that he means our own good works
   in general; but then, they say, he only means to exclude any proper
   merit in those works. But to say the apostle means one thing when he
   says, we are not justified by works, and another when he says, we are
   not justified by the works of the law, when we find the expressions
   mixed and used in the same discourse, and when the apostle is evidently
   upon the same argument, is very unreasonable; it is to dodge, and fly
   from Scripture, rather than open and yield ourselves to its teachings.

   2. In the third chapter of Romans, our having been guilty of breaches
   of the moral law, is an argument that the apostle uses, why we cannot
   be justified by the works of the law. Beginning with the 9th verse, he
   proves out of the Old Testament, that all are under sin: Rom. iii.
   9-15."There is none righteous, no not one: their throat is an open
   sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit: their mouth is
   full of cursing and bitterness; and their feet swift to shed blood."
   And so he goes on, mentioning only those things that are breaches of
   the moral law; and then when he has done, his conclusion is, in the
   19th and 20th verses, "Now we know that whatsoever things the law
   saith, it saith to them that are under that law, that every mouth may
   be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Therefore,
   by the deeds of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight."
   This is most evidently his argument, because all had sinned, (as it was
   said in the 9th verse,) and been guilty of those breaches of the moral
   law that he had mentioned, (and it is repeated over again, verse 23.)
   "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;" therefore
   none at all can be justified by the deeds of the law. Now if the
   apostle meant only, that we are not justified by the deeds of the
   ceremonial law, what kind of arguing would that be, Rom. iii. 14, 15.
   "Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to
   shed blood?" therefore they cannot be justified by the deeds of the
   Mosaic administration. They are guilty of the breaches of the moral
   law; and therefore they cannot be justified by the deeds of the
   ceremonial law! Doubtless, the apostle's argument is, that the very
   same law they have broken, can never justify them as observers of it,
   because every law necessarily condemns its violators. And therefore our
   breaches of the moral law argue no more, than that we cannot be
   justified by the law we have broken.

   And it may be noted, that the apostle's argument here is the same that
   I have already used, viz. that as we are in ourselves, and out of
   Christ, we are under the condemnation of that original law or
   constitution that God established with mankind; and therefore it is no
   way fit that any thing we do, any virtue or obedience of ours, should
   be accepted, or we accepted on the account of it.

   3. The apostle, in all the preceding part of this epistle, wherever he
   has the phrase, the law, evidently intends the moral law principally.
   As in the 12th verse of the foregoing chapter: Rom. ii. 12."For as many
   as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law." It is
   evidently the written moral law the apostle means, by the next verse
   but one. Rom. ii. 14. "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law,
   do by nature the things contained in the law;" that is, the moral law
   that the Gentiles have by nature. And so the next verse, Rom. ii. 15.
   "Which show the work of the law written in their hearts." It is the
   moral law, and not the ceremonial, that is written in the hearts of
   those who are destitute of divine revelation. And so in the 18th verse,
   "Thou approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed
   out of the law." It is the moral law that shows us the nature of
   things, and teaches us what is excellent; 20th verse, "Thou hast a form
   of knowledge and a truth in the law." It is the moral law, as is
   evident by what follows, verse 22, 23. Rom. ii. 22, 23. "Thou that
   sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery?
   Thou that abhorrest idols, does thou commit sacrilege? Thou that makest
   thy boast of the law, through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God?"
   Adultery, idolatry, and sacrilege, surely are the breaking of the
   moral, and not the ceremonial law. So in the 27th verse, "And shall not
   uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee,
   who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law?" i.e. the
   Gentiles, that you despise because uncircumcised, if they live moral
   and holy lives, in obedience to the moral law, shall condemn you though
   circumcised. And so there is not one place in all the preceding part of
   the epistle, where the apostle speaks of the law, but that he most
   apparently intends principally the moral law; and yet when the apostle,
   in continuance of the same discourse, comes to tell us, that we cannot
   be justified by the works of the law, then they will needs have it,
   that he means only the ceremonial law. Yea, though all this discourse
   about the moral law, showing how the Jews as well as Gentiles have
   violated it, is evidently preparatory and introductory to that
   doctrine, chap. iii. 20. "That no flesh," that is, none mankind,
   neither Jews nor Gentiles, "can be justified by the works of the law."

   4. It is evident that when the apostle says, we cannot be justified by
   the works of the law, he means the moral as well as ceremonial law, by
   his giving this reason for it, that "by the law is the knowledge of
   sin," as Rom. iii. 20. "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be
   justified in his sight; for by the law is the knowledge of sin." Now
   that law by which we come to the knowledge of sin, is the moral law
   chiefly and primarily. If this argument of the apostle be good, "that
   we cannot be justified by the deeds of the law" chiefly and primarily.
   If this argument of the apostle be good, "that we cannot be justified
   by the deeds of the law, because it is by the law that we come to the
   knowledge of sin;" then it proves that we cannot be justified by the
   deeds of the moral law, nor by the precepts of Christianity; for by
   them is the knowledge of sin. If the reason be good, then where the
   reason holds, the truth holds. It is a miserable shift, and a violent
   force put upon the words, to say that the meaning is, that by the law
   of circumcision is the knowledge of sin, because circumcision
   signifying the taking away of sin, puts men in the mind of sin. The
   plain meaning of the apostle is, that as the law most strictly forbids
   sin, it tends to convince us of sin, and bring our own consciences to
   condemn us, instead of justifying of us; that the use of it is to
   declare to us our own guilt and unworthiness, which is the reverse of
   justifying and approving of us as virtuous or worthy. This is the
   apostle's meaning, if we will allow him to be his own expositor; for he
   himself, in this very epistle, explains to us how it is that by the law
   we have the knowledge of sin, and that it is by the law's forbidding
   sin, chap. vii. 7. "I had not known sin, but by the law; for I had not
   known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet." There the
   apostle determines two things; first, That the way in which "by the law
   is the knowledge of sin," is by the law's forbidding sin: and secondly,
   which is more directly still to the purpose, he determines that it is
   the moral law by which we come to the knowledge of sin; "for," says he,
   "I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet."
   Now it is the moral, and not the ceremonial law, that says, "Thou shalt
   not covet." Therefore, when the apostle argues, that by the deeds of
   the law no flesh living shall be justified, because by the law is the
   knowledge of sin, his argument proves, (unless he was mistaken as to
   the force of his argument,) that we cannot be justified by the deeds of
   the moral law.

   5. It is evident that the apostle does not mean only the ceremonial
   law, because he gives this reason why we have righteousness, and a
   title to the privilege of God's children, not by the law, but by faith,
   "that the law worketh wrath." Rom. iv. 13-16. "For the promise that he
   should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed
   through the law, but through righteousness of faith. For if they which
   are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of
   none effect. Because the law worketh wrath; for where no law is, there
   is no transgression. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by
   grace." Now the way in which the law works wrath, by the apostle's own
   account, in the reason he himself annexes, is by forbidding sin, and
   aggravating the guilt of the transgression; Rom. iv. 15."for," says he,
   "where no law is, there is no transgression:" And so, chap. vii. 13.
   "That sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful." If,
   therefore, this reason of the apostle be good, it is much stronger
   against justification by the moral law than the ceremonial law; for it
   is by transgressions of the moral law chiefly that there comes wrath;
   for they are most strictly forbidden, and most terribly threatened.

   6. It is evident that when the apostle says, we are not justified by
   the works of the law, that he excludes all our own virtue, goodness, or
   excellency, by that reason he gives for it, viz. "That boasting might
   be excluded." Rom. iii. 26, 27, 28. "To declare, I say, at this time
   his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him
   which believeth in Jesus. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By
   what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith. Therefore we
   conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the
   law." Eph. ii. 8, 9. "For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and
   that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any
   man should boast." Now what are men wont to boast of, but what they
   esteem their own goodness and excellency? If we are not justified by
   works of the ceremonial law, yet how does that exclude boasting, as
   long as we are justified by our own excellency, or virtue, and goodness
   of our own, or works of righteousness which we have done?

   But it is said, that boasting is excluded, as circumcision was
   excluded, which was that the Jews especially used to glory in, and
   value themselves upon, above other nations.

   To this I answer, that the Jews were not only used to boast of
   circumcision, but were notorious for boasting of their moral
   righteousness. The Jews of those days were generally admirers and
   followers of the Pharisees, who were full of their boasts of their
   moral righteousness; as we may see by the example of the Pharisee
   mentioned in the 18th of Luke, which Christ mentions as describing the
   general temper of that sect: Luke xviii. 11. "Lord," says he, "I thank
   thee, that I am not as other men, an extortioner, nor unjust, nor an
   adulterer." The works that he boasts of were chiefly moral works: he
   depended on the works of the law for justification; and therefore
   Christ tells us, that the publican, that renounced all his own
   righteousness, Luke xviii. 14. "went down to his house justified rather
   than he." And elsewhere, we read of the Pharisees praying in the
   corners of the streets, and sounding a trumpet before them when they
   did alms. But those works which they so vainly boasted of were moral
   works. And not only so, but what the apostle in this very epistle
   condemns the Jews for, is their boasting of the moral law. Chap. ii.
   22, 23. "Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou
   commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?
   Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law,
   dishonourest thou God?" The law here mentioned that they made their
   boast of, was that of which adultery, idolatry, and sacrilege, were the
   breaches, which is the moral law. So that this is the boasting which
   the apostle condemns them for; and therefore, if they were justified by
   the works of this law, then how comes he to say that their boasting is
   excluded? And besides, when they boasted of the rites of the ceremonial
   law, it was under a notion of its being a part of their own goodness or
   excellency, or what made them holier and more lovely in the sight of
   God than other people; and if they were not justified by this part of
   their own supposed goodness or holiness, yet if they were by another,
   how did that exclude boasting? How was their boasting excluded, unless
   all goodness or excellency of their own was excluded?

   7. The reason given by the apostle why we can be justified only by
   faith, and not by the works of the law, in the 3d chapter of Gal. viz.
   Gal. iii. 10. "That they that are under the law, are under the curse,"
   makes it evident that he does not mean only the ceremonial law. In that
   chapter the apostle had particularly insisted upon it, that Abraham was
   justified by faith, and that it is by faith only, and not by the works
   of the law, that we can be justified, and become the children of
   Abraham, and be made partakers of the blessing of Abraham: and he gives
   this reason for it in the 10th verse: "For as many as are of the works
   of the law, are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
   that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
   law to do them." It is manifest that these words, cited from
   Deuteronomy, are spoken not only with regard to the ceremonial law, but
   the whole law of God to mankind, and chiefly the moral law; and that
   all mankind are therefore as they are in themselves under that curse,
   not only while the ceremonial law lasted, but now since that has
   ceased. And therefore all who are justified, are redeemed from that
   curse, by Christ's bearing it for them; as in verse 13. "Christ hath
   redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for
   it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree." Now
   therefore, either its being said, that he is cursed who continueth not
   in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them, is a
   good reason why we cannot be justified by the works of that law of
   which it is so said; or it is not; if it be, then it is a good reason
   why we cannot be justified by the works of the moral law, and of the
   whole rule which God has given to mankind to walk by; for the words are
   spoken of the moral as well as the ceremonial law, and reach every
   command or precept which God has given to mankind; and chiefly the
   moral precepts, which are most strictly enjoined, and the violations of
   which in both the New Testament and the Old, and in the books of Moses
   themselves, are threatened with the most dreadful curse.

   8. The apostle in like manner argues against our being justified by our
   own righteousness, as he does against being justified by the works of
   the law; and evidently uses the expressions, of our own righteousness,
   and works of the law, promiscuously, and as signifying the same thing.
   It is particularly evident by Rom. x.3. "For they being ignorant of
   God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
   righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
   God." Here it is plain that the same thing is asserted as in the two
   last verses but one of the foregoing chapter. Rom. ix. 31."But Israel,
   which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
   law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it, not by faith,
   but as it were by the works of the law." And it is very unreasonable,
   upon several accounts, to suppose that the apostle, by their own
   righteousness, intends only their ceremonial righteousness. For when
   the apostle warns us against trusting our own righteousness for
   justification, doubtless it is fair to interpret the expression in an
   agreement with other scriptures, where we are warned, not to think that
   it is for the sake of our own righteousness that we obtain God's favour
   and blessing; as particularly in Deut. ix. 4-6. "Speak not thou in
   thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before
   thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to
   possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord
   doth drive them out from before thee. Not for thy righteousness, or for
   the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but
   for the wickedness of these nations, the Lord thy God doth drive them
   out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which he sware
   unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Understand therefore, that
   the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it, for thy
   righteousness; for thou art a stiff-necked people." None will pretend
   that here the expression thy righteousness, signifies only a ceremonial
   righteousness, but all virtue or goodness of their own; yea, and the
   inward goodness of the heart, as well as the outward goodness of life;
   which appears by the beginning of the 5th verse, Deut. ix. 5. "Not for
   thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart;" and also by
   the antithesis in the 6th verse, Deut. ix. 6. "Not for thy
   righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked people." Their
   stiff-neckedness was their moral wickedness, obstinacy, and
   perverseness of heart. By righteousness, therefore, on the contrary, is
   meant their moral virtue, and rectitude of heart and life. This is what
   I would argue from hence, that the expression of our own righteousness,
   when used in Scripture with relation to the favour of God--and when we
   are warned against looking upon it as that by which that favour, or the
   fruits of it, are obtained--does not signify only a ceremonial
   righteousness, but all manner of goodness of our own.

   The Jews also, in the New Testament, are condemned for trusting in
   their own righteousness in this sense; Luke xviii. 9, &c. "And he spake
   this parable unto certain that trusted in themselves that they were
   righteous." This intends chiefly a moral righteousness; as appears by
   the parable itself, in which we have an account of the prayer of the
   Pharisee, wherein the things that he mentions as what he trusts in, are
   chiefly moral qualifications and performances, viz. That he was not an
   extortioner, unjust, nor an adulterer, &c.

   But we need not go to the writings of other penmen of the Scripture. If
   we will allow the apostle Paul to be his own interpreter, he--when he
   speaks of our own righteousness as that by which we are not justified
   or saved--does not mean only a ceremonial righteousness, nor does he
   only intend a way of religion and serving God, of our own choosing,
   without divine warrant or prescription; but by our own righteousness he
   means the same as a righteousness of our own doing, whether it be a
   service or righteousness of God's prescribing, or our own unwarranted
   performing. Let it be an obedience to the ceremonial law, or a gospel
   obedience, or what it will, if it be a righteousness of our own doing,
   it is excluded by the apostle in this affair, as is evident by Titus
   iii.5. "Not by works of righteousness which we have done."--But I would
   more particularly insist on this text; and therefore this may be the

   9th argument, That the apostle, when he denies justification by works,
   works of the law, and our own righteousness, does not mean works of the
   ceremonial law only. Tit. iii.3-7. "For we ourselves also were
   sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and
   pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
   But after that the kingdom and love of God our Saviour toward man
   appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
   according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
   renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly, through
   Jesus Christ our Saviour: that being justified by his grace we should
   be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life." Works of
   righteousness that we have done are here excluded, as what we are
   neither saved nor justified by. The apostle expressly says, we are not
   saved by them; and it is evident that when he says this, he has respect
   to the affair of justification. And that he means, we are not saved by
   them in not being justified by them, as by the next verse but one,
   which is part of the same sentence, Titus iii. 7."That being justified
   by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
   life."

   It is several ways manifest, that the apostle in this text, by "works
   of righteousness which we have done," does not mean only works of the
   ceremonial law. It appears by the 3d verse, Titus iii. 3. "For we
   ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
   divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
   hating one another." These are breaches of the moral law, that the
   apostle observes they lived in before they were justified: and it is
   most plain that it is this which gives occasion to the apostle to
   observe, as he does in the 5th verse, that it was not by works of
   righteousness which they had done, that they were saved or justified.

   But we need not go to the context, it is most apparent from the words
   themselves, that the apostle does not mean only works of the ceremonial
   law. If he had only said, it is not by our own works of righteousness;
   what could we understand by works of righteousness, but only righteous
   works, or, which is the same thing, good works? And to say, that it is
   by our own righteous works that we are justified, though not by one
   particular kind of righteous works, would certainly be a contradiction
   to such an assertion. But, the words are rendered yet more strong,
   plain, and determined in their sense, by those additional words, which
   we have done; which shows that the apostle intends to exclude all our
   own righteous or virtuous works universally. If it should be asserted
   concerning any commodity, treasure, or precious jewel, that it could
   not be procured by money, and not only so, but, to make the assertion
   the more strong, it should be asserted with additional words, that it
   could not be procured by money that men possess; how unreasonable would
   it be, after all, to say, that all that was meant was, that it could
   not be procured with brass money.

   And what renders the interpreting of this text, as intending works of
   the ceremonial law, yet more unreasonable, is, that these works were
   indeed no works of righteousness at all, but were only falsely supposed
   to be so by the Jews. And this our opponents in this doctrine also
   suppose is the very reason why we are not justified by them, because
   they are not works of righteousness, or because (the ceremonial law
   being now abrogated) there is no obedience in them. But how absurd is
   it to say, that the apostle, when he says we are not justified by works
   of righteousness that we have done, meant only works of the ceremonial
   law, and that for that very reason, because they are not works of
   righteousness? To illustrate this by the forementioned comparison: If
   it should be asserted, that such a thing could not be procured by money
   that men possess, how ridiculous would it be to say, that the meaning
   only was, that it could not be procured by counterfeit money, and that
   for that reason, because it was not money. What scripture will stand
   before men, if they will take liberty to manage scripture thus? Or what
   one text is there in the Bible that may not at this rate be explained
   all away, and perverted to any sense men please?

   But further, if we should allow that the apostle intends only to oppose
   justification by works of the ceremonial law in this text, yet it is
   evident by the expression he uses, that he means to oppose it under
   that notion, or in that quality, of their being works of righteousness
   of our own doing. But if the apostle argues against our being justified
   by works of the ceremonial law, under the notion of their being of that
   nature and kind, viz. works of our own doing; then it will follow, that
   the apostle's argument is strong against, not only those, but all of
   that nature and kind, even all that are of our own doing.

   If there were no other text in the Bible about justification but this,
   this would clearly and invincibly prove, that we are not justified by
   any of our own goodness, virtue, or righteousness, or for the
   excellency of righteousness of any thing that we have done in religion;
   because it is here so fully and strongly asserted; but this text
   abundantly confirms other texts of the apostle, where he denies
   justification by works of the law. No doubt can be rationally made, but
   that the apostle, when he shows, that God does not save us by "works of
   righteousness that we have done," verse 5. and that so we are
   "justified by grace," verse 7. herein opposing salvation by works, and
   salvation by grace--means the same works as he does in other places,
   where he in like manner opposes works and grace: as in Rom. xi. 6. "And
   if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more
   grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work
   is not more work." And the same works as in Rom. iv. 4. "Now to him
   that worketh, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." And
   the same works that are spoken of in the context of the 24th verse of
   the foregoing chapter, which the apostle there calls "works of the law,
   being justified freely by his grace." And of the 4th chapter, 16th
   verse, "Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace." Where in
   the context the righteousness of faith is opposed to the righteousness
   of the law; for here God's saving us according to his mercy, and
   justifying us by grace, is opposed to saving us by works of
   righteousness that we have done; in the same manner as in those places,
   justifying us by his grace, is opposed to justifying us by works of the
   law.

   10. The apostle could not mean only works of the ceremonial law, when
   he says, we are not justified by the works of the law, because it is
   asserted of the saints under the Old Testament as well as New. If men
   are justified by their sincere obedience, it will then follow that
   formerly, before the ceremonial law was abrogated, men were justified
   by the works of the ceremonial law, as well as the moral. For if we are
   justified by our sincere obedience, then it alters not the case,
   whether the commands be moral or positive, provided they be God's
   commands, and our obedience be obedience to God. And so the case must
   be just the same under the Old Testament, with the works of the moral
   law and ceremonial, according to the measure of the virtue of obedience
   there was in either. It is true, their obedience to the ceremonial law
   would have nothing to do in the affair of justification, unless it was
   sincere; and so neither would the works of the moral law. If obedience
   was the thing, then obedience to the ceremonial law, while that stood
   in force, and obedience to the moral law, had just the same sort of
   concern, according to the proportion of obedience that consists in
   each; as now under the New Testament, if obedience is what we are
   justified by, that obedience must doubtless comprehend obedience to all
   God's commands now in force, to the positive precepts of attendance on
   baptism and the Lord's supper, as well as moral precepts. If obedience
   be the thing, it is not because it is obedience to such a kind of
   commands, but because it is obedience. So that by this supposition, the
   saints under the Old Testament were justified, at least in part, by
   their obedience to the ceremonial law.

   But it is evident that the saints under the Old Testament were not
   justified, in any measure, by the works of the ceremonial law. This may
   be proved, proceeding on the foot of our adversaries' own
   interpretation of the apostle's phrase, "the works of the law," and
   supposing them to mean by it only the works of the ceremonial law. To
   instance in David, it is evident that he was not justified in any wise
   by the works of the ceremonial law, by Rom. iv. 6-8. "Even as David
   also describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth
   righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
   are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
   the Lord will not impute sin." It is plain that the apostle is here
   speaking of justification, from the preceding verse, and all the
   context; and the thing spoken of, viz. forgiving iniquities and
   covering sins, is what our adversaries themselves suppose to be
   justification, and even the whole of justification. This David,
   speaking of himself, says (by the apostle's interpretation) that he had
   without works. For it is manifest that David, in the words here cited,
   from the beginning of the 32d Psalm, has a special respect to himself:
   he speaks of his own sins being forgiven and not imputed to him; as
   appears by the words that immediately follow. Psalm xxxii. 3-5."When I
   kept silence, my bones waxed old; through my roaring all the day long.
   For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned
   into the drought of summer. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
   iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto
   the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin." Let us therefore
   understand the apostle which way we will respecting works, when he
   says, Romans iv .6. "David describes the blessedness of the man to whom
   the Lord imputes righteousness without works," whether of all manner of
   works, or only works of the ceremonial law, yet it is evident at least,
   that David was not justified by works of the ceremonial law. Therefore
   here is the argument: if our own obedience be that by which men are
   justified, then under the Old Testament, men were justified partly by
   obedience to the ceremonial law (as has been proved); but the saints
   under the Old Testament were not justified partly by the works of the
   ceremonial law; therefore men's own obedience is not that by which they
   are justified.

   11. Another argument that the apostle, when he speaks of the two
   opposite ways of justification, one by the works of the law, and the
   other by faith, does not mean only the works of the ceremonial law, may
   be taken from Rom. x. 5, 6. "For Moses describeth the righteousness
   which is of the law, that the man which doth those things, shall live
   by them. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaking on this
   wise," &c.--Here two things are evident.

   First, That the apostle here speaks of the same two opposite ways of
   justification, one by the righteousness which is of the law, the other
   by faith, that he had treated of in the former part of the epistle; and
   therefore it must be the same law that is here spoken of. The same law
   is here meant as in the last verses of the foregoing chapter, where he
   says, the Jews had Rom. ix. 31, 32."not attained to the law of
   righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by faith, but as
   it were by the works of the law;" as is plain, because the apostle is
   still speaking of the same thing; the words are a continuation of the
   same discourse, as may be seen at first glance, by any one that looks
   on the context.

   Secondly, It is manifest that Moses, when he describes the
   righteousness which is of the law, or the way of justification by the
   law, in the words here cited, Gal. iii. 12. "He that doth those things,
   shall live in them," does not speak only, nor chiefly, of the works of
   the ceremonial law; for none will pretend that God ever made such a
   covenant with man, that he who kept the ceremonial law should live in
   it, or that there ever was a time, that it was chiefly by the works of
   the ceremonial law that men lived and were justified. Yea, it is
   manifest by the forementioned instance of David, mentioned in the 4th
   of Romans, that there never was a time wherein men were justified in
   any measure by the works of the ceremonial law, as has been just now
   shown. Moses therefore, in those words which the apostle says, are a
   description of the righteousness which is of the law, cannot mean only
   the ceremonial law. And therefore it follows, that when the apostle
   speaks of justification by the works of the law, as opposite to
   justification by faith, he does not mean only the ceremonial law, but
   also the works of the moral law, which are the things spoken of by
   Moses, when he says, Gal. iii. 12. "He that doth those things, shall
   live in them." And these are the things which the apostle in this very
   place is arguing that we cannot be justified by; as is evident by the
   last verses of the preceding chapter; Rom. ix. 31, 32."But Israel,
   which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
   law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by faith,
   but as it were by the works of the law," &c. And in the 3d verse of
   this chapter, Rom. x. 3. "For they being ignorant of God's
   righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
   have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God."

   And further, how can the apostle's description that he here gives from
   Moses, of this exploded way of justification by the works of the law,
   consist with the Arminian scheme, of a way of justification by the
   virtue of a sincere obedience, that still remains as the true and only
   way of justification under the gospel? It is most apparent that it is
   the design of the apostle to give a description of both the legal
   rejected and the evangelical valid ways of justification, in that
   wherein they are distinguished the one from the other. But how is it,
   that "he who doth those things, shall live in them," that wherein the
   way of justification by the works of the law is distinguished from that
   in which Christians under the gospel are justified, according to their
   scheme; for still, according to them, it may be said, in the same
   manner, of the precepts of the gospel, he that doth these things, shall
   live in them. The difference lies only in the things to be done, but
   not at all in that the doing of them is not the condition of living in
   them, just in the one case, as in the other. The words, Gal. iii. 12.
   "He that doth them, shall live in them," will serve just as well for a
   description of the latter as the former. By the apostle's saying, the
   righteousness of the law is described thus, he that doth these things,
   shall live in them; but the righteousness of faith saith thus, plainly
   intimates that the righteousness of faith saith otherwise, and in an
   opposite manner. Besides, if these words cited from Moses are actually
   said by him of the moral law as well as ceremonial, as it is most
   evident they are, it renders it still more absurd to suppose them
   mentioned by the apostle, as the very note of distinction between
   justification by a ceremonial obedience, and a moral sincere obedience,
   as the Arminians must suppose.

   Thus I have spoken to a second argument, to prove that we are not
   justified by any manner of virtue or goodness of our own, viz. that to
   suppose otherwise, is contrary to the doctrine directly urged, and
   abundantly insisted on, by the apostle Paul in his epistles.

   I now proceed to a

   Third argument, viz. That to suppose that we are justified by our own
   sincere obedience, or any of our own virtue or goodness, derogates from
   gospel grace.

   That scheme of justification that manifestly takes from or diminishes
   the grace of God, is undoubtedly to be rejected; for it is the declared
   design of God in the gospel to exalt the freedom and riches of his
   grace, in that method of justification of sinners, and way of admitting
   them to his favour, and the blessed fruits of it, which it declares.
   The Scripture teaches, that the way of justification appointed in the
   gospel-covenant, is appointed for that end, that free grace might be
   expressed, and glorified; Rom. iv. 16. "Therefore it is of faith, that
   it might be by grace." The exercising and magnifying of free grace in
   the gospel-contrivance for the justification and salvation of sinners,
   is evidently the chief design of it. And this freedom and riches of
   grace in the gospel is every where spoken of in Scripture as the chief
   glory of it. Therefore that doctrine which derogates from the free
   grace of God in justifying sinners, as it is most opposite to God's
   design, so it must be exceedingly offensive to him.

   Those who maintain, that we are justified by our own sincere obedience,
   pretend that their scheme does not diminish the grace of the gospel;
   for they say, that the grace of God is wonderfully manifested in
   appointing such a way and method of salvation by sincere obedience, in
   assisting us to perform such an obedience, and in accepting our
   imperfect obedience, instead of perfect.

   Let us therefore examine that matter, whether their scheme, of a man's
   being justified by his own virtue and sincere obedience, does derogate
   from the grace of God or no; or whether free grace is not more exalted
   in supposing, as we do, that we are justified without any manner of
   goodness of our own. In order to this, I will lay down this
   self-evident

   Proposition, that whatsoever that be by which the abundant benevolence
   of the giver is expressed, and gratitude in the receiver is obliged,
   that magnifies free grace. This I suppose none will ever controvert or
   dispute.--And it is not much less evident, that it doth both show a
   more abundant benevolence in the giver when he shows kindness without
   goodness or excellency in the object, to move him to it; and that it
   enhances the obligation to gratitude in the receiver.

   1. It shows a more abundant goodness in the giver, when he shows
   kindness without any excellency in our persons or actions that should
   move the giver to love and beneficence. For it certainly shows the more
   abundant and overflowing goodness, or disposition to communicate good,
   by how much the less loveliness or excellency there is to entice
   beneficence. The less there is in the receiver to draw good-will and
   kindness, it argues the more of the principle of good-will and kindness
   in the giver. One that has but little of a principle of love and
   benevolence, may be drawn to do good, and to show kindness, when there
   is a great deal to draw him, or when there is much excellency and
   loveliness in the object to move good-will; when he whose goodness and
   benevolence is more abundant, will show kindness where there is less to
   draw it forth; for he does not so much need to have it drawn from
   without, he has enough of the principle within to move him of itself.
   Where there is most of the principle, there it is most sufficient for
   itself, and stands in least need of something without to excite it. For
   certainly a more abundant goodness more easily flows forth with less to
   impel or draw it, than where there is less; or, which is the same
   thing, the more any one is disposed of himself, the less he needs from
   without himself, to put him upon it, or stir him up to it. And
   therefore his kindness and goodness appears the more exceeding great,
   when it is bestowed without any excellency or loveliness at all in the
   receiver, or when the receiver is respected in the gift, as wholly
   without excellency. And much more still when the benevolence of the
   giver not only finds nothing in the receiver to draw it, but a great
   deal of hatefulness to repel it. The abundance of goodness is then
   manifested, not only in flowing forth without any thing extrinsic to
   put it forward, but in overcoming great repulsion in the object. And
   then does kindness and love appear most triumphant, and wonderfully
   great, when the receiver is not only wholly without all excellency or
   beauty to attract it, but altogether, yea infinitely, vile and hateful.

   2. It is apparent also that it enhances the obligation to gratitude in
   the receiver. This is agreeable to the common sense of mankind, that
   the less worthy or excellent the object of benevolence, or the receiver
   of kindness, is, the more he is obliged, and the greater gratitude is
   due. He therefore is most of all obliged, that receives kindness
   without any goodness or excellency in himself, but with a total and
   universal hatefulness. And as it is agreeable to the common sense of
   mankind, so it is agreeable to the common sense of mankind, so it is
   agreeable to the word of God. How often does God in the Scripture
   insist on this argument with men, to move them to love him, and to
   acknowledge his kindness! How much does he insist on this as an
   obligation to gratitude, that they are so sinful, and undeserving, and
   ill deserving!

   Therefore it certainly follows, that the doctrine which teaches, that
   God, when he justifies a man, and shows him such great kindness as to
   give him a right to eternal life, does not do it for any obedience, or
   any manner of goodness, of his; but that justification respects a man
   as ungodly, and wholly without any manner of virtue, beauty, or
   excellency. I say, this doctrine does certainly more exalt the free
   grace of God in justification, and man's obligation to gratitude for
   such a favour, than the contrary doctrine, viz. That God, in showing
   this kindness to man, respects him as sincerely obedient and virtuous,
   and as having something in him that is truly excellent and lovely, and
   acceptable in his sight, and that this goodness or excellency of man is
   the very fundamental condition of the bestowment of that kindness on
   him, or of distinguishing him from others by that benefit. But I hasten
   to a

   Fourth argument for the truth of the doctrine, That to suppose a man is
   justified by his own virtue or obedience, derogates from the honour of
   the Mediator, and ascribes that to man's virtue which belongs only to
   the righteousness of Christ: it puts man in Christ's stead, and makes
   him his own saviour, in a respect in which Christ only is his Saviour.
   And so it is a doctrine contrary to the nature and design of the
   gospel, which is to abase man, and to ascribe all the glory of our
   salvation to Christ the Redeemer. It is inconsistent with the doctrine
   of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which is a
   gospel-doctrine.

   Here I would explain what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness. Prove the thing intended by it to be true. Show that
   this doctrine is utterly inconsistent with the doctrine of our being
   justified by our own virtue or sincere obedience.

   First, I would explain what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness. Sometimes the expression is taken by our divines in a
   larger sense, for the imputation of all that Christ did and suffered
   for our redemption, whereby we are free from guilt, and stand righteous
   in the sight of God; and so implies the imputation both of Christ's
   satisfaction and obedience. But here I intend it in a stricter sense,
   for the imputation of that righteousness or moral goodness that
   consists in the obedience of Christ. And by that righteousness being
   imputed to us, is meant no other than this, that the righteousness of
   Christ is accepted for us, and admitted instead of that perfect
   inherent righteousness which ought to be in ourselves. Christ's perfect
   obedience shall be reckoned to our account, so that we shall have the
   benefit of it, as though we had performed it ourselves. And so we
   suppose that a title to eternal life is given us as the reward of this
   righteousness. The Scripture uses the word impute in this sense, viz.
   for reckoning any thing belonging to any person, to another person's
   account: as Philemon 18. Philemon i.18. "If he hath wronged thee, or
   oweth thee ought, put that on mine account." In the original it is NOT
   ENGLISH : impute that to me. It is a word of the same root with that
   which is translated impute, Rom. iv .6. "To whom God imputeth
   righteousness without works." And it is the very same word that is
   used, Rom. v.13., that is translated impute, "sin is not imputed when
   there is no law."

   The opposers of this doctrine suppose that there is an absurdity in
   supposing that God imputes Christ's obedience to us, it is to suppose
   that God is mistaken, and thinks that we performed that obedience which
   Christ performed. But why cannot that righteousness be reckoned to our
   account, and be accepted for us, without any such absurdity? Why is
   there any more absurdity in it, than in a merchant's transferring debt
   or credit from one man's account to another, when one man pays a price
   for another, so that it shall be accepted as if that other had paid it?
   Why is there any more absurdity in supposing that Christ's obedience is
   imputed to us, that that his satisfaction is imputed? If Christ has
   suffered the penalty of the law in our stead, then it will follow, that
   his suffering that penalty is imputed to us, that is accepted for us,
   and in our stead, and is reckoned to our account, as though we had
   suffered it. But why may not his obeying the law of God be as
   rationally reckoned to our account, as his suffering the penalty of the
   law? Why may not a price to bring into debt, be as rationally
   transferred from one person's account to another, as a price to pay a
   debt? Having thus explained what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness, I proceed,

   Secondly, To prove that the righteousness of Christ is thus imputed.

   1. There is the very same need of Christ's obeying the law in our
   stead, in order to the reward, as of his suffering the penalty of the
   law in our stead, in order to our escaping the penalty; and the same
   reason why one should be accepted on our account, as the other. There
   is the same need of one as the other, that the law of God might be
   answered; one was as requisite to answer the law as the other. It is
   certain, that was the reason why there was need that Christ should
   suffer the penalty for us, even that the law might be answered; for
   this Scripture plainly teaches. This is given as the reason why Christ
   was made a curse for us, that the law threatened a curse to us, Gal.
   iii. 10, 13. But the same law that fixes the curse of God as the
   consequence of not continuing in all things written in the law to do
   them, verse 10. has as much fixed doing those things as an antecedent
   of living in them, ( as verse 12.) There is as much connexion
   established in one case as in the other. There is therefore exactly the
   same need, from the law, of perfect obedience being fulfilled in order
   to our obtaining the reward, as there is of death being suffered in
   order to our escaping the punishment; or the same necessity by the law,
   of perfect obedience preceding life, as there is of disobedience being
   succeeded by death. The law is, without doubt, as much of an
   established rule in one case as in the other.

   Christ by suffering the penalty, and so making atonement for us, only
   removes the guilt of our sins, and so sets us in the same state that
   Adam was in the first moment of his creation; and it is no more fit
   that we should obtain eternal life only on that account, than that Adam
   should have the reward of eternal life, or of a confirmed and
   unalterable state of happiness, the first moments of his existence,
   without any obedience at all. Adam was not to have the reward merely on
   account of his being innocent; if so, he would have had it fixed upon
   him at once, as soon as ever he was created; for he was as innocent
   then as he could be. But he was to have the reward on account of his
   activeness in obedience; not on account merely of his not having done
   ill, but on account of his doing well.

   So on the same account we have not eternal life merely as void of
   guilt, which we have by the atonement of Christ; but on the account of
   Christ's activeness in obedience, and doing well. Christ is our second
   federal head, and is called the second Adam, 1 Cor. xv. 22. because he
   acted that part for us which the first Adam should have done. When he
   had undertaken to stand in our stead, he was looked upon and treated as
   though he were guilty with our guilt; and by his bearing the penalty,
   he did as it were free himself from this guilt. But by this the second
   Adam did only bring himself into the state in which the first Adam was
   on the first moment of his existence, viz. a state of mere freedom from
   guilt; and hereby indeed was free from any obligation to suffer
   punishment; but this being supposed, there was need of something
   further, even a positive obedience, in order to his obtaining, as our
   second Adam, the reward of eternal life.

   God saw meet to place man first in a state of trial, and not to give
   him a title to eternal life as soon as he had made him; because it was
   his will that he should first give honour to his authority, by fully
   submitting to it, in will and act, and perfectly obeying his law. God
   insisted upon it, that his holy majesty and law should have their due
   acknowledgement and honour from man, such as became the relation he
   stood in to that Being who created him, before he would bestow the
   reward of confirmed and everlasting happiness upon him; and therefore
   God gave him a law that he might have opportunity, by giving due honour
   to his authority in obeying it, to obtain this happiness. It therefore
   became Christ--seeing that, in assuming man to himself, he sought a
   title to this eternal happiness for him after he had broken the
   law--that he himself should become subject to God's authority, and be
   in the form of a servant, that he might do that honour to God's
   authority for him, by his obedience, which God at first required of man
   as the condition of his having a title to that reward. Christ came into
   the world to render the honour of God's authority and law consistent
   with the salvation and eternal life of sinners; he came to save them,
   and yet withal to assert and vindicate the honour of the lawgiver, and
   his holy law. Now, if the sinner, after his sin was satisfied for, had
   eternal life bestowed upon him without active righteousness, the honour
   of his law would not be sufficiently vindicated. Supposing this were
   possible, that the sinner himself could, by suffering, pay the debt,
   and afterwards be in the same state that he was in before his
   probation, that is to say, negatively righteous, or merely without
   guilt; if he now at last should have eternal life bestowed upon him,
   without performing that condition of obedience; then God would recede
   from his law, and would give the promised reward, and his law never
   have respect and honour shown to it, in that way of being obeyed. But
   now Christ, by subjecting himself to the law, and obeying it, has done
   great honour to the law, and to the authority of God who gave it. That
   so glorious a person should become subject to the law, and fulfil it,
   has done much more to honour it, than if mere man had obeyed it. It was
   a thing infinitely honourable to God, that a person of infinite dignity
   was not ashamed to call him his God, and to adore and obey him as such.
   This was more to God's honour than if any mere creature, of any
   possible degree of excellence and dignity, had so done.

   It is absolutely necessary, that in order to a sinner's being
   justified, the righteousness of some other should be reckoned to his
   account; for it is declared, that the person justified is looked upon
   as (in himself) ungodly; but God neither will nor can justify a person
   without a righteousness; for justification is manifestly a forensic
   term, as the word is used in Scripture, and a judicial thing, or the
   act of a judge. So that if a person should be justified without a
   righteousness, the judgment would not be according to truth. The
   sentence of justification would be a false sentence, unless there be a
   righteousness performed that is by the judge properly looked upon as
   his. To say, that God does not justify the sinner without sincere,
   though an imperfect, obedience, does not help the case; for an
   imperfect righteousness before a judge is no righteousness. To accept
   of something that falls short of the rule, instead of something else
   that answers the rule, is not judicial act, or act of a judge, but a
   pure act of sovereignty. An imperfect righteousness is no righteousness
   before a judge; for "righteousness (as one observes) is a relative
   thing, and has always relation to a law. The formal nature of
   righteousness, properly understood, lies in a conformity of actions to
   that which is the rule and measure of them." Therefore that only is
   righteousness in the sight of a judge that answers the law. [660] The
   law is the judge's rule: if he pardons and hides what really is, and so
   does not pass sentence according to what things are in themselves, he
   either does not act the part of a judge, or else judges falsely. The
   very notion of judging is to determine what is, and what is not, in any
   one's case. The judge's work is twofold; it is to determine first what
   is fact, and then whether what is in fact be according to rule, or
   according to the law. If a judge has no rule or law established
   beforehand, by which he should proceed in judging, he has no foundation
   to go upon in judging, he has no opportunity to be a judge; nor is it
   possible that he should do the part of a judge. To judge without a law
   or rule by which to judge, is impossible; for the very notion of
   judging, is to determine whether the object of judgment be according to
   rule; and therefore God has declared, that when he acts as a judge, he
   will not justify the wicked, and cannot clear the guilty; and, by
   parity of reason, cannot justify without righteousness.

   And the scheme of the old law's being abrogated, and a new law
   introduced, will not help at all in this difficulty; for an imperfect
   righteousness cannot answer the law of God we are under, whether that
   be an old or a new one; for every law requires perfect obedience to
   itself. Every rule whatsoever requires perfect conformity to itself; it
   is a contradiction to suppose otherwise. For to say, that there is a
   law that does not require perfect obedience to itself, is to say that
   there is a law that does not require all that it requires. That law
   that now forbids sin, is certainly the law that we are now under, (let
   that be an old or a new one,) or else it is not sin. That which is not
   forbidden, and is the breach of the law, is no sin. But if we are now
   forbidden to commit sin, then it is by a law that we are now under; for
   surely we are neither under the forbiddings nor commanding of a law
   that we are not under. Therefore, if all sin is now forbidden, then we
   are now under a law that requires perfect obedience; and therefore
   nothing can be accepted as a righteousness in the sight of our Judge,
   but perfect righteousness. So that our Judge cannot justify us, unless
   he sees a perfect righteousness, some way belonging to us, either
   performed by ourselves, or by another, and justly and duly reckoned to
   our account.

   God doth, in the sentence of justification, pronounce a man perfectly
   righteousness, or else he would need a further justification after he
   is justified. His sins being removed by Christ's atonement, is not
   sufficient for his justification; for justifying a man, as has been
   already shown, is not merely pronouncing him innocent, or without
   guilt, but standing right with regard to the rule that he is under, and
   righteous unto life: but this, according to the established rule of
   nature, reason, and divine appointment, is a positive, perfect
   righteousness.

   As there is the same need that Christ's obedience should be reckoned to
   our account, as that his atonement should; so there is the same reason
   why it should. As if Adam had persevered, and finished his course of
   obedience, we should have received the benefit of his obedience, as
   much as now we have the mischief of his disobedience; so in like
   manner, there is reason that we should receive the benefit of the
   second Adam's obedience, as of his atonement of our disobedience.
   Believers are represented in Scripture as being so in Christ, as that
   they are legally one, or accepted as one, by the Supreme Judge: Christ
   has assumed our nature, and has so assumed all in that nature that
   belongs to him, into such an union with himself, that he is become
   their head, and has taken them to be his members. And therefore, what
   Christ has done in our nature, whereby he did honour to the law and
   authority of God by his acts, as well as the reparation to the honour
   of the law by his sufferings, is reckoned to the believer's account; so
   as that the believer should be made happy, because it was so well and
   worthily done by his Head, as well as freed from being miserable,
   because he has suffered for our ill and unworthy doing.

   When Christ had once undertaken with God to stand for us, and put
   himself under our law, by that law he was obliged to suffer and by the
   same law he was obliged to obey: by the same law, after he had taken
   man's guilt upon him, he himself, being our surety, could not be
   acquitted till he had suffered, nor rewarded till he had obeyed: but he
   was not acquitted as a private person, but as our head, and believers
   are acquitted in his acquittance; nor was he accepted to a reward for
   his obedience, as a private person, but as our head, and we are
   accepted to a reward in his acceptance. The Scripture teaches us, that
   when Christ was raised from the dead, he was justified; which
   justification, as I have already shown, implies both his acquittance
   from our guilt, and his acceptance to the exaltation and glory that was
   the reward of his obedience; but believers, as soon as they believe,
   are admitted to partake with Christ in this his justification: hence we
   are told, that he was "raised again for our justification," Rom. iv.
   25. which is true, not only of that part of his justification that
   consists in his acquittance, but also his acceptance to his reward. The
   Scripture teaches us, that he is exalted, and gone to heaven to take
   possession of our glory in our name, as our forerunner, Heb. vi. 20. We
   are, as it were, both raised up together with Christ, and also made to
   sit together with Christ in heavenly places, and in him, Eph. ii. 6.

   If it be objected here, that there is this reason, why what Christ
   suffered should be accepted on our account, rather than the obedience
   he performed, that he was obliged to obedience for himself, but was not
   obliged to suffer but only on our account; to this I answer, That
   Christ was not obliged, on his own account, to undertake to obey.
   Christ, in his original circumstances, was in no subjection to the
   Father, being altogether equal with him: he was under no obligation to
   put himself in man's stead, and under man's law; or to put himself into
   any state of subjection to God whatsoever. There was a transaction
   between the Father and the Son, that was antecedent to Christ's
   becoming man, and being made under the law, wherein he undertook to put
   himself under the law, and both to obey and to suffer; in which
   transaction these things were already virtually done in the sight of
   God; as is evident by this, that God acted on the ground of that
   transaction, justifying and saving sinners, as if the things undertaken
   had been actually performed long before they were performed indeed. And
   therefore, without doubt, in order to estimate the value and validity
   of what Christ did and suffered, we must look back to that transaction,
   wherein these things were first undertaken, and virtually done in the
   sight of God, and see what capacity and circumstances Christ acted in
   them, and we shall find that Christ was under no manner of obligation,
   either to obey the law, or to suffer its penalty. After this he was
   equally under obligation to both; for henceforward he stood as our
   surety or representative: and therefore this consequent obligation may
   be as much of an objection against the validity of his suffering the
   penalty, as against his obedience. But if we look to that original
   transaction between the Father and the Son, wherein both these were
   undertaken and accepted as virtually done in the sight of the Father,
   we shall find Christ acting with regard to both, as one perfectly in
   his own right, and under no manner of previous obligation to hinder the
   validity of either.

   2. To suppose that all Christ does is only to make atonement for us by
   suffering, is to make him our Saviour but in part. It is to rob him of
   half his glory as a Saviour. For if so, all that he does is to deliver
   us from hell; he does not purchase heaven for us. The adverse scheme
   supposes that he purchases heaven for us, in that he satisfies for the
   imperfections of our obedience, and so purchases that our sincere
   imperfect obedience might be accepted as the condition of eternal life;
   and so purchases an opportunity for us to obtain heaven by our own
   obedience. But to purchase heaven for us only in this sense, is to
   purchase it in no sense at all; for all of it comes to no more than a
   satisfaction for our sins, or removing the penalty by suffering in our
   stead. For all the purchasing they speak of, that our imperfect
   obedience should be accepted, is only to pay a debt for us; there is no
   positive purchase of any good. We are taught in Scripture that heaven
   is purchased for us; it is called the purchased possession, Eph. i. 14.
   The gospel proposes the eternal inheritance, not to be acquired, as the
   first covenant did, but as already acquired and purchased. But he that
   pays a man's debt for him, and so delivers him from slavery, cannot be
   said to purchase an estate for him, merely because he sets him at
   liberty, so that henceforward he has an opportunity to get an estate by
   his own hand-labour. So that according to this scheme, the saints in
   heaven have no reason to thank Christ for purchasing heaven for them,
   or redeeming them to God, and making them kings and priests, as we have
   an account that they do, in Rev. v. 9.

   3. Justification by the righteousness and obedience of Christ, is a
   doctrine that the Scripture teaches in very full terms; Rom. v.18, 19.
   "By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
   justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
   sinners; so, by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous."
   Here in one verse we are told, that we have justification by Christ's
   righteousness; and, that there might be no room to understand the
   righteousness spoken of, merely of Christ's atonement by his suffering
   the penalty, in the next verse it is put in other terms, and asserted,
   that it is by Christ's obedience we are made righteous. It is scarcely
   possible any thing should be more full and determined: the terms, taken
   singly, are such as fix their own meaning, and taken together, they fix
   the meaning of each other. The words show that we are justified by that
   righteousness of Christ which consists in his obedience, and that we
   are made righteous or justified by that obedience of his, that is, his
   righteousness, or moral goodness before God.

   Here possibly it may be objected, that this text means only, that we
   are justified by Christ's passive obedience.

   To this I answer, whether we call it active or passive, it alters not
   the case as to the present argument, as long as it is evident by the
   words, that it is not merely under the notion of an atonement for
   disobedience, or a satisfaction for unrighteousness, but under the
   notion of a positive obedience, and a righteousness, or moral goodness,
   that it justifies us, or makes us righteous; because both the words
   righteousness and obedience are used, and used too as the opposites to
   sin and disobedience, and an offence. Rom. iv. 18. "Therefore as by the
   offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so, by
   the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
   justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
   sinners; so, by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous."
   Now, what can be meant by righteousness, when spoken of as the opposite
   to sin, or moral evil, but moral goodness? What is the righteousness
   that is the opposite of an offence, but the behaviour that is well
   pleasing? and what can be meant by obedience, when spoken of as the
   opposite of disobedience, or going contrary to a command, but a
   positive obeying and an actual complying with the command? So that
   there is no room for any invented distinction of active and passive, to
   hurt the argument from this scripture; for it is evident by it, as any
   thing can be, that believers are justified by the righteousness and
   obedience of Christ, under the notion of his moral goodness;--his
   positive obeying, and actual complying with the commands of God, and
   that behaviour which, because of its conformity to his commands, was
   well-pleasing in his sight. This is all that ever any need to desire to
   have granted in this dispute.

   By this it appears, that if Christ's dying be here included in the
   words righteousness and obedience, it is not merely as a propitiation,
   or bearing a penalty of a broken law in our stead, but as his voluntary
   submitting and yielding himself to those sufferings, was an act of
   obedience to the Father's commands, and so was a part of his positive
   righteousness, or moral goodness.

   Indeed all obedience considered under the notion of righteousness, is
   something active, something done in voluntary compliance with a
   command; whether it may be done without suffering, or whether it be
   hard and difficult; yet as it is obedience, righteousness, or moral
   goodness, it must be considered as something voluntary and active. If
   any one is commanded to go through difficulties and sufferings, and he,
   in compliance with this command, voluntarily does it, he properly obeys
   in so doing; and as he voluntarily does it in compliance with a
   command, his obedience is as active as any whatsoever. It is the same
   sort of obedience, a thing of the very same nature, as when a man, in
   compliance with a command, does a piece of hard service, or goes
   through hard labour; and there is no room to distinguish between such
   obedience of it, as if it were a thing of quite a different nature, by
   such opposite terms as active and passive: all the distinction that can
   be pretended, is that which is between obeying an easy command and a
   difficult one. But is there from hence any foundation to make two
   species of obedience, one active and the other passive? There is no
   appearance of any such distinction ever entering into the hearts of any
   of the penmen of Scripture.

   It is true, that of late, when a man refuses to obey the precept of a
   human law, but patiently yields himself up to suffer the penalty of the
   law, it is called passive obedience: but this I suppose is only a
   modern use of the word obedience; surely it is a sense of the word that
   the Scripture is a perfect stranger to. It is improperly called
   obedience, unless there be such a precept in the law, that he shall
   yield himself patiently to suffer, to which his so doing shall be an
   active voluntary conformity. There may in some sense be said to be a
   conformity of the law in a person's suffering the penalty of the law;
   but no other conformity to the law is properly called obedience to it,
   but an active voluntary conformity to the precepts of it. The word obey
   is often found in Scripture with respect to the law of God to man, but
   never in any other sense.

   It is true that Christ's willingly undergoing those sufferings which he
   endured, is a great part of that obedience of righteousness by which we
   are justified. The sufferings of Christ are respected in Scripture
   under a twofold consideration, either merely as his being substituted
   for us, or put into our stead, in suffering the penalty of the law; and
   so his sufferings are considered as a satisfaction and propitiation for
   sin; or as he, in obedience to a law or command of the Father,
   voluntarily submitted himself to those sufferings, and actively yielded
   himself up to bear them; and so they are considered as his
   righteousness, and a part of his active obedience. Christ underwent
   death in obedience to the command of the Father, Psalm xl. 6, 7, 8.
   "Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou
   opened: burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not required. Then
   said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me: I
   delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy "law is within my heart."
   John x.17, 18. "I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man
   taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself: I have power to lay it
   down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I
   received of my Father." John xviii. 11. "The cup which my Father hath
   given me, shall I not drink it?" And this is part, and indeed the
   principal part, of that active obedience by which we are justified.

   It can be no just objection against this, that the command of the
   Father to Christ that he should lay down his life, was no part of the
   law that we had broken; and therefore, that his obeying this command
   could be no part of that obedience that he performed for us, but only
   that which we had broken or failed of obeying. For although it must be
   the same legislative authority, whose honour is repaired by Christ's
   obedience, that we have injured by our disobedience; yet there is no
   need that the law which Christ obeys should be precisely the same that
   Adam was to have obeyed, in that sense, that there should be no
   positive precepts wanting, nor any added. There was wanting the precept
   about the forbidden fruit, and there was added the ceremonial law. The
   thing required was perfect obedience. It is no matter whether the
   positive precepts were the same, if they were equivalent. The positive
   precepts that Christ was to obey, were much more than equivalent to
   what was wanting, because infinitely more difficult, particularly the
   command that he had received to lay down his life, which was his
   principal act of obedience, and which, above all other, is concerned in
   our justification. As that act of disobedience by which we fell, was
   disobedience to a positive precept that Christ never was under, viz.
   that of abstaining from the tree of knowledge of good and evil; so that
   act of obedience by which principally we are redeemed, is obedience to
   a positive precept that Adam never was under, viz. the precept of
   laying down his life. It was suitable that it should be a positive
   precept, that should try both Adam's and Christ's obedience. Such
   precepts are the greatest and most proper trial of obedience; because
   in them, the mere authority and will of the legislator is the sole
   ground of the obligation, (and nothing in the nature of the things
   themselves,) and therefore they are the greatest trial of any person's
   respect to that authority and will.

   The law that Christ was subject to, and obeyed, was in some sense the
   same that was given to Adam. There are innumerable particular duties
   required by the law only conditionally; and in such circumstances, are
   comprehended in some great and general rule of that law. Thus, for
   instance, there are innumerable acts of respect and obedience to men,
   which are required by the law of nature, (which was a law given to
   Adam,) which yet are not required absolutely, but upon many
   pre-requisite conditions; as, that there be men standing in such
   relations to us, and that they give forth such commands, and the like.
   So many acts of respect and obedience to God are included, in like
   manner, in the moral law conditionally, or such and such things being
   supposed; as Abraham's going about to sacrifice his son, the Jews'
   circumcising their children when eight days old, and Adam's not eating
   the forbidden fruit; they are virtually comprehended in that great
   general rule of the moral law, that we should obey God, and be subject
   to him in whatsoever he pleases to command us. Certainly the moral law
   does as much require us to obey God's positive commands, as it requires
   us to obey the positive commands of our parents. And thus all that
   Adam, and all that Christ was commanded, even his observing the rites
   and ceremonies of the Jewish worship, and his laying down his life, was
   virtually included in this same great law. [661]

   It is no objection against the last-mentioned thing, even Christ's
   laying down his life, it being included in the moral law given to Adam,
   because that law itself allowed of no occasion for any such thing; for
   the moral law virtually includes all right acts, on all possible
   occasions, even occasions that the law itself allows not: thus we are
   obliged by the moral law to mortify our lusts, and repent of our sins,
   though that law allows of no lust to mortify, of sin to repent of.

   There is indeed but one great law of God, and that is the same law that
   says, "if thou sinnest, thou shalt die;" and "cursed is every one that
   continues not in all things contained in this law to do them." All
   duties of positive institution are virtually comprehended in this law:
   and therefore, if the Jews broke the ceremonial law, it exposed them to
   the penalty of the law, or covenant of works, which threatened, "thou
   shalt surely die." The law is the eternal and unalterable rule of
   righteousness between God and man, and therefore is the rule of
   judgment, by which all that a man does shall be either justified or
   condemned; and no sin exposes to damnation, but by the law. So now he
   that refuses to obey the precepts that require an attendance on the
   sacraments of the New Testament, is exposed to damnation, by virtue of
   the law or covenant of works. It may moreover be argued, that all sins
   whatsoever are breaches of the law or covenant of works, because all
   sins, even breaches of the positive precepts, as well as others, have
   atonement by the death of Christ: but what Christ died for, was to
   satisfy the law, or to bear the curse of the law; as appears by Gal.
   iii. 10-13. and Rom. vii. 3, 4.

   So that Christ's laying down his life might be part of that obedience
   by which we are justified, though it was a positive precept not given
   to Adam. It was doubtless Christ's main act of obedience, because it
   was obedience to a command that was attended with immensely the
   greatest difficulty, and so to a command that was the greatest trial of
   his obedience. His respect shown to God in it, and his honour to God's
   authority, was proportionably great. It is spoken of in Scripture as
   Christ's principal act of obedience. Philip. ii. 7 ,8. "But made
   himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
   was made in the likeness of man: and being found in fashion as a man,
   he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
   the cross." Heb. v. 8. "Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience
   by the things that he suffered." It was mainly by this act of obedience
   that Christ purchased so glorious a reward for himself; Philip. ii. 8,
   9. "He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
   Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which
   is above every name." And it therefore follows from what has been
   already said, that it is mainly by this act of obedience that believers
   in Christ also have the reward of glory, or some to partake with Christ
   in his glory. We are as much saved by the death of Christ, as his
   yielding himself to die was an act of obedience, as we are, as it was a
   propitiation for our sins: for as it was not the only act of obedience
   that merited, he having performed meritorious acts of obedience through
   the whole course of his life; so neither was it the only suffering that
   was propitiatory; all his sufferings through the whole course of his
   life being propitiatory, as well as every act of obedience meritorious.
   Indeed this was his principal suffering; and it was as much his
   principal act of obedience.

   Hence we may see how that the death of Christ did not only make
   atonement, but also merited eternal life; and hence we may see how by
   the blood of Christ we are not only redeemed from sin, but redeemed
   unto God; and therefore the Scripture seems every where to attribute
   the whole of salvation to the blood of Christ. This precious blood is
   as much the main price by which heaven is purchased, as it is the main
   price by which we are redeemed from hell. The positive righteousness of
   Christ, or that price by which he merited, was of equal value with that
   by which he satisfied; for indeed it was the same price. He spilled his
   blood to satisfy, and by reason of the infinite dignity of his person,
   his sufferings were looked upon as of infinite value, and equivalent to
   the eternal sufferings of a finite creature. And he spilled his blood
   out of respect to the honour of God's majesty, and in submission to his
   authority, who had commanded him so to do: and his obedience therein
   was of infinite value; both because of the dignity of the person that
   performed it, and because he put himself to infinite expense to perform
   it, whereby the infinite degree of his regard to God's authority
   appeared.

   One would wonder what Arminians mean by Christ's merits. They talk of
   Christ's merits as much as any body, and yet deny the imputation of
   Christ's positive righteousness. What should there be that any one
   should merit or deserve any thing by, besides righteousness or
   goodness? If any thing that Christ did or suffered, merited or deserved
   any thing, it was by virtue of the goodness, or righteousness, or
   holiness of it. If Christ's sufferings and death merited heaven, it
   must be because there was an excellent righteousness and transcendent
   moral goodness in that act of laying down his life. And if by that
   excellent righteousness he merited heaven for us; then surely that
   righteousness is reckoned to our account, that we have the benefit of
   it, or, which is the same thing, it is imputed to us.

   Thus, I hope, I have made it evident, that the righteousness of Christ
   is indeed imputed to us. I proceed now to the

   Third and last thing under this argument, That this doctrine, of the
   imputation of Christ's righteousness, is utterly inconsistent with the
   doctrine of our being justified by our own virtue or sincere obedience.
   If acceptance to God's favour, and a title to life, be given to
   believers as the reward of Christ's obedience, then it is not given as
   the reward of our own obedience. In what respect soever Christ is our
   Saviour, that doubtless excludes our being our own saviours in that
   same respect. If we can be our own saviours in the same respect that
   Christ is, it will thence follow, that the salvation of Christ is
   needless in that respect; according to the apostle's reasoning, Gal. v.
   4. "Christ is rendered of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
   justified by the law." Doubtless, it is Christ's prerogative to be our
   Saviour in that sense wherein he is our Saviour. And therefore, if it
   be by his obedience that we are justified, then it is not by our own
   obedience.

   Here perhaps it may be said, that a title to salvation is not directly
   given as the reward of our obedience; for that is not by any thing of
   ours, but only by Christ's satisfaction and righteousness; but yet an
   interest in that satisfaction and righteousness if given as a reward of
   our obedience.

   But this does not at all help the case; for this is to ascribe as much
   to our obedience as if we ascribed salvation to it directly, without
   the intervention of Christ's righteousness. For it would be as a great
   thing for God to give us Christ, and his satisfaction and
   righteousness, in reward for our obedience, as to give us heaven
   immediately; it would be as great a reward, and as great a testimony of
   respect to our obedience. And if God gives as great a thing as
   salvation for our obedience, why could he not as well give salvation
   itself directly? and then there would have been no need of Christ's
   righteousness. And indeed if God gives us Christ, or an interest in
   him, properly in reward of our obedience, he does really give us
   salvation in reward for our obedience: for the former implies the
   latter; yea, it implies it, as the greater implies the less. So that
   indeed it exalts our virtue and obedience more, to suppose that God
   gives us Christ in reward of that virtue and obedience, than if he
   should give salvation without Christ.

   The thing that the Scripture guards and militates against, is our
   imagining that it is our own goodness, virtue, or excellency that
   instates us in God's acceptance and favour. But to suppose that God
   gives us an interest in Christ in reward for our virtue, is as great an
   argument that it instates us in God's favour, as if he bestowed a title
   to eternal life as its direct reward. If God gives us an interest in
   Christ as a reward of our obedience, it will then follow, that we are
   instated in God's acceptance and favour by our own obedience,
   antecedent to our having an interest in Christ. For a rewarding any
   one's excellency, evermore supposes favour and acceptance on the
   account of that excellency: it is the very notion of a reward, that it
   is a good thing, bestowed in testimony of respect and favour for the
   virtue or excellency rewarded. So that it is not by virtue of our
   interest in Christ and his merits, that we first come into favour with
   God, according to this scheme; for we are in God's favour before we
   have any interest in those merits; in that we have an interest in those
   merits given as a fruit of God's favour for our own virtue. If our
   interest in Christ be the fruit of God's favour, then it cannot be the
   ground of it. If God did not accept us, and had no favour for us for
   our own excellency, he never would bestow so great a reward upon us, as
   a right in Christ's satisfaction and righteousness. So that such a
   scheme destroys itself; for it supposes that Christ's satisfaction and
   righteousness are necessary for us to recommend us to the favour of
   God; and yet supposes that we have God's favour and acceptance before
   we have Christ's satisfaction and righteousness, and have these given
   as a fruit of God's favour.

   Indeed, neither salvation itself, nor Christ the Saviour, are given as
   a reward of any thing in man: they are not given as a reward of faith,
   nor any thing else of ours: we are not united to Christ as a reward of
   our faith, but have union with him by faith, only as faith is the very
   act of uniting or closing on our part. As when a man offers himself to
   a woman in marriage, he does not give himself to her as a reward of her
   receiving him in marriage. Her receiving him is not considered as a
   worthy deed in her for which he rewards her by giving himself to her;
   but it is by her receiving him that the union is made, by which she
   hath him for her husband. It is on her part the unition itself. By
   these things it appears how contrary to the gospel of Christ their
   scheme is, who say that faith justifies as a principle of obedience, or
   as a leading act of obedience; or (as others) the sum and comprehension
   of all evangelical obedience. For by this, the obedience or virtue that
   is in faith gives it its justifying influence; and that is the same
   thing as to say, that we are justified by our own obedience, virtue, or
   goodness.

   Having thus considered the evidence of the truth of the doctrine, I
   proceed now to the

   III. Thing proposed, viz. "To show in what sense the act of a christian
   life, or of evangelical obedience, may be looked upon to be concerned
   in this affair."

   From what has been said already, it is manifest that they cannot have
   any concern in this affair as good works, or by virtue of any moral
   goodness in them; not as works of the law, or as that moral excellency,
   or any part of it, which is the fulfilment of that great, universal,
   and everlasting law or covenant of works which the great lawgiver has
   established, as the highest and unalterable rule of judgment, which
   Christ alone answers, or does any thing towards it.

   It having been shown out of the Scripture, that it is only by faith, or
   the soul's receiving and uniting to the Saviour who has wrought our
   righteousness, that we are justified; it therefore remains, that the
   acts of a christian life cannot be concerned in this affair any
   otherwise than as they imply, and are the expressions of, faith, and
   may be looked upon as so many acts of reception of Christ the Saviour.
   But the determining what concerns acts of christian obedience can have
   in justification in this respect, will depend on the resolving of
   another point, viz. Whether any other act of faith besides the first
   act, has any concern in our justification, or how far perseverance in
   faith, or the continued and renewed acts of faith, have influence in
   this affair. And it seems manifest that justification is by the first
   act of faith, in some respects, in a peculiar manner, because a sinner
   is actually and finally justified as soon as he has performed one act
   of faith; and faith in its first act does, virtually at least, depend
   on God for perseverance, and entitles to this among other benefits. But
   yet the perseverance of faith is not excluded in this affair; it is not
   only certainly connected with justification, but it is not to be
   excluded from that on which the justification of a sinner has a
   dependence, or that by which he is justified.

   I have shown that the way in which justification has a dependence on
   faith, is, that it is the qualification on which the congruity of an
   interest in the righteousness of Christ depends, or wherein such a
   fitness consists. But the consideration of the perseverance of faith
   cannot be excluded out of this congruity or fitness, for it is
   congruous that he that believes in Christ should have an interest in
   Christ's righteousness, and so in the eternal benefits purchased by it,
   because faith is that by which the soul hath union or oneness with
   Christ; and there is a natural congruity in it, that they who are one
   with Christ should have a joint interest with him in his eternal
   benefits; but yet this congruity depends on its being an abiding union.
   As it is needful that the branch should abide in the vine, in order to
   its receiving the lasting benefits of the root; so it is necessary that
   the soul should abide in Christ, in order to its receiving those
   lasting benefits of God's final acceptance and favour. John xv. 6, 7.
   "If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch. If ye abide in
   me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
   be done unto you." Ver. 9, 10. "Continue ye in my love. If ye keep (or
   abide in) my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have
   kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love." There is the
   same reason why it is necessary that the union with Christ should
   remain, as why it should be begun; why it should continue to be, as why
   it should once be. If it should be begun without remaining, the
   beginning would be in vain. In order to the soul's being now in a
   justified state, and now free from condemnation, it is necessary that
   it should now be in Christ, and not merely that it should once have
   been in him. Rom. viii. 1. "There is no condemnation to them which are
   in Christ Jesus." The soul is saved in Christ, as being now in him,
   when the salvation is bestowed, and not merely as remembering that it
   once was in him. Philip. iii. 9. "That I may be found in him, not
   having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
   through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
   faith." 1 John ii. 28. "And now, little children, abide in him; that
   when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before
   him at his coming." In order to persons being blessed after death, it
   is necessary not only that they should once be in him, but that they
   should die in him. Rev. xiv. 13. "Blessed are the dead that die in the
   Lord."--And there is the same reason why faith, the uniting
   qualification, should remain, in order to the union's once being.

   So that although the sinner is actually and finally justified on the
   first acts of faith, yet the perseverance of faith, even then, comes
   into consideration, as one thing on which the fitness of acceptance to
   life depends. God, in the act of justification, which is passed on a
   sinner's first believing, has respect to perseverance, as being
   virtually contained in that first act of faith; and it is looked upon,
   and taken by him that justifies, as being as it were a property in that
   faith. God has respect to the believer's continuance in faith, and he
   is justified by that, as though it already were, because by divine
   establishment it shall follow; and it being by divine constitution
   connected with that first faith, as much as if it were a property in
   it, it is then considered as such, and so justification is not
   suspended; but were it not for this, it would be needful that is should
   be suspended, till the sinner had actually persevered in faith.

   And that it is so, that God in the act of final justification which he
   passes at the sinner's conversion, has respect to perseverance in
   faith, and future acts of faith, as being virtually implied in the
   first act, is further manifest by this, viz. That in a sinner's
   justification, at his conversion there is virtually contained a
   forgiveness as to eternal and deserved punishment, not only of all past
   sins, but also of all future infirmities and acts of sin that they
   shall be guilty of; because that first justification is decisive and
   final. And yet pardon, in the order of nature, properly follows the
   crime, and also follows those acts of repentance and faith that respect
   the crime pardoned, as is manifest both from reason and Scripture.
   David, in the beginning of Psalm xxxii. speaks of the forgiveness of
   sins which were doubtless committed long after he was first godly, as
   being consequent on those sins, and on his repentance and faith with
   respect to them; and yet this forgiveness is spoken of by the apostle
   in the 4th of Romans, as an instance of justification by faith.
   Probably the sin David there speaks of is the same that he committed in
   the matter of Uriah, and so the pardon the same with that release from
   death, or eternal punishment, which the prophet Nathan speaks of , 2
   Sam. xii. 13. "The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not
   die." Not only does the manifestation of this pardon follow the sin in
   the order of time, but the pardon itself, in the order of nature,
   follows David's repentance and faith with respect to this sin; for it
   is spoken of in the Psalm xxxii., as depending on it.

   But inasmuch as a sinner, in his first justification, is for ever
   justified and freed from all obligations to eternal punishment; it
   hence of necessity follows, that future faith and repentance are
   beheld, in that justification, as virtually contained in that first
   faith and repentance; because repentance of those future sins, and
   faith in a Redeemer, with respect to them, or, at least, the
   continuance of that habit and principle in the heart that has such an
   actual repentance and faith in its nature and tendency, is now made
   sure by God's promise.--If remission of sins, committed after
   conversion, in the order of nature, follows that faith and repentance
   that is after them, then it follows that future sins are respected in
   the first justification, no otherwise than as future faith and
   repentance are respected in it. And future repentance and faith are
   looked upon by him that justifies, as virtually implied in the first
   repentance and faith, in the same manner as justification from future
   sins is virtually implied in the first justification; which is the
   thing that was to be proved.

   And besides, if no other act of faith could be concerned in
   justification but the first act, it will then follow, that Christians
   ought never to seek justification by any other act of faith. For if
   justification is not to be obtained by after acts of faith, then surely
   it is not a duty to seek it by such acts: and so it can never be a duty
   for persons after they are once converted, by faith to seek to God, or
   believingly to look to him, for the remission of sin, or deliverance
   from the guilt of it, because deliverance from the guilt of sin is part
   of what belongs to justification. And if it be not proper for converts
   by faith to look to God through Christ for it, then it will follow,
   that it is not proper for them to pray for it; for christian prayer to
   God for a blessing, is but an expression of faith in God for that
   blessing; prayer is only the voice of faith. But if these things are
   so, it will follow that the petition of the Lord's prayer, forgive us
   our debts, is not proper to be put up by disciples of Christ, or to be
   used in christian assemblies; and that Christ improperly directed his
   disciples to use that petition, when they were all of them, except
   Judas, converted before. The debt that Christ directs his disciples to
   pray for the forgiveness of, can mean nothing else but the punishment
   that sin deserves, or the debt that we owe to divine justice, the ten
   thousand talents we owe our Lord. To pray that God would forgive our
   debts, is undoubtedly the same thing as to pray that God would release
   us from obligation to due punishment; but releasing from obligation to
   the punishment due to sin, and forgiving the debt that we owe to divine
   justice, is what appertains to justification.

   And then to suppose that no after acts of faith are concerned in the
   business of justification, and so that it is not proper for any ever to
   seek justification by such acts, would be for ever to cut off those
   Christians that are doubtful concerning their first act of faith, from
   the joy and peace of believing. As the business of a justifying faith
   is to obtain pardon and peace with God, by looking to God, and trusting
   in him for these blessings; so the joy and peace of that faith is in
   the apprehension of pardon and peace obtained by such a trust. This a
   Christian that is doubtful of his first act of faith cannot have from
   that act, because, by the supposition, he is doubtful whether it be an
   act of faith, and so whether he did obtain pardon and peace by that
   act. The proper remedy, in such a case, is now by faith to look to God
   in Christ for these blessings; but he is cut off from this remedy,
   because he is uncertain whether he has warranted so to do; for he does
   not know but that he has believed already; and if so, then he has no
   warrant to look to God by faith for these blessings now, because, by
   the supposition, no new act of faith is a proper means of obtaining
   these blessings. And so he can never properly obtain the joy of faith;
   for there are acts of true faith that are very weak, and the first act
   may be so as well as others: it may be like the first motion of the
   infant in the womb; it may be so weak an act, that the Christian, by
   examining it, may never be able to determine whether it was a true act
   of faith or no; and it is evident from fact, and abundant experience,
   that many Christians are for ever at a loss to determine which was
   their first act of faith. And those saints who have had a good degree
   of satisfaction concerning their faith, may be subject to great
   declensions and falls, in which case they are liable to great fears of
   eternal punishment; and the proper way of deliverance, is to forsake
   their sin by repentance, and by faith now to come to Christ for
   deliverance from the deserved eternal punishment; but this it would not
   be, if deliverance from that punishment was not this way to be
   obtained.

   But what is a still more plain and direct evidence of what I am now
   arguing for, is, that the act of faith which Abraham exercised in the
   great promise of the covenant of grace that God made to him, of which
   it is expressly said, Gal. iii. 6. "It was accounted to him for
   righteousness"--the grand instance and proof that the apostle so much
   insists upon throughout the 4th chapter of Romans, and 3d chapter of
   Galatians, to confirm his doctrine of justification by faith alone--was
   not Abraham's first act of faith, but was exerted long after he had by
   faith forsaken his own country, Heb. xi. 8. and had been treated as an
   eminent friend of God.

   Moreover, the apostle Paul, in the 3d chapter of Philip. tells us how
   earnestly he sought justification by faith, or to win Christ and obtain
   that righteousness which was by the faith of him, in what he did after
   his conversion. Verse 8, 9. "For whom I have suffered the loss of all
   things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found
   in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that
   which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
   by faith." And in the two next verses he expresses the same thing in
   other words, and tells us how he went through sufferings, and became
   conformable to Christ's death, that he might be a partaker with Christ
   in the benefit of his resurrection; which the same apostle elsewhere
   teaches us, is especially justification. Christ's resurrection was his
   justification; in this, he that was put to death in the flesh, was
   justified by the Spirit; and he that was delivered for our offences,
   rose again for our justification. And the apostle tells us in the
   verses that follow in that 3d chapter of Philippians, that he thus
   sought to attain the righteousness which is through the faith of
   Christ, and so to partake of the benefit of his resurrection, still as
   though he had not already attained, but that he continued to follow
   after it.

   On the whole, it appears, that the perseverance of faith is necessary,
   even to the congruity of justification; and that not the less, because
   the sinner is justified, and perseverance promised, on the first act of
   faith, but God, in that justification, has respect, not only to the
   past act of faith, but to his own promise of future acts, and to the
   fitness of a qualification beheld as yet only in his own promise. And
   that perseverance in faith is thus necessary to salvation, not merely
   as a sine qua non, nor as an universal concomitant of it, but by reason
   of such an influence and dependence, seems manifest by many scriptures:
   I would mention two or three; Heb. iii. 6. "Whose house are we, if we
   hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
   end." Verse 14. "For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the
   beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end." Chap. vi. 12. "Be
   ye followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
   promises." Rom. xi. 20. "Well, because of unbelief they were broken
   off; but thou standest by faith. Be not high minded, but fear."

   And, as the congruity to a final justification depends on perseverance
   in faith, as well as the first act, so oftentimes the manifestation of
   justification in the conscience, arises as great deal more from after
   acts, than the first act. And all the difference whereby the first act
   of faith has a concern in this affair that is peculiar, seems to be, as
   it were, only an accidental difference, arising from the circumstance
   of time, or its being first in order of time; and not from any peculiar
   respect that God has to it, or any influence it has of a peculiar
   nature, in the affair of our salvation.

   And thus it is that a truly christian walk, and the acts of an
   evangelical, child-like, believing obedience, are concerned in the
   affair of our justification, and seem to be sometimes so spoken of in
   Scripture, viz. as an expression of a persevering faith in the Son of
   God, the only Saviour. Faith unites to Christ, and so gives a congruity
   to justification, not merely as remaining a dormant principle in the
   heart, but as being and appearing in its active expressions. The
   obedience of a Christian, so far as it is truly evangelical, and
   performed with the Spirit of the Son sent forth into the heart, has all
   relation to Christ, the Mediator, and is but an expression of the
   soul's believing unition to Christ. All evangelical works are works of
   that faith that worketh by love; and every such act of obedience,
   wherein it is inward, and the act of the soul, is only a new effective
   act of reception of Christ, and adherence to the glorious Saviour.
   Hence that of the apostle, Gal. ii.20. "I live; yet not I, but Christ
   liveth in me; and the life that I now live in the flesh, is by the
   faith of the Son of God." And hence we are directed, in whatever we do,
   whether in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus
   Christ, Col. iii.17.

   And that God in justification has respect, not only to the first act of
   faith, but also to future persevering acts, as expressed in life, seems
   manifest by Rom. i. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God
   revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, "The just shall live by
   faith." And Heb. x.38, 39. "Now the just shall live by faith; but if
   any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are
   not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe, to
   the saving of the soul."

   So that as was before said of faith, so may it be said of a child-like
   believing obedience, it has no concern in justification by any virtue
   or excellency in it; but only as there is a reception of Christ in it.
   And this is no more contrary to the apostle's frequent assertion of our
   being justified without the works of the law, than to say that we are
   justified by faith; for faith is as much a work, or act of christian
   obedience, as the expressions of faith, in spiritual life and walk. And
   therefore, as we say that faith does not justify as a work, so we say
   of all these effective expressions of faith.

   This is the reverse of the scheme of our modern divines, who hold, that
   faith justifies only as an act or expression of obedience; whereas, in
   truth, obedience has no concern in justification, any otherwise than as
   an expression of faith.

   I now proceed to the

   IV. Thing proposed, viz. To answer objections.

   Object. 1. We frequently find promises of eternal life and salvation,
   and sometimes of justification itself, made our own virtue and
   obedience. Eternal life is promised to obedience, in Rom. ii.7. "To
   them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honour,
   and immortality; eternal life:" and the like in innumerable other
   places. And justification itself is promised to that virtue of a
   forgiving spirit or temper in us, Matt. vi.14. "For, if ye forgive men
   their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye
   forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
   trespasses." All allow that justification in great part consists in the
   forgiveness of sins.

   To this I answer,

   1. These things being promised to our virtue and obedience, argues no
   more, that that there is a connexion between them and evangelical
   obedience; which, I have already observed, is not the thing in dispute.
   All that can be proved by obedience and salvation being connected in
   the promise, is, that obedience and salvation are connected in fact;
   which nobody denies; and whether it be owned or denied, is, as has been
   shown, nothing to the purpose. There is no need that an admission to a
   title to salvation, should be given on the account of our obedience, in
   order to the promises being true. If we find such a promise, that he
   that obeys shall be saved, or he that is holy shall be justified; all
   that is needful, in order to such promises being true, is, that it be
   really so, that he that obeys shall be saved, and that holiness and
   justification shall indeed go together. That proposition may be a
   truth, that he that obeys shall be saved; because obedience and
   salvation are connected together in fact; and yet an acceptance to a
   title to salvation not be granted upon the account of any of our own
   virtue or obedience. What is a promise, but only a declaration of
   future truth, for the comfort and encouragement of the person to whom
   it is declared? Promises are conditional propositions; and, as has been
   already observed, it is not the thing in dispute, whether other things
   besides faith may not have the place of the condition in such
   propositions wherein pardon and salvation are the consequent.

   2. Promises may rationally be made to signs and evidences of faith, and
   yet the thing promised not be upon the account of the sign, but the
   thing signified. Thus, for instance, human government may rationally
   make promises of such and such privileges to those that can show such
   evidences of their being free of such a city, or members of such a
   corporation, or descended of such a family; when it is not at all for
   the sake of that which is the evidence or sign, in itself considered,
   that they are admitted to such a privilege, but only and purely for the
   sake of that which it is an evidence of. And though God does not stand
   in need of signs to know whether we have true faith or not, yet our own
   consciences do; so that it is much for our comfort that promises are
   made to signs of faith. Finding in ourselves a forgiving temper and
   disposition, may be a most proper and natural evidence to our
   consciences, that our hearts have, in a sense of our own utter
   unworthiness, truly closed and fallen in with the way of free and
   infinitely gracious forgiveness of our sins by Jesus Christ; whence we
   may be enabled, with the greater comfort, to apply to ourselves the
   promises of forgiveness by Christ.

   3. It has been just now shown, how that acts of evangelical obedience
   are indeed concerned in our justification itself, and are not excluded
   from that condition that justification depends upon, without the least
   prejudice to that doctrine of justification by faith, without any
   goodness of our own, that has been maintained; and therefore it can be
   no objection against this doctrine, that we have sometimes in Scripture
   promises of pardon and acceptance made to such acts of obedience.

   4. Promises of particular benefits implied in justification and
   salvation, may especially be fitly made to such expressions and
   evidences of faith as they have a peculiar natural likeness and
   suitableness to. As forgiveness is promised to a forgiving spirit in
   us; obtaining mercy is fitly promised to mercifulness in us, and the
   like; and that upon several accounts, they are the most natural
   evidences of our heart's closing with those benefits by faith; for they
   do especially show the sweet accord and consent that there is between
   the heart and these benefits; and by reason of the natural likeness
   that there is between the virtue and the benefit, the one has the
   greater tendency to bring the other to mind; the practice of the virtue
   tends the more to renew the sense, and refresh the hope, of the
   blessing promised; and also to convince the conscience of the justice
   of being denied the benefit, if the duty be neglected. Besides the
   sense and manifestation of divine forgiveness in our own
   consciences--yea, and may exercises of God's forgiving mercy, (as it
   respects God's fatherly displeasure,) granted after justification,
   through the course of a Christian's life--may be given as the proper
   rewards of a forgiving spirit, and yet this not be at all to the
   prejudice of the doctrine we have maintained; as will more fully
   appear, when we come to answer another objection hereafter to be
   mentioned.

   Object. 2. Our own obedience, and inherent holiness, is necessary to
   prepare men for heaven; and therefore is doubtless what recommends
   persons to God's acceptance, as the heirs of heaven.

   To this I answer,

   1. Our own obedience being necessary in order to a preparation for an
   actual bestowment of glory, is no argument that it is the thing upon
   the account of which we are accepted to a right to it. God may, and
   does do many things to prepare the saints for glory, after he has
   accepted them as the heirs of glory. A parent may do much to prepare a
   child for an inheritance in its education, after the child is an heir;
   yea, there are many things necessary to fit a child for the actual
   possession of the inheritance, yet not necessary in order to its having
   a right to the inheritance.

   2. If every thing that is necessary to prepare men for glory must be
   the proper condition of justification, then perfect holiness is the
   condition of justification. Men must be made perfectly holy, before
   they are admitted to the enjoyment of the blessedness of heaven; for
   there must in no wise enter in there any spiritual defilement. And
   therefore, when a saint dies, he leaves all his sin and corruption when
   he leaves the body.

   Object. 3. Our obedience is not only indissolubly connected with
   salvation, and preparatory to it, but the Scripture expressly speaks of
   bestowing eternal blessings as rewards for the good deeds of the
   saints. Matt. x. 42. "Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these
   little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, he
   shall in no wise lose his reward." 1 Cor. iii. 8. "Every man shall
   receive his own reward, according to his own labour." And in many other
   places. This seems to militate against the doctrine that has been
   maintained, two ways: (1.) The bestowing a reward, carries in it a
   respect to a moral fitness in the thing rewarded to the reward; the
   very notion of a reward being a benefit bestowed in testimony of
   acceptance of, and respect to, the goodness or amiableness of some
   qualification or work in the person rewarded. Besides, the Scripture
   seems to explain itself in this matter, in Rev. iii. 4. "Thou hast a
   few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments; and
   they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy." This is here
   given as the reason why they should have such a reward, "because they
   were worthy;" which, though we suppose it to imply no proper merit, yet
   it at least implies a moral fitness, or that the excellency of their
   virtue in God's sight recommends them to such a reward; which seems
   directly repugnant to what has been supposed, viz. that we are
   accepted, and approved of God, as the heirs of salvation, not out of
   regard to the excellency of our own virtue or goodness, or any moral
   fitness therein to such a reward, but only on account of the dignity
   and moral fitness of Christ's righteousness. (2.) Our being eternally
   rewarded for our own holiness and good works, necessarily supposes that
   our future happiness will be greater or smaller, in some proportion as
   our own holiness and obedience is more or less; and that there are
   different degrees of glory, according to different degrees of virtue
   and good works, is a doctrine very expressly and frequently taught us
   in Scripture. But this seems quite inconsistent with the saints all
   having their future blessedness as a reward of Christ's righteousness:
   for if Christ's righteousness be imputed to all, and this be what
   entitles each one to glory, then it is the same righteousness that
   entitles one to glory which entitles another. But if all have glory as
   the reward of the same righteousness, why have not all the same glory?
   Does not the same righteousness merit as much glory when imputed to one
   as when imputed to another?

   In answer to the first part of this objection, I would observe, that it
   does not argue that we are justified by our good deeds, that we shall
   have eternal blessings in reward for them; for it is in consequence of
   our justification, that our good deeds become rewardable with spiritual
   and eternal rewards. The acceptableness, and so the rewardableness, of
   our virtue, is not antecedent to justification, but follows it, and is
   built entirely upon it; which is the reverse of what those in the
   adverse scheme of justification suppose, viz. that justification is
   built on the acceptableness and reward of our virtue. They suppose that
   a saving interest in Christ is given as a reward of our virtue, or,
   (which is the same thing,) as a testimony of God's acceptance of our
   excellency in our virtue. But the contrary is true; that God's respect
   to our virtue as our amiableness in his sight, and his acceptance of it
   as rewardable, is entirely built on our interest in Christ already
   established. So that the relation to Christ, whereby believers in
   scripture language are said to be in Christ, is the very foundation of
   our virtues and good deeds being accepted of God, and so of their being
   rewarded; for a reward is a testimony of acceptance. For we, and all
   that we do, are accepted only in the beloved, Eph. i.6. Our sacrifices
   are acceptable, only through our interest in him, and through his
   worthiness and preciousness being, as it were, made ours. 1 Pet. ii. 4,
   5. "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men,
   but chosen of God, and precious. Ye also as lively stones, are built up
   a spiritual house, an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
   acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." Here being actually built on this
   stone, precious to God, is mentioned as all the ground of the
   acceptableness of our good works to God, and their becoming also
   precious in his eyes. So, Heb. xiii. 21. "Make you perfect in every
   good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in
   his sight, through Jesus Christ." And hence we are directed, whatever
   we offer to God, to offer it in Christ's name, as expecting to have it
   accepted no other way, than from the value that God has to that name.
   Col. iii. 17. "And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name
   of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him." To act
   in Christ's name, is to act under him as our head, and as having him to
   stand for us, and represent us to God-ward.

   The reason of this may be seen from what has been already said, to show
   it is not meet that any thing in us should be accepted of God as any
   excellency of our persons, until we are actually in Christ, and
   justified through him. The loveliness of the virtue of fallen creatures
   is nothing in the sight of God, till he beholds them in Christ, and
   clothed with his righteousness. 1. Because till then we stand condemned
   before God, by his own holy law, to his utter rejection and abhorrence.
   And, 2. Because we are infinitely guilty before him; and the loveliness
   of our virtue bears no proportion to our guilt, and must therefore pass
   for nothing before a strict judge. And, 3. Because our good deeds and
   virtuous acts themselves are in a sense corrupt; and the hatefulness of
   the corruption of them, if we are beheld as we are in ourselves, or
   separate from Christ, infinitely outweighs the loveliness of the good
   that is in them. So that if no other sin was considered but only that
   which attends the act of virtue itself, the loveliness vanishes into
   nothing in comparison of it; and therefore the virtue must pass for
   nothing, out of Christ. Not only are our best duties defiled, in being
   attended with the exercises of sin and corruption which precede,
   follow, and are intermingled with them; but even the holy acts
   themselves, and the gracious exercises of the godly, are defective.
   Though the act most simply considered is good, yet take the acts in
   their measure and dimensions, and the manner in which they are exerted,
   and they are sinfully defective; there is that defect in them that may
   well be called the corruption of them. That defect is properly sin, an
   expression of a vile sinfulness of heart, and what tends to provoke the
   just anger of God: not because the exercise of love and other grace is
   not equal to God's loveliness; for it is impossible the love of
   creatures (men or angels) should be so; but because the act is so very
   disproportionate to the occasion given for love or other grace,
   considering God's loveliness, the manifestation that is made of it, the
   exercises of kindness, the capacity of human nature, and our advantages
   (and the like) together.--A negative expression of corruption may be as
   truly sin, and as just cause of provocation, as a positive. Thus if a
   worthy and excellent person should, from mere generosity and goodness,
   exceedingly lay out himself, and with great expense and suffering save
   another's life, or redeem him from some extreme calamity; and if that
   other person should never thank him for it, or express the least
   gratitude any way; this would be a negative expression of his
   ingratitude and baseness; but is equivalent to an act of ingratitude,
   or positive exercise of a base unworthy spirit; and is truly an
   expression of it, and brings as much blame as if he by some positive
   act had much injured another person. And so it would be (only in a
   lesser degree) if the gratitude was but very small, bearing no
   proportion to the benefit and obligation: as if, for so great and
   extraordinary a kindness, he should express no more gratitude than
   would have been becoming towards a person who had only given him a cup
   of water when thirsty, or shown him the way in a journey when at a
   loss, or had done him some such small kindness. If he should come to
   his benefactor to express his gratitude, and should do after this
   manner, he might truly be said to act unworthily and odiously; he would
   show a most ungrateful spirit. His doing after such a manner might
   justly be abhorred by all; and yet the gratitude, that little there is
   of it, most simply considered, and so far as it goes, is good. And so
   it is with respect to our exercise of love, and gratitude, and other
   graces, towards God; they are defectively corrupt and sinful, and, take
   them as they are, in their manner and measure, might justly be odious
   and provoking to God, and would necessarily be so, were we beheld out
   of Christ. For in that this defect is sin, it is infinitely hateful;
   and so the hatefulness of the very act infinitely outweighs the
   loveliness of it; because all sin has infinite hatefulness and
   heinousness; but our holiness has but little value and loveliness, as
   has been elsewhere demonstrated.

   Hence, though it be true that the saints are rewarded for their good
   works, yet it is for Christ's sake only, and not for the excellency of
   their works in themselves considered, or beheld separately from Christ;
   for so they have no excellency in God's sight, or acceptableness to
   him, as has now been shown. It is acknowledged that God, in rewarding
   the holiness and good works of believers, does in some respect give
   them happiness as a testimony of his respect to the loveliness of their
   holiness and good works in his sight; for that is the very notion of a
   reward. But it is in a very different sense from what would have been
   if man had not fallen; which would have been to bestow eternal life on
   man, as a testimony of God's respect to the loveliness of what man did,
   considered as in itself, and as in man separately by himself, and not
   beheld as a member of Christ. In which sense also, the scheme of
   justification we are opposing necessarily supposes the excellency of
   our virtue to be respected and rewarded; for it supposes a saving
   interest in Christ itself to be given as a reward of it.

   Two things come to pass, relating to the saints' reward for their
   inherent righteousness, by virtue of their relation to Christ. 1. The
   guilt of their persons is all done away, and the pollution and
   hatefulness that attends and is in their good works, is hid. 2. Their
   relation to Christ adds a positive value and dignity to their good
   works in God's sight. That little holiness, and those faint and feeble
   acts of love, and other grace, receive an exceeding value in the sight
   of God, by virtue of God's beholding them as in Christ, and as it were
   members of one so infinitely worthy in his eyes; and that because God
   looks upon the persons as of greater dignity on this account. Isa.
   xliii .4. "Since thou was precious in my sight, thou hast been
   honourable." God, for Christ's sake, and because they are members of
   his own righteousness and dear Son, sets an exceeding value upon their
   persons; and hence it follows, that he also sets a great value upon
   their good acts and offering. The same love and obedience in a person
   of greater dignity and value in God's sight, is more valuable in his
   eyes than in one of less dignity. Love is valuable in proportion to the
   dignity of the person whose love it is; because, so far as any one
   gives his love to another, he gives himself, in that he gives his
   heart. But this is a more excellent offering, in proportion as the
   person whose self is offered is more worth. Believers are become
   immensely more honourable in God's esteem by virtue of their relation
   to Christ, than man would have been considered as by himself, though he
   had been free from sin; as a mean person becomes more honourable when
   married to a king. Hence God will probably reward the little weak love,
   and poor and exceeding imperfect obedience of believers in Christ, with
   more glorious reward than he would have done Adam's perfect obedience.
   According to the tenor of the first covenant, the person was to be
   accepted and rewarded, only for the work's sake; but by the covenant of
   grace, the work is accepted and rewarded, only for the person's sake;
   the person being beheld antecedently as a member of Christ, and clothed
   with his righteousness. So that though the saints' inherent holiness is
   rewarded, yet this very reward is indeed not the less founded on the
   worthiness and righteousness of Christ. None of the value that their
   works have in his sight, nor any of the acceptance they have with him,
   is out of Christ, and out of his righteousness; but his worthiness as
   mediator is the prime and only foundation on which all is built, and
   the universal source whence all arises. God indeed doth great things
   out of regard to the saints' loveliness, but it is only as a secondary
   and derivative loveliness. When I speak of a derivative loveliness, I
   do not mean only, that the qualifications themselves accepted as
   lovely, are derived from Christ, from his power and purchase; but that
   the acceptance of them as a loveliness, and all the value that is set
   upon them, and all their connexion with the reward, is founded in, and
   derived from, Christ's righteousness and worthiness.

   If we suppose that not only higher degrees of glory in heaven, but
   heaven itself, is in some respect given in reward for the holiness and
   good works of the saints, in this secondary an derivative sense, it
   will not prejudice the doctrine we have maintained. It is no way
   impossible that God may bestow heaven's glory wholly out of respect to
   Christ's righteousness, and yet in reward for man's inherent holiness,
   in different respects, and different ways. It may be only Christ's
   righteousness that God has respect to, for its own sake, the
   independent acceptableness and dignity of it being sufficient of itself
   to recommend all that believe in Christ to a title to this glory; and
   so it may be only by this that persons enter into a title to heaven, or
   have their prime right to it: and yet God may also have respect to the
   saints' own holiness, for Christ's sake, and as deriving a value from
   Christ's merit, which he may testify in bestowing heaven upon them. The
   saints being beheld as members of Christ, their obedience is looked
   upon by God as something of Christ's, it being the obedience of the
   members of Christ; as the sufferings of the members of Christ are
   looked upon, in some respect, as the sufferings of Christ. Hence the
   apostle, speaking of his sufferings, says, Col. i.24. "Who now rejoice
   in my suffering for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
   afflictions of Christ in my flesh." To the same purpose is Matt. xxv.
   35, &c. I was an hungred, naked, sick, and in prison, &c. And so that
   in Rev. xi. 8. "And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the
   great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
   Lord was crucified."

   By the merit and righteousness of Christ, such favour of God towards
   the believer may be obtained, as that God may hereby be already, as it
   were, disposed to make them perfectly and eternally happy. But yet this
   does not hinder, but that God in his wisdom may choose to bestow this
   perfect and eternal happiness in this way, viz. in some respect as a
   reward of their holiness and obedience. It is not impossible but that
   the blessedness may be bestowed as a reward for that which is done
   after that an interest is already obtained in that favour, which (to
   speak of God after the manner of men) disposes God to bestow the
   blessedness. Our heavenly Father may already have that favour for a
   child, whereby he may be thoroughly ready to give the child an
   inheritance, because he is his child; which he is by the purchase of
   Christ's righteousness: and yet that the Father may choose to bestow
   the inheritance on the child in a way of reward for his dutifulness,
   and behaving in a manner becoming a child. And so great a reward may
   not be judged more than a meet reward for his dutifulness; but that so
   great a reward is judged meet, does not arise from the excellency of
   the obedience absolutely considered, but from his standing in so near
   and honourable a relation to God, as that of a child, which is obtained
   only by the righteousness of Christ. And thus the reward, and the
   greatness of it, arises properly from the righteousness of Christ;
   though it be indeed in some sort the reward of their obedience. As a
   father might justly esteem the inheritance no more than a meet reward
   for the obedience of his child, and yet esteem it more than a meet
   reward for the obedience of a servant. The favour whence a believer's
   heavenly Father bestows the eternal inheritance, and his title as an
   heir, is founded in that relation he stands in to him as a child,
   purchased by Christ's righteousness; though he in wisdom chooses to
   bestow it in such a way, and therein to testify his acceptance of the
   amiableness of his obedience in Christ.

   Believers having a title to heaven by faith antecedent to their
   obedience, or its being absolutely promised to them before, does not
   hinder but that the actual bestowment of heaven may also be a testimony
   of God's regard to their obedience, though performed afterwards. Thus
   it was with Abraham, the father and pattern of all believers: God
   bestowed upon him that blessing of multiplying his seed as the stars of
   heaven, and causing that in his seed all the families of the earth
   should be blessed, in reward for his obedience in offering up his son
   Isaac, Gen. xxii. 16, 17, 18. "And said, By myself have I sworn, saith
   the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld
   thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
   multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the
   sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate
   of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
   blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice." And yet the very same
   blessings had been from time to time promised to Abraham, in the most
   positive terms, and the promise, with great solemnity, confirmed and
   sealed to him; as chap. xii. 2, 3. chap. xiii. 16. chap. xv. 1, 4-7,
   &c. chap. xvii. throughout; chap. xviii. 10, 18.

   From what has been said we may easily solve the difficulty arising from
   that text in Rev. iii. 4. "They shall walk with me in white, for they
   are worthy;" which is parallel with that text in Luke xx. 35. "But they
   which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
   resurrection from the dead." I allow (as in the objection) that this
   worthiness does doubtless denote a moral fitness to the reward, or that
   God looks on these glorious benefits as a meet testimony of his regard
   to the value which their persons and performances have in his sight.

   1. God looks on these glorious benefits as a meet testimony of his
   regard to the value which their persons have in his sight. But he sets
   this value upon their persons purely for Christ's sake. They are such
   jewels, and have such preciousness in his eyes, only because they are
   beheld in Christ, and by reason of the worthiness of the head they are
   the members of, and the stock they are grafted into. And the value that
   God sets upon them on this account is so great, that God thinks meet,
   from regard to it, to admit them to such exceeding glory. The saints,
   on account of their relation to Christ, are such precious jewels in
   God's sight, that they are thought worthy of a place in his own crown.
   Mal. iii. 17. Zech. ix. 16. So far as the saints are said to be
   valuable in God's sight, on whatever account, so far may they properly
   be said to be worthy, or meet for that honour which is answerable to
   the value or price which God sets upon them. A child or wife of a
   prince is worthy to be treated with great honour; and therefore if a
   mean person should be adopted to be a child of a prince, or should be
   espoused to a prince, it would be proper to say, that she was worthy of
   such and such honour and respect, and there would be no force upon the
   words in saying, that she ought to have such respect paid her, for she
   is worthy, though it be only on account of her relation to the prince
   that she is so.

   2. From the value God sets upon their persons, for the sake of Christ's
   worthiness, he also sets a high value on their virtue and performances.
   Their meek and quiet spirit is of great price in his sight. Their
   fruits are pleasant fruits, their offerings are an odour of sweet smell
   to him; and that because of the value he sets on their persons, as has
   been already observed and explained. This preciousness or high
   valuableness of believers is a moral fitness to a reward; and yet this
   valuableness is all in the righteousness of Christ, that is the
   foundation of it. The thing respected is not excellency in them
   separately by themselves, or in their virtue by itself, but the value
   in God's account arises from other considerations; which is the natural
   import of Luke xx. 35. "They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain
   that world," &c. and Luke xxi. 36. "That ye may be accounted worthy to
   escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
   the Son of man." 2 Thess. i.5. "That ye may be counted worthy of the
   kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer."

   There is a vast difference between this scheme, and what is supposed in
   the scheme of those that oppose the doctrine of justification by faith
   alone. This lays the foundation of first acceptance with God, and all
   actual salvation consequent upon it, wholly in Christ and his
   righteousness. On the contrary, in their scheme, a regard to man's own
   excellency or virtue is supposed to be first, and to have the place of
   the first foundation in actual salvation, though not in that
   ineffectual redemption, which they suppose common to all. They lay the
   foundation of all discriminating salvation in man's own virtue and
   moral excellency. This is the very bottom stone in this affair; for
   they suppose that it is from regard to our virtue, that even a special
   interest in Christ itself is given. The foundation being thus contrary,
   the whole scheme becomes exceeding diverse and contrary; the one is
   utterly inconsistent with our being justified by Christ's
   righteousness, the other not at all.

   From what has been said, we may understand, not only how the
   forgiveness of sin granted in justification is indissolubly connected
   with a forgiving spirit in us, but how there may be many exercises of
   forgiving mercy granted in reward for our forgiving those who trespass
   against us. For none will deny but that there are many acts of divine
   forgiveness towards the saints, that do not presuppose an unjustified
   state immediately preceding that forgiveness. None will deny, that
   saints who never fell from a justified state, yet commit many sins
   which God forgives afterwards, by laying aside his fatherly
   displeasure. This forgiveness may be in reward for our forgiveness,
   without any prejudice to the doctrine that has been maintained, as well
   as other mercies and blessings consequent on justification.

   With respect to the second part of the objection, that relates to the
   different degrees of glory, and the seeming inconsistence there is in
   it, that the degrees of glory in different saints should be greater or
   lesser according to their inherent holiness and good works, and yet,
   that every one's glory should be purchased with the price of the very
   same imputed righteousness,--I answer, That Christ, by his
   righteousness, purchased for every one complete and perfect happiness,
   according to his capacity. But this does not hinder but that the
   saints, being of various capacities, may have various degrees of
   happiness, and yet all their happiness be the fruit of Christ's
   purchase. Indeed it cannot be properly said, that Christ purchased any
   particular degree of happiness, so that the value of Christ's
   righteousness in the sight of God, is sufficient to raise a believer so
   high in happiness, and no higher, and so that if the believer were made
   happier, it would exceed the value of Christ's righteousness; but in
   general, Christ purchased eternal life, or perfect happiness for all,
   according to their several capacities. The saints are as so many
   vessels of different sizes, cast into the sea of happiness, where every
   vessel is full; this Christ purchased for all. But after all, it is
   left to God's sovereign pleasure to determine the largeness of the
   vessel; Christ's righteousness meddles not with this matter. Eph. iv.
   4, 5, 6, 7. "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called
   in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism,"
   &c.--"But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure
   of the gift of Christ." God may dispense in this matter according to
   what rule he pleases, not the less for what Christ has done: he may
   dispense either without condition, or upon what condition he pleases to
   fix. It is evident that Christ's righteousness meddles not with this
   matter; for what Christ did was to fulfill the covenant of works; but
   the covenant of works did not meddle at all with this. If Adam had
   persevered in perfect obedience, he and his posterity would have had
   perfect and full happiness; every one's happiness would have so
   answered his capacity, that he would have been completely blessed; but
   God would have been at liberty to have made some of one capacity, and
   others of another, as he pleased.--The angels have obtained eternal
   life, or a state of confirmed glory, by a covenant of works, whose
   condition was perfect obedience; but yet some are higher in glory than
   others, according to the several capacities that God, according to his
   sovereign pleasure, hath given them. So that it being still left with
   God, notwithstanding the perfect obedience of the second Adam, to fix
   the degree of each one's capacity by what rule he pleases, he hath been
   pleased to fix the degree of capacity, and so of glory, by the
   proportion of the saints' grace and fruitfulness here. He gives higher
   degrees of glory, in reward for higher degrees of holiness and good
   works, because it pleases him; and yet all the happiness of each saint
   is indeed the fruit of the purchase of Christ's obedience. If it had
   been but one man that Christ had obeyed and died for, and it had please
   God to make him of a very large capacity, Christ's perfect obedience
   would have purchased that his capacity should be filled, and then all
   his happiness might properly be said to be the fruit of Christ's
   perfect obedience; though, if he had been of a less capacity, he would
   not have had so much happiness by the same obedience; and yet would
   have had as much as Christ merited for him. Christ's righteousness
   meddles not with the degree of happiness, any otherwise than as he
   merits that it should be full and perfect, according to the capacity;
   and so it may be said to be concerned in the degree of happiness, as
   perfect is a degree with respect to imperfect; but it meddles not with
   the degrees of perfect happiness.

   This matter may be yet better understood, if we consider that Christ
   and the whole church of saints are, as it were, one body, of which he
   is the Head, and they members of different place and capacity: now the
   whole body, head, and members, have communion in Christ's
   righteousness; they are all partakers of the benefit of it; Christ
   himself the Head is rewarded for it, and every member is partaker of
   the benefit and reward. But it does by no means follow, that every part
   should equally partake of the benefit, but every part in proportion to
   its place and capacity; the Head partakes of far more than other parts,
   and the more noble members partake of more than the inferior. As it is
   in a natural body that enjoys perfect health, the head, and the heart,
   and lungs, have a greater share of this health, they have it more
   seated in them, than the hands and feet, because they are parts of
   greater capacity; though the hands and feet are as much in perfect
   health as those nobler parts of the body. So it is in the mystical body
   of Christ, all the members are partakers of the benefit of the Head;
   but it is according to the different capacity and place they have in
   the body; and God determines that place and capacity as he pleases; he
   makes whom he pleases the foot, and whom he pleases the hand, and whom
   he pleases the lungs, &c. 1 Cor. xii. 18. "God hath set the members
   every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him." God
   efficaciously determines the place and capacity of every member, by the
   different degrees of grace and assistance in the improvement of it in
   this world. Those that he intends for the highest place in the body, he
   gives them most of his Spirit, the greatest share of the divine nature,
   the Spirit and nature of Christ Jesus the Head, and that assistance
   whereby they perform the most excellent works, and do most abound in
   them.

   Object. 4. It may be objected against what has been supposed, (viz.
   That rewards are given to our good works, only in consequence of an
   interest in Christ, or in testimony of God's respect to the excellency
   or value of them in his sight, as built on an interest in Christ's
   righteousness already obtained,) That the Scripture speaks of an
   interest in Christ itself, as being given out of respect to our moral
   fitness. Matt. x.37, 38, 39. "He that loveth father or mother more than
   me, is not worthy of me: he that loveth son or daughter more than me,
   is not worthy of me: he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth
   after me, is not worthy of me: he that findeth his life, shall lose
   it," &c. Worthiness here at least signifies a moral fitness, or an
   excellency that recommends. And this place seems to intimate as though
   it were from respect to a moral fitness that men are admitted even to
   an union with Christ, and interest in him; and therefore this
   worthiness cannot be consequent on being in Christ, and by the
   imputation of his worthiness, or from any value that is in us, or in
   our actions in God's sight, as beheld in Christ.

   To this I answer, That though persons when they are accepted, are not
   accepted as worthy, yet when they are rejected, they are rejected as
   unworthy. He that does not love Christ above other things, but treats
   him with such indignity, as to set him below earthly things, shall be
   treated as unworthy of Christ; his unworthiness of Christ, especially
   in that particular, shall be marked against him, and imputed to him.
   And though he be a professing Christian, and live in the enjoyment of
   the gospel, and has been visibly ingrafted into Christ, and admitted as
   one of his disciples, as Judas was; yet he shall be thrust out in
   wrath, as a punishment of his vile treatment of Christ. The
   forementioned words do not imply, that if a man does love Christ above
   father and mother, &c. that he would be worthy; the most they imply is,
   that such a visible Christian shall be treated and thrust out as
   unworthy. He that believes is not received for the worthiness or moral
   fitness of faith; but yet the visible Christian is cast out by God, for
   the unworthiness and moral unfitness of unbelief. A being accepted as
   one of Christ's, is not the reward of believing; but being thrust out
   from being one of Christ's disciples, after a visible admission as
   such, is properly a punishment of unbelief. John iii. 18, 19. "He that
   believeth on him, is not condemned; but he that believeth not, is
   condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
   begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come
   into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their
   deeds were evil." Salvation is promised to faith as a free gift, but
   damnation is threatened to unbelief as a debt, or punishment due to
   unbelief. They who believed while in the wilderness, did not enter into
   Canaan, because of the worthiness of their faith; but God sware in his
   wrath, that they that believed not should not enter in, because of the
   unworthiness of their unbelief. Admitting a soul to an union with
   Christ is an act of free and sovereign grace; but excluding at death,
   and at the day of judgment, those professors of Christianity who have
   had the offers of a Saviour, and enjoyed great privileges as God's
   people, is a judicial proceeding, and a just punishment of their
   unworthy treatment of Christ. The design of this saying of Christ is to
   make them sensible of the unworthiness of their treatment of Christ,
   who professed him to be their Lord and Saviour, and set him below
   father and mother, &c. and not to show the worthiness of loving him
   above father and mother. If a beggar should be offered any great and
   precious gift, but as soon as offered, should trample it under his
   feet, it might be taken from him, as unworthy to have it. Or if a
   malefactor should have his pardon offered him, that he might be freed
   from execution, and should only scoff at it, his pardon might be
   refused him, as unworthy of it; though if he had received it, he would
   not have had it for his worthiness, or as being recommended to it by
   his virtue; for his being a malefactor supposes him unworthy, and its
   being offered him to have it only on accepting, supposes that the king
   looks for no worthiness, nothing in him for which he should bestow
   pardon as a reward. This may teach us how to understand Acts xiii. 46.
   "It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken
   unto you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy
   of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles."

   Object. 5. It is objected against the doctrine of justification by
   faith alone, That repentance is evidently spoken of in Scripture as
   that which is in a special manner the condition of remission of sins;
   but remission of sins is by all allowed to be that wherein
   justification does (at least) in great part consist.

   But it must certainly arise from a misunderstanding of what the
   Scripture says about repentance, to suppose that faith and repentance
   are two distinct things, that in like manner are the conditions of
   justification. For it is most plain from the Scripture, that the
   condition of justification, or that in us by which we are justified, is
   but one, and that is faith. Faith and repentance are not two distinct
   conditions of justification, nor are they two distinct things that
   together make one condition of justification; but faith comprehends the
   whole of that by which we are justified, or by which we come to have an
   interest in Christ, and there is nothing else has a parallel concern
   with it in the affair of our salvation. And this the divines on the
   other side themselves are sensible of, and therefore they suppose that
   the faith the apostle Paul speaks of, which he says we are justified by
   alone, comprehends in it repentance.

   And therefore, in answer to the objection, I would say, That when
   repentance is spoken of in Scripture as the condition of pardon,
   thereby is not intended any particular grace, or act, properly distinct
   from faith, that has a parallel influence with it in the affair of our
   pardon or justification; but by repentance is intended nothing distinct
   from active conversion, (or conversion actively considered,) as it
   respects the term from which. Active conversion is a motion or exercise
   of the mind that respects two terms, viz. sin and God; and by
   repentance is meant this conversion, or active change of the mind, so
   far as it is conversant about the term from which, or about sin. This
   is what the word repentance properly signifies; which, in the original
   of the New Testament, is NOT ENGLISH, and signifies a change of the
   mind, or, which is the same thing, the turning or the conversion of the
   mind. Repentance is this turning, as it respects what is turned from.
   Acts xxvi. 20. "Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I showed unto them of
   Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and
   then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God." Both
   these are the same turning, but only with respect to opposite terms: in
   the former, is expressed the exercise of mind about sin in this
   turning; in the other, the exercise of mind turning towards God.

   If we look over the scriptures that speak of evangelical repentance, we
   shall presently see that repentance is to be understood in this sense;
   as Matt. ix. 13. "I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
   repentance." Luke xiii. 3. "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
   perish." And chap. xv. 7, 10. "There is joy in heaven over one sinner
   that repenteth," i.e. over one sinner that is converted. Acts xi. 18.
   "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life." This
   is said by the Christians of the circumcision at Jerusalem, upon
   Peter's giving an account of the conversion of Cornelius and his
   family, and their embracing the gospel, though Peter had said nothing
   expressly about their sorrow for sin. And again, Acts xvii. 30. "But
   now commandeth all men every where to repent." And Luke xvi. 30. "Nay,
   father Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead, they would
   repent." 2 Pet. iii. 9. "The Lord is not slack concerning his promise,
   as some men count slackness, but is long-suffering to us-ward, not
   willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
   repentance." It is plain that in these and other places, by repentance
   is meant conversion.

   Now it is true, that conversion is the condition of pardon and
   justification: but if it be so, how absurd is it to say, that
   conversion is one condition of justification, and faith another, as
   though they were two distributively distinct and parallel conditions!
   Conversion is the condition of justification, because it is that great
   change by which we are brought from sin to Christ, and by which we
   become believers in him: agreeable to Matt. xxi. 32. "And ye, when ye
   had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him." When
   we are directed to repent, that our sins may be blotted out, it is as
   much as to say, Let your minds and hearts be changed, that your sins
   may be blotted out. But if it be said, Let your hearts be changed, that
   you may be justified; and believe, that you may be justified; does it
   therefore follow, that the heart being changed is one condition of
   justification, and believing another? But our minds must be changed,
   that we may believe, and so may be justified.

   And besides, evangelical repentance, being active conversion, is not to
   be treated of as a particular grace, properly and entirely distinct
   from faith, as by some it seems to have been. What is conversion, but
   the sinful, alienated soul's closing with Christ, or the sinner's being
   brought to believe in Christ? That exercise of soul in conversion that
   respects sin, cannot be excluded out of the nature of faith in Christ:
   there is something in faith, or closing with Christ, that respects sin,
   and that is evangelical repentance. That repentance which in Scripture
   is called, repentance for the remission of sins, is that very principle
   or operation of the mind itself that is called faith, so far as it is
   conversant about sin. Justifying faith in a Mediator is conversant
   about two things: it is conversant about sin or evil to be rejected and
   to be delivered from, and about positive good to be accepted and
   obtained by the Mediator; as conversant about the former of these, it
   is evangelical repentance, or repentance for remission of sins. Surely
   they must be very ignorant, or at least very inconsiderate, of the
   whole tenor of the gospel, who think that the repentance by which
   remission of sins is obtained, can be completed, as to all that is
   essential to it, without any respect to Christ, or application of the
   mind to the Mediator, who alone has made atonement for sin. Surely so
   great a part of salvation as remission of sins, is not to be obtained
   without looking or coming to the great and only Saviour. It is true,
   repentance, in its more general abstracted nature, is only a sorrow for
   sin, and forsaking of it, which is a duty of natural religion; but
   evangelical repentance, or repentance for remission of sins, hath more
   than this essential to it; a dependence of soul on the Mediator for
   deliverance from sin, is of the essence of it.

   That justifying repentance has the nature of faith, seems evident by
   Acts xix. 4. "Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of
   repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
   which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." The latter
   words, "saying unto the people, that they should believe on him," &c.
   are evidently exegetical of the former, and explain how he preached
   repentance for the remission of sins. When it is said, that he preached
   repentance for the remission of sin, saying, that they should believe
   on Christ, it cannot be supposed but that his saying, that they should
   believe on Christ, was intended as directing them what to do that they
   might obtain the remission of sins. So, 2 Tim. ii .25. "In meekness
   instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give
   them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth." That acknowledging
   of the truth which there is in believing, is here spoken of as what is
   retained in repentance. And on the other hand, that faith includes
   repentance in its nature, is evident by the apostle's speaking of sin
   as destroyed in faith, Gal. ii. 18.--In the preceding verses the
   apostle mentions an objection against the doctrine of justification by
   faith alone, viz. that it tends to encourage men in sin, and so to make
   Christ the minister of sin. This objection he rejects and refutes with
   this, "If I build again the things that I destroyed, I make myself a
   transgressor." If sin be destroyed by faith, it must be by repentance
   of sin included in it; for we know that it is our repentance of sin, or
   the NOT ENGLISH , or turning of the mind from sin, that is our
   destroying our sin.

   That in justifying faith which directly respects sin, or the evil to be
   delivered from by the Mediator, is as follows: a sense of our own
   sinfulness, and the hatefulness of it, and a hearty acknowledgement of
   its desert of the threatened punishment, looking to the free mercy of
   God in a Redeemer, for deliverance from it and its punishment.

   Concerning this, here described, three things may be noted: 1. That it
   is the very same with that evangelical repentance to which remission of
   sins is promised in Scripture. 2. That it is of the essence of
   justifying faith, and is the same with that faith, so far as it is
   conversant about evil to be delivered from by the Mediator. 3. That
   this is indeed the proper and peculiar condition of remission of sins.

   1. All of it is essential to evangelical repentance, and is indeed the
   very thing meant by that repentance, to which remission of sins is
   promised in the gospel. As to the former part of the description, viz.
   a sense of our own sinfulness, and hatefulness of it, and a hearty
   acknowledgement of its desert of wrath, none will deny it to be
   included in repentance: but this does not comprehend the whole essence
   of evangelical repentance; but what follows does also properly and
   essentially belong to its nature, looking to the free mercy of God in a
   Redeemer, for deliverance from it, and the punishment of it. That
   repentance to which remission is promised, not only always has this
   with it, but it is contained in it, as what is of the proper nature and
   essence of it: and respect is ever had to this in the nature of
   repentance, whenever remission is promised to it; and it is especially
   from respect to this in the nature of repentance, that it has that
   promise made to it. If this latter part be missing, it fails of the
   nature of that evangelical repentance to which remission of sins is
   promised. If repentance remains in sorrow for sin, and does not reach
   to a looking to the free mercy of God in Christ for pardon, it is not
   that which is the condition of pardon, neither shall pardon be obtained
   by it. Evangelical repentance is an humiliation for sin before God; but
   the sinner never comes and humbles himself before God in any other
   repentance, but that which includes hoping in his mercy for remission:
   if sorrow be not accompanied with that, there will be no coming to God
   in it, but a flying further from him. There is some worship of God in
   justifying repentance; but that is not in any other repentance which
   has not a sense of and faith in the divine mercy to forgive sin; Psalm
   cxxx .4. "There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared."
   The promise of mercy to a true penitent, in Prov. xxviii. 13. is
   expressed in these terms, "Whoso confesseth and forsaketh his sins,
   shall have mercy." But there is faith in God's mercy in that
   confessing. The psalmist, (Psalm xxxii.) speaketh of the blessedness of
   the man whose transgression is forgiven--and whose sin is covered, to
   whom the Lord imputes not sin--says, that while he kept silence his
   bones waxed old: but he acknowledged his sin unto God, his iniquity he
   did not hide; he said, he would confess his transgression to the Lord,
   and then God forgave the iniquity of his sin. The manner of expression
   plainly holds forth, that then he began to encourage himself in the
   mercy of God, but his bones waxed old while he kept silence; and
   therefore the apostle Paul, in the 4th of Romans, brings this instance,
   to confirm the doctrine of justification by faith alone, that he had
   been insisting on. When sin is aright confessed to God, there is always
   faith in that act. That confessing of sin which is joined with despair,
   as in Judas, is not the confession to which the promise is made. In
   Acts ii. 38. the direction given to those who were pricked in their
   heart with a sense of the guilt of sin, was to repent, and be baptized
   in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins. Being
   baptized in the name of Christ for the remission of sins, implied faith
   in Christ for the remission of sins. Repentance for the remission of
   sins was typified of old by the priest's confessing the sins of the
   people over the scape-goat, laying his hands on him, Lev. xvi. 21.
   denoting it is that repentance and confession of sin only that obtains
   remission, which is made over Christ the great sacrifice, and with
   dependence on him. Many other things might be produced from the
   Scripture, that in like manner confirm this point; but these may be
   sufficient.

   2. All the forementioned description is of the essence of justifying
   faith, and not different from it, so far as it is conversant about sin,
   or the evil to be delivered from by the Mediator. For it is doubtless
   of the essence of justifying faith, to embrace Christ as a Saviour from
   sin and its punishment; and all that is contained in that act is
   contained in the nature of faith itself. But in the act of embracing
   Christ as a Saviour from our sin and its punishment, is implied a sense
   of our sinfulness, and a hatred of our sins, or a rejecting them with
   abhorrence, and a sense of our desert of punishment. Embracing Christ
   as a Saviour from sin, implies the contrary act, viz. a rejecting sin.
   If we fly to the light to be delivered from darkness, the same act is
   contrary to darkness, viz. a rejecting of it. In proportion to the
   earnestness with which we embrace Christ as a Saviour from sin, in the
   same proportion is the abhorrence with which we reject sin, in the same
   act. Yea, suppose there be in the nature of faith, as conversant about
   sin, no more than the hearty embracing of Christ as a Saviour from the
   punishment of sin, this act will imply in it the whole of the
   above-mentioned description. It implies a sense of our own sinfulness.
   Certainly in the hearty embracing of a Saviour from the punishment of
   our sinfulness, there is the exercise of a sense that we are sinful. We
   cannot heartily embrace Christ as a Saviour from the punishment of that
   which we are not sensible we are guilty of. There is also in the same
   act, a sense of our desert of the threatened punishment. We cannot
   heartily embrace Christ as a Saviour from that which we are not
   sensible that we have deserved. For if we are not sensible that we have
   deserved the punishment, we shall not be sensible that we have any need
   of a Saviour from it, or, at least, shall not be convinced but that God
   who offers the Saviour, unjustly makes him needful; and we cannot
   heartily embrace such an offer. And further, there is implied in a
   hearty embracing Christ as a Saviour from punishment, not only a
   conviction of conscience, that we have deserved the punishment, such as
   the devils and damned have; but there is a hearty acknowledgment of it,
   with the submission of the soul, so as, with the accord of the heart,
   to own that God might be just in the punishment. If the heart rises
   against the act or judgment of God, in holding us obliged to the
   punishment, when he offers us his Son as a Saviour from the punishment,
   we cannot with the consent of the heart receive him in that character:
   but if persons thus submit to the righteousness of so dreadful a
   punishment of sin, this carries in it a hatred of sin.

   That such a sense of our sinfulness, and utter unworthiness, and desert
   of punishment, belongs to the nature of saving faith, is what the
   Scripture from time to time holds forth; as particularly in Matt. xv.
   26-28. "But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's
   bread, and to cast it to dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs
   eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's table. Then Jesus
   answered, and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith."--And Luke
   vii. 6-9. "The centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord,
   trouble not thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under
   my roof. Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee;
   but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed: for I also am a man
   set under authority," &c.--"When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled
   at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that followed
   him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
   Israel." And also ver. 37, 38. "And behold, a woman in the city, which
   was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's
   house, brought an alabaster-box of ointment, and stood at his feet
   behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe
   them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them
   with the ointment." Together with ver. 50. "He said unto the woman, Thy
   faith hath saved thee; go in peace."

   These things do not necessarily suppose that repentance and faith are
   words of just the same signification; for it is only so much in
   justifying faith as respects the evil to be delivered from by the
   Saviour, that is called repentance. Besides, both repentance and faith,
   take them only in their general nature, are entirely distinct;
   repentance is a sorrow for sin, and forsaking of it; and faith is a
   trusting in God's sufficiency and truth. But faith and repentance, as
   evangelical duties, or justifying faith, and repentance for remission
   of sins, contain more in them, and imply a respect to a mediator, and
   involve each other's nature; [662] though they still bear the name of
   faith and repentance, from those general moral virtues--that
   repentance, which is a duty of natural religion, and that faith, which
   was a duty required under the first covenant--that are contained in
   this evangelical act; which severally appear, when this act is
   considered with respect to its different terms and objects.

   It may be objected here, that the Scripture sometimes mentions faith
   and repentance together, as if they were entirely distinct things; as
   in Mark i. 15. "Repent ye, and believe the gospel." But there is no
   need of understanding these as two distinct conditions of salvation,
   but the words are exegetical one of another. It is to teach us after
   what manner we must repent, viz. as believing the gospel, and after
   what manner we must believe the gospel, viz. as repenting. These words
   no more prove faith and repentance to be entirely distinct, than those
   fore-mentioned, Matt. xxi. 32. "And ye, when ye had seen it, repented
   not afterwards, that ye might believe him." Or those, 2 Tim. ii. 25.
   "If peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of
   the truth." The apostle, in Acts xix. 4. seems to have reference to
   these words of John the Baptist, "John baptized with the baptism of
   repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe," &c.
   where the latter words, as we have already observed, are to explain how
   he preached repentance.

   Another Scripture where faith and repentance are mentioned together, is
   Acts xx. 21. "Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
   repentance towards God, and faith towards the Lord Jesus Christ." It
   may be objected, that in this place, faith and repentance are not only
   spoken of as distinct things, but having distinct objects.

   To this I answer, That faith and repentance, in their general nature,
   are distinct things; and repentance for the remission of sins, or that
   in justifying faith that respects the evil to be delivered from, so far
   as it regards that term, which is what especially denominates it
   repentance, has respect to God as the object, because he is the Being
   offended by sin, and to be reconciled, but that in this justifying act,
   whence it is denominated faith, does more especially respect Christ.
   But let us interpret it how we will, the objection of faith being here
   so distinguished from repentance, is as much of an objection against
   the scheme of those that oppose justification by faith alone, as
   against this scheme; for they hold that the justifying faith the
   apostle Paul speaks of, includes repentance, as has been already
   observed.

   3. This repentance that has been described, is indeed the special
   condition of remission of sins. This seems very evident by the
   Scripture, as particularly, Mark i. 4. "John did baptize in the
   wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of
   sins." So, Luke iii. 3. "And he came into all the country about Jordan,
   preaching the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins." Luke
   xxiv. 47. "And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
   in his name among all nations." Acts v. 31. "Him hath God exalted with
   his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance
   unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins." Chap. ii. 38. "Repent, and be
   baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
   remission of sins." And, chap. iii. 19. "Repent ye therefore, and be
   converted, that your sins may be blotted out." The like is evident by
   Lev. xxvi. 40-42. Job xxxiii. 27, 28. Psal. xxxii. 5. Prov. xxviii. 13.
   Jer. iii. 13. And 1 John i.9. and other places.

   And the reason may be plain from what has been said. We need not wonder
   that what in faith especially respects sin, should be especially the
   condition of remission of sins; or that this motion or exercise of the
   soul, as it rejects and flies from evil, and embraces Christ as a
   Saviour from it, should especially be the condition of being free from
   that evil; and in like manner, as the same principle or motion, as it
   seeks good, and cleaves to Christ as the procurer of that good, should
   be the condition of obtaining that good. Faith with respect to good is
   accepting, and with respect to evil it is rejecting. Yea this rejecting
   evil is itself an act of acceptance; it is accepting freedom or
   separation from that evil; and this freedom or separation is the
   benefit bestowed in remission. No wonder that what in faith immediately
   respects this benefit, and is our acceptance of it, should be the
   special condition of our having it. It is so with respect to all the
   benefits that Christ has purchased. Trusting in God through Christ for
   such a particular benefit that we need, is the special condition of
   obtaining that benefit. When we need protection from enemies, the
   exercise of faith with respect to such a benefit, or trusting in Christ
   for protection from enemies, is especially the way to obtain that
   particular benefit, rather than trusting in Christ for something else;
   and so of any other benefit that might be mentioned. So prayer (which
   is the expression of faith) for a particular mercy needed, is
   especially the way to obtain that mercy. [663] So that no argument can
   be drawn from hence against the doctrine of justification by faith
   alone. And there is that in the nature of repentance, which peculiarly
   tends to establish the contrary of justification by works: for nothing
   so much renounces our own worthiness and excellency, as repentance; the
   very nature of it is to acknowledge our own utter sinfulness and
   unworthiness, and to renounce our own goodness, and all confidence in
   self; and so to trust in the propitiation of the Mediator, and ascribe
   all the glory of forgiveness to him.

   Object. 6. The last objection I shall mention, is that paragraph in the
   3d chapter of James, where persons are said expressly to be justified
   by works: Ver. 21. "Was not Abraham our father justified by works?"
   Ver. 24. "Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
   faith only." Ver. 25. "Was not Rahab the harlot justified by works?"

   In answer to this objection, I would,

   1. Take notice of the great unfairness of the divines that oppose us,
   in the improvement they make of this passage against us. All will
   allow, that in that proposition of St. James, "By works a man is
   justified, and not by faith only," one of the terms, either the word
   faith, or else the word justify, is not to be understood precisely in
   the same sense as the same terms when used by St. Paul; because they
   suppose, as well as we, that it was not the intent of the apostle James
   to contradict St. Paul in that doctrine of justification by faith
   alone, in which he had instructed the churches. But if we understand
   both the terms, as used by each apostle, in precisely the same sense,
   then what one asserts is a precise, direct, and full contradiction of
   the other, the one affirming and the other denying the very same thing.
   So that all the controversy from this text comes to this, viz. which of
   these two terms shall be understood in a diversity from St. Paul. They
   say that it is the word faith; for they suppose, that when the apostle
   Paul uses the word, and makes faith that by which alone we are
   justified, that then by it is understood a compliance with and practice
   of Christianity in general; so as to include all saving christian
   virtue and obedience. But as the apostle James uses the word faith in
   this place, they suppose thereby is to be understood only an assent of
   the understanding to the truth of gospel doctrines, as distinguished
   from good works, and that may exist separate from them, and from all
   saving grace. We, on the other hand, suppose that the word justify is
   to be understood in a different sense from the apostle Paul. So that
   they are forced to go as far in their scheme, in altering the sense of
   terms from Paul's use of them, as we. But yet at the same time that
   they freely vary the sense of the former of them, viz. faith, yet when
   we understand the latter, viz. justify, in a different sense from St.
   Paul, they exclaim against us. What necessity of framing this
   distinction, but only to serve an opinion? At this rate a man may
   maintain any thing, though never so contrary to Scripture, and elude
   the clearest text in the Bible! though they do not show us why we have
   not as good warrant to understand the word justify in a diversity from
   St. Paul, as they the word faith. If the sense of one of the words must
   be varied on either scheme, to make the apostle James's doctrine
   consistent with the apostle Paul's; and if varying the sense of one
   term or the other be all that stands in the way of their agreeing with
   either scheme; and if varying the sense of the latter be in itself as
   fair as of the former, then the text lies as fair for one scheme as the
   other, and can no more fairly be an objection against our scheme than
   theirs. And if so, what becomes of all this great objection from this
   passage in James?

   2. If there be no more difficulty in varying the sense of one of these
   terms than another, from any thing in the text itself, so as to make
   the words suit with either scheme, then certainly that is to be chosen
   that is most agreeable to the current of Scripture, and other places
   where the same matter is more particularly and fully treated of; and
   therefore that we should understand the word justify in this passage of
   James, in a sense in some respects diverse from that in which St. Paul
   uses it. For by what has been already said, it may appear, that there
   is no doctrine in the whole Bible more fully asserted, explained, and
   urged, than the doctrine of justification by faith alone, without any
   of our own righteousness.

   3. There is a very fair interpretation of this passage of St. James, no
   way inconsistent with this doctrine of justification, which I have
   shown that other scriptures abundantly teach, which the words
   themselves will as well allow of, as that which the objectors put upon
   them, and much better agrees with the context; and that is, that works
   are here spoken of as justifying as evidences. A man may be said to be
   justified by that which clears him, or vindicates him, or makes the
   goodness of his cause manifest. When a person has a cause tried in a
   civil court, and is justified or cleared, he may be said in different
   senses to be justified or cleared, by the goodness of his cause, and by
   the goodness of the evidences of it. He may be said to be cleared by
   what evidences his cause to be good; but not in the same sense as he is
   by that which makes his cause to be good. That which renders his cause
   good, is the proper ground of his justification; it is by that that he
   is himself a proper subject of it; but evidences justify, only as they
   manifest that his cause is good in fact, whether they are of such a
   nature as to have any influence to render it so or no. It is by works
   that our cause appears to be good; but by faith our cause not only
   appears to be good, but becomes good; because thereby we are united to
   Christ. That the word justify should be sometimes understood to signify
   the former of these, as well as the latter, is agreeable to the use of
   the word in common speech; as we say such an one stood up to justify
   another, i.e. he endeavoured to show or manifest his cause to be
   good.-And it is certain that the word is sometimes used in this sense
   in Scripture, when speaking of our being justified before God; as where
   it is said, we shall be justified by our words, Matt. xii. 37. "For by
   thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be
   condemned." It cannot be meant that men are accepted before God on the
   account of their words; for God has told us nothing more plainly, than
   that it is the heart that he looks at; and that when he acts as judge
   towards men, in order to justifying or condemning, he tries the heart,
   Jer. xi. 20. "But, O Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that
   triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them; for
   unto thee have I revealed my cause." Psalm vii. 8, 9. "The Lord shall
   judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
   according to mine integrity that is in me. O let the wickedness of the
   wicked come to an end; but establish the just; for the righteous God
   trieth the hearts and reins." Ver. 11. "God judgeth the righteous." And
   many other places to the like purpose. And therefore men can be
   justified by their words, no otherwise than as evidences or
   manifestations of what is in the heart. And it is thus that Christ
   speaks of the words in this very place, as is evident by the context,
   ver. 34, 35. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A
   good man out of the good treasure of the heart," &c. The words, or
   sounds themselves, are neither parts of godliness nor evidences of
   godliness, but as signs of what is inward.

   God himself, when he acts towards men as judge, in order to a
   declarative judgment, makes use of evidences, and so judges men by
   their works. And therefore, at the day of judgment, God will judge men
   according to their works: for though God will stand in no need of
   evidence to inform him what is right, yet it is to be considered, that
   he will then sit in judgment, not as earthly judges do, to find out
   what is right in a cause, but to declare and manifest what is right:
   and therefore the day is called by the apostle, "the day of the
   revelation of the righteous judgment of God." Rom. ii. 5.

   To be justified, is to be approved of and accepted: but a man may be
   said to be approved and accepted in two respects; the one is to be
   approved really, and the other to be approved and accepted
   declaratively. Justification is twofold; it is either the acceptance
   and approbation of the judge itself, or the manifestation of that
   approbation, by a sentence or judgment declared by the judge, either to
   our own consciences, or to the world. If justification be understood in
   the former sense, for the approbation itself, that is only that by
   which we become fit to be approved: but if it be understood in the
   latter sense, for the manifestation of this approbation, it is by
   whatever is a proper evidence of that fitness. In the former, only
   faith is concerned; because it is by that only in us that we become fit
   to be accepted and approved: in the latter, whatever is an evidence of
   our fitness, is alike concerned. And therefore, take justification in
   this sense, and then faith, and all other graces and good works, have a
   common and equal concern in it: for any other grace, or holy act, is
   equally an evidence of a qualification for acceptance or approbation,
   as faith.

   To justify has always, in common speech, signified indifferently,
   either simply approbation, or testifying that approbation; sometimes
   one, and sometimes the other; because they are both the same, only as
   one is outwardly what the other is inwardly. So we, and it may be all
   nations, are wont to give the same name to two things, when one is only
   declarative of the other. Thus sometimes judging, intends only judging
   in our thoughts; at other times, testifying and declaring judgment. So
   such words as justify, condemn, accept, reject, prize, slight, approve,
   renounce, are sometimes put for mental acts, at other times, for an
   outward treatment. So in the sense in which the apostle James seems to
   use the word justify for manifestative justification, a man is
   justified not only by faith, but also by works; as a tree is manifested
   to be good, not only by immediately examining the tree, but also by the
   fruit, [664] Prov. xx. 11. "Even a child is known by his doing, whether
   his work be pure, and whether it be right."

   The drift of the apostle does not require that he should be understood
   in any other sense; for all that he aims at, as appears by a view of
   the context, is to prove that good works are necessary. The error of
   those that he opposed was this, That good works were not necessary to
   salvation; that if they did but believe that there was but one God, and
   that Christ was the Son of God, and the like, and were baptized, they
   were safe, let them live how they would; which doctrine greatly tended
   to licentiousness. The evincing the contrary of this is evidently the
   apostle's scope.

   And that we should understand the apostle, of works justifying as an
   evidence, and in a declarative judgment, is what a due consideration of
   the context will naturally lead us to.-For it is plain, that the
   apostle is here insisting on works, in the quality of a necessary
   manifestation and evidence of faith, or as what the truth of faith is
   made to appear by: as ver. 18. "Show me thy faith without thy works,
   and I will show thee my faith by my works." And when he says, ver. 26.
   "As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
   also." It is much more rational and natural to understand him as
   speaking of works, as the proper signs and evidences of the reality,
   life, and goodness of faith. Not that the very works or actions done
   are properly the life of faith, as the spirit in the body; but it is
   the active, working nature of faith, of which the actions or works done
   are the signs, that is itself the life and spirit of faith. The sign of
   a thing is often in scripture language said to be that thing; as it is
   in that comparison by which the apostle illustrates it. Not the actions
   themselves of a body, are properly the life or spirit of the body; but
   the active nature, of which those actions or motions are the signs, is
   the life of the body. That which makes men pronounce any thing to be
   alive, is, that they observe it has an active operative nature; which
   they observe no otherwise than by the actions or motions which are the
   signs of it. It is plainly the apostle's aim to prove, that if faith
   hath not works, it is a sign that it is not a good sort of faith; which
   would not have been to his purpose, if it was his design to show that
   it is not by faith alone, though of a right sort, that we have
   acceptance with God, but that we are accepted on the account of
   obedience as well as faith. It is evident, by the apostle's reasoning,
   that the necessity of works, is not from their having a parallel
   concern in our salvation with faith; but he speaks of works only as
   related to faith, and expressive of it; which, after all, leaves faith
   the alone fundamental condition, without any thing else having a
   parallel concern with it in this affair; and other things conditions,
   only as several expressions and evidences of it.

   That the apostle speaks of works justifying only as a sign, or
   evidence, and in God's declarative judgment, is further confirmed by
   verse 21. "Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had
   offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?" Here the apostle seems
   plainly to refer to that declarative judgment of God concerning
   Abraham's sincerity, manifested to him, for the peace and assurance of
   his own conscience, after his offering up Isaac his son on the altar,
   Gen. xxii. 12. "Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not
   withheld thy son, thine only son, from me." But here it is plain, and
   expressed in the very words of justification or approbation, that this
   work of Abraham offering up his son on the altar, justified him as an
   evidence. When the apostle James says, we are justified by works, he
   may and ought to be understood in a sense agreeable to the instance he
   brings for the proof of it: but justification in that instance appears
   by the words of justification themselves, to be by works as an
   evidence. And where this instance of Abraham's obedience is elsewhere
   mentioned in the New Testament, it is mentioned as a fruit and evidence
   of his faith. Heb. xi. 17. "By faith Abraham, when he was tried,
   offered up Isaac; and he that had received the promises, offered up his
   only-begotten son."

   And in the other instance when the apostle mentions, ver. 25. "Likewise
   also we not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received
   the messengers, and had sent them out another way?" The apostle refers
   to a declarative judgment, in that particular testimony which was given
   of God's approbation of her as a believer, in directing Joshua to save
   her when the rest of Jericho was destroyed, Josh. vi. 25. "And Joshua
   saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household, and all that
   she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day: because she hid
   the messengers which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho." This was accepted
   as an evidence and expression of her faith. Heb. xi. 31. "By faith the
   harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had
   received the spies with peace." The apostle in saying, "Was not Rahab
   the harlot justified by works?" by the manner of his speaking has
   reference to something in her history; but we have no account in her
   history of any other justification of her but this.

   4. If, notwithstanding, any choose to take justification in St. James's
   precisely as we do in Paul's epistles, for God's acceptance or
   approbation itself, and not any expression of that approbation; what
   has been already said concerning the manner in which acts of
   evangelical obedience are concerned in the affair of our justification,
   affords a very easy, clear, and full answer. For it we take works as
   acts or expressions of faith, they are not excluded; so a man is not
   justified by faith only, but also by works; i.e., he is not justified
   only by faith as a principle in the heart, or in its first and more
   immanent acts, but also by the effective acts of it in life, which are
   the expressions of the life of faith, as the operations and actions of
   the body are of the life of that; agreeable to verse 26.

   What has been said in answer to these objections, may also, I hope,
   abundantly serve for an answer to another objection, often made against
   this doctrine, viz. that it encourages licentiousness in life. For,
   from what has been said, we may see that the Scripture doctrine of
   justification by faith alone, without any manner of goodness or
   excellency of ours, does in no wise diminish either the necessity or
   benefit of a sincere evangelical universal obedience. Man's salvation
   is not only indissolubly connected with obedience, and damnation with
   the want of it, in those who have opportunity for it, but depends upon
   it in many respects. It is the way to salvation, and the necessary
   preparation for it; eternal blessings are bestowed in reward for it,
   and our justification in our own consciences and at the day of
   judgment, depends on it, as the proper evidence of our acceptable
   state; and that even in accepting of us as entitled to life in our
   justification, God has respect to this, as that on which the fitness of
   such an act of justification depends: so that our salvation does as
   truly depend upon it, as if we were justified for the moral excellency
   of it. And besides all this, the degree of our happiness to all
   eternity is suspended on, and determined by, the degree of this. So
   that this gospel-scheme of justification is as far from encouraging
   licentiousness, and contains as much to encourage and excite to strict
   and universal obedience, and the utmost possible eminency of holiness,
   as any scheme that can be devised, and indeed unspeakably more.

   I come now to the

   V. And last thing proposed, which is to consider the "importance of
   this doctrine."

   I know there are many who make as though this controversy was of no
   great importance; that it is chiefly a matter of nice speculation,
   depending on certain subtle distinctions, which many that make use of
   them do not understand themselves; and that the difference is not of
   such consequence as to be worth being zealous about; and that more hurt
   is done by raising disputes about it than good.

   Indeed I am far from thinking that it is of absolute necessity persons
   should understand, and be agreed upon, all the distinctions needful
   particularly to explain and defend this doctrine against all cavils and
   objections. Yet all Christians should strive after an increase of
   knowledge; and none should content themselves without some clear and
   distinct understanding in this point. But we should believe in the
   general, according to the clear and abundant revelations of God's word,
   that it is none of our own excellency, virtue, or righteousness, that
   is the ground of our being received from a state of condemnation into a
   state of acceptance in God's sight, but only Jesus Christ, and his
   righteousness and worthiness, received by faith. This I think to be of
   great importance, at least in application to ourselves; and that for
   the following reasons.

   1. The Scripture treats of this doctrine, as a doctrine of very great
   importance. That there is a certain doctrine of justification by faith,
   in opposition to justification by the works of the law, which the
   apostle Paul insists upon as of the greatest importance, none will
   deny; because there is nothing in the Bible more apparent. The apostle,
   under the infallible conduct of the Spirit of God, thought it worth his
   most strenuous and zealous disputing about and defending. He speaks of
   the contrary doctrine as fatal and ruinous to the souls of men, in the
   latter end of the 9th chapter of Romans, and beginning of the 10th. He
   speaks of it as subversive of the gospel of Christ, and calls it
   another gospel, and says concerning it, if any one, "though an angel
   from heaven, preach it, let him be accursed;" Gal. i. 6-9. compared
   with the following part of the epistle. Certainly we must allow the
   apostles to be good judges of the importance and tendency of doctrines;
   at least the Holy Ghost in them. And doubtless we are safe, and in no
   danger of harshness and censoriousness, if we only follow him, and keep
   close to his express teachings, in what we believe and say of the
   hurtful and pernicious tendency of any error. Why are we to blame, for
   saying what the Bible has taught us to say, or for believing what the
   Holy Ghost has taught us to that end that we might believe it?

   2. The adverse scheme lays another foundation of man's salvation than
   God hath laid. I do not now speak of that ineffectual redemption that
   they suppose to be universal, and what all mankind are equally subjects
   of; but, I say, it lays entirely another foundation of man's actual,
   discriminating salvation, or that salvation wherein true Christians
   differ from wicked men. We suppose the foundations of this to be
   Christ's worthiness and righteousness: on the contrary, that scheme
   supposes it to be men's own virtue; even so, that this is the ground of
   a saving interest in Christ itself. It takes away Christ out of the
   place of the bottom stone, and puts in men's own virtue in the room of
   him: so that Christ himself in the affair of distinguishing actual
   salvation, is laid upon this foundation. And the foundation being so
   different, I leave it to every out to judge whether the difference
   between the two schemes consists only in punctilios of small
   consequence. The foundation being contrary, makes the whole scheme
   exceeding diverse and opposite; the one is a gospel scheme, the other a
   legal one.

   3. It is in this doctrine that the most essential difference lies
   between the covenant of grace and the first covenant. The adverse
   scheme of justification supposes that we are justified by our works, in
   the very same sense wherein man was to have been justified by his works
   under the first covenant. By that covenant our first parents were not
   to have had eternal life given them for any proper merit in their
   obedience; because their perfect obedience was a debt that they owed
   God. Nor was it to be bestowed for any proportion between the dignity
   of their obedience, and the value of the reward; but only it was to be
   bestowed from a regard to a moral fitness in the virtue of their
   obedience, to the reward of God's favour; and a title to eternal life
   was to be given them, as a testimony of God's pleasedness with their
   works, or his regard to the inherent beauty of their virtue. And so it
   is the very same way that those in the adverse scheme suppose that we
   are received into God's special favour now, and to those saving
   benefits that are the testimonies of it. I am sensible the divines of
   that side entirely disclaim the popish doctrine of merit; and are free
   to speak of our utter unworthiness, and the great imperfections of all
   our services. But after all, it is our virtue, imperfect as it is, that
   recommends men to God, by which good men come to have a saving interest
   in Christ, and God's favour, rather than others; and these things are
   bestowed in testimony of God's respect to their goodness. So that
   whether they will allow the term merit or no, yet they hold, that we
   are accepted by our own merit, in the same sense, though not in the
   same degree, as under the first covenant.

   But the great and most distinguishing difference between that covenant
   and the covenant of grace is, that by the covenant of grace we are not
   thus justified by our own works, but only by faith in Jesus Christ. It
   is on this account chiefly that the new covenant deserves the name of a
   covenant of grace, as is evident by Rom. iv. 16. "Therefore it is of
   faith, that it might be by grace." And chap. iii. 20, 24. "Therefore by
   the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
   sight;"-"Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
   that is in Jesus Christ." And chap xi. 6. "And if by grace, then it is
   no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of
   works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work." Gal.
   v.4. "Whosoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from
   grace." And therefore the apostle, in the same epistle to the
   Galatians, speaking of the doctrine of justification by works as
   another gospel, adds, "which is not another," chap. 1. verse 6, 7. It
   is no gospel at all; it is law. It is no covenant of grace, but of
   works; not an evangelical, but a legal doctrine. Certainly that
   doctrine wherein consists the greatest and most essential difference
   between the covenant of grace and the first covenant, must be a
   doctrine of great importance. That doctrine of the gospel by which all
   others it is worthy of the name of gospel, is doubtless a very
   important doctrine of the gospel.

   4. This is the main thing for which fallen men stood in need of divine
   revelation, to teach us how we who have sinned may come to be again
   accepted of God; or, which is the same thing, how the sinner may be
   justified. Something beyond the light of nature is necessary to
   salvation chiefly on this account. Mere natural reason afforded no
   means by which we could come to the knowledge of this, it depending on
   the sovereign pleasure of the Being that we had offended by sin. This
   seems to be the great drift of that revelation which God has given, and
   of all those mysteries it reveals, all those great doctrines that are
   peculiarly doctrines of revelation, and above the light of nature. It
   seems to have been very much on this account, that it was requisite the
   doctrine of the Trinity itself should be revealed to us; that by a
   discovery of the concern of the several divine persons in the great
   affair of our salvation, we might the better understand and see how all
   our dependence in this affair is on God, and our sufficiency all in
   him, and not in ourselves; that he is all in all in this business,
   agreeable to 1 Cor. i. 29-31. "That no flesh should glory in his
   presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that,
   according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
   Lord." What is the gospel, but only the glad tidings of a new way of
   acceptance with God unto life, a way wherein sinners may come to be
   free from the guilt of sin, and obtain a title to eternal life? And if,
   when this way is revealed, it is rejected, and another of man's
   devising be put in the room of it, without doubt, it must be an error
   of great importance, and the apostle might well say it was another
   gospel.

   5. The contrary scheme of justification derogates much from the honour
   of God and the Mediator. I have already shown how it diminishes the
   glory of the Mediator, in ascribing that to man's virtue and goodness,
   which belongs alone to his worthiness and righteousness. By the
   apostle's sense of the matter it renders Christ needless. Gal. v.4.
   "Christ is become of not effect to you, whosoever of you are justified
   by the law." If that scheme of justification be followed in its
   consequences, it utterly overthrows the glory of all the great things
   that have been contrived, and done, and suffered in the work of
   redemption. Gal. ii. 21. "If righteousness come by the law, Christ is
   dead in vain." It has also been already shown how it diminishes the
   glory of divine grace, (which is the attribute God hath especially set
   himself to glorify in the work of redemption,) and so that it greatly
   diminishes the obligation to gratitude in the sinner that is saved.
   Yea, in the sense of the apostle, it makes void the distinguishing
   grace of the gospel. Gal. v. 4. "Whosoever of you are justified by the
   law, are fallen from grace." It diminishes the glory of the grace of
   God and the Redeemer, and proportionably magnifies man. It makes the
   goodness and excellency of fallen man to be something, which I have
   shown are nothing. I have also already shown, that it is contrary to
   the truth of God in the threatening of his holy law, to justify the
   sinner for his virtue. And whether it were contrary to God's truth or
   no, it is a scheme of things very unworthy of God. It supposes that
   God, when about to lift up a poor forlorn malefactor condemned to
   eternal misery for sinning against his Majesty, and to make him
   unspeakably and eternally happy by bestowing his Son and himself upon
   him, as it were, sets all this to gale, for the price of his virtue and
   excellency. I know that those whom we oppose acknowledge, that the
   price is very disproportionate to the benefit bestowed; and say, that
   God's grace is wonderfully manifested in accepting so little virtue,
   and bestowing so glorious a reward for such imperfect righteousness.
   But seeing we are such infinitely sinful and abominable creatures in
   God's sight, and by our infinite guilt have brought ourselves into such
   wretched and deplorable circumstances-and all our righteousnesses are
   nothing, and ten thousand times worse than nothing, if God looks upon
   them as they are in themselves-is it not immensely more worthy of the
   infinite majesty and glory of God, to deliver and make happy such
   wretched vagabonds and captives, without any money or price of theirs,
   or any manner of expectation of excellency or virtue in them, in any
   wise to recommend them? Will it not betray a foolish exalting opinion
   of ourselves, were a mean one of God, to have thought of offering any
   thing of ours, to recommend us to the favour of being brought from
   wallowing, like filthy swine, in the mire of our sins, and from the
   enmity and misery of devils in the lowest hell, to the state of God's
   dear children in the everlasting arms of his love in heavenly glory; or
   to imagine that it is the constitution of God, that we should bring our
   filthy rags, and offer them to him as the price of this?

   6. The opposite scheme does most directly tend to lead men to trust in
   their own righteousness for justification, which is a thing fatal to
   the soul. This is what men are of themselves exceeding prone to do,
   (and that though they are never so much taught the contrary,) through
   the partial and high thoughts they have of themselves, and their
   exceeding dullness of apprehending any such mystery as our being
   accepted for the righteousness of another. But this scheme directly
   teaches men to trust in their own righteousness for justification; in
   that it teaches them that this is indeed what they must be justified
   by, being the way of justification which God himself has appointed. So
   that if a man had naturally no disposition to trust in his own
   righteousness, yet if he embraced this scheme, and acted consistently,
   it would lead him to it. But that trusting in our own righteousness, is
   a thing fatal to the soul, is what the Scripture plainly teaches us. It
   tells us, that it will cause that Christ shall profit us nothing, and
   be of no effect to us, Gal. v. 2-4. For though the apostle speaks there
   particularly of circumcision, yet it is not merely being circumcised,
   but trusting in circumcision as a righteousness, that the apostle has
   respect to. He could not mean, that merely being circumcised would
   render Christ of no profit or effect to a person; for we read that he
   himself, for certain reasons, took Timothy and circumcised him, Acts
   xvi. 3. And the same is evident by the context, and by the rest of the
   epistle. And the apostle speaks of trusting in their own righteousness
   as fatal to the Jews, Rom. ix. 31, 32. "But Israel, which followed
   after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of
   righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as
   it were by the works of the law; for they stumbled at the
   stumbling-stone." Together with chap. x. verse 3. "For they being
   ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
   righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
   God." And this is spoken of as fatal to the Pharisees, in the parable
   of the Pharisee and the publican, which Christ spake to them in order
   lo reprove them for trusting in themselves that they were righteous.
   The design of the parable is to show them, that the very publicans
   shall be justified, rather than they; as appears by the reflection
   Christ makes upon it, Luke xviii. 14. "I tell you, this man went down
   to his house justified rather than the other;" that is, this and not
   the other. The fatal tendency of it might also be proved from its
   inconsistence with the nature of justifying faith, and with the nature
   of that humiliation that the Scripture often speaks of as absolutely
   necessary to salvation; but these scriptures are so express, that it is
   needless to bring any further arguments.

   How far a wonderful and mysterious agency of God's Spirit may so
   influence some men's hearts, that their practice in this regard may be
   contrary to their own principles, so that they shall not trust in their
   own righteousness, though they profess that men are justified by their
   own righteousness--or how far they may believe the doctrine of
   justification by men's own righteousness in general, and yet not
   believe it in a particular application of it to themselves--or how far
   that error which they may have been led into by education, or cunning
   sophistry of others, may yet be indeed contrary to the prevailing
   disposition of their hearts, and contrary to their practice--or how far
   some may seem to maintain a doctrine contrary to this gospel-doctrine
   of justification, that really do not, but only express themselves
   differently from others; or seem to oppose it through their
   misunderstanding of our expressions, or we of theirs, when indeed our
   real sentiments are the same in the main--or may seem to differ more
   than they do, by using terms that are without a precisely fixed and
   determinate meaning--or to be wide in their sentiments from this
   doctrine, for want of a distinct understanding of it; whose hearts, at
   the same time, entirely agree with it, and if once it was clearly
   explained to their understandings, would immediately close with it, and
   embrace it:--how far these things may be, I will not determine; but am
   fully persuaded that great allowances are to be made on these and such
   like accounts, in innumerable instances; though it is manifest, from
   what has been said, that the teaching and propagating contrary
   doctrines and schemes, is of a pernicious and fatal tendency.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [654] "Our Saviour compares his mystical body, that is his church, to a
   vine, which his Father, whom he compares to a husbandman, hath planted;
   John xv. 1 I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. To
   represent to us the union that is betwixt Christ and all true
   Christians, and the influence of grace and spiritual life, which all
   that are united to him do derive and receive from him, he sets it forth
   to us by the resemblance of a vine and branches. As there is a natural
   vital union between the vine and the branches, so there is a spiritual
   union between Christ and true Christians: and this union is the cause
   of our fruitfulness in the works of obedience and a good life. There
   are some indeed that seem to be grafted into Christ by an outward
   profession of Christianity, who yet derive no influence from him, so as
   to bring forth fruit, because they are not vitally united to him"--Dr.
   Tillotson in his 3rd vol. of Serm., p. 307 By this it appears that the
   vital union between Christ and true Christians, which is much more of a
   mystery than the relative union, and necessarily implies it, was not
   thought an unreasonable doctrine by one of the greatest divines on the
   other side of the question in hand.

   [655] The word "union," in this connexion, is both more intelligible
   and more appropriate, than the word relation; since in this connexion
   the latter is the consequence of the former. As the doctrine of a vital
   union to Christ is fundamentally important in Christianity, and
   inseparable from the doctrine of justification; and as our author
   passes it over with so much brevity, a few observations upon it in this
   place may appear the more needful. 1. The Scriptures are not only full
   of the fact, but they abound with illustrations of it. The first part
   of John xv. is full and explicit to this purpose. 2. What the
   Scriptures assert, and illustrate, is abundantly corroborated by the
   reasonableness of the thing. To suppose the reality of vital religion
   without a corresponding vital union, is to suppose an important effect
   without as adequate cause, as shall be further shown 3. The question
   then is, What is the immediate cause of this vital union? Now as the
   union subsisting is between the Spirit of Christ, and man, the
   immediate cause must be in the one or the other of these, or in both at
   the same instant, or in neither. If the immediate cause be in man, he
   makes his approach to Christ either as a carnal or spiritual man, for
   these is no conceivable medium. But the idea of a carnal man uniting
   himself to Christ in order to form a vital union, is both unscriptural
   and unreasonable. It is unscriptural; for the scripture asserts that
   "The carnal mind is enmity against God;" how then can it be the cause
   of a vital union? "Of him are ye in Christ Jesus; "--" and you hath he
   quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; "--it is not therefore
   the carnal man that unites himself to Christ, or quickens himself in
   order to effect it. It is also unreasonable; for it supposes a glorious
   effect without an adequate cause. The effect is spiritual, while the
   cause is carnal, which are not only different but even directly
   opposite. What ideas can be more contradictory, or sentiment more
   unreasonable? 4. The supposition of two simultaneous causes, the one
   being the Spirit of Christ, and the other the carnal man, involves the
   same inconsistency. For how can the mere circumstance of time,
   irrespective of causal influence, make any difference? If the carnal
   mind be adequate to unite itself to Christ at one time, why not at
   another time as well, except some causal influence makes the
   difference? For surely no one can suppose that some individual moment
   of time, as distinguished from others preceding, constitutes the cause
   of difference. powerful, the quickening, and uniting presence, the
   vital and 5 To suppose a spiritual man whether by the exercise of his
   faith or by any other mental act, in the cause of a vital union, is no
   less inconsistent than the former supposition. For how can he be a
   spiritual man, without a spiritual casual influence? But if such
   influence be admitted as a predisposing cause of his vital acts, it is
   incumbent on the objector to show that such casual influence may take
   place without vital union. This I am persuaded no one can do. It is
   contrary to all analogy, and to every sound principle of true
   philosophy. It is contrary to christian experience and revealed
   statements. What effect in physical nature can be produced, which does
   not imply a casual union? Does not the divine energy pervade all second
   causes in the way of union with them, in order to the production of
   their effects? and what miraculous effects have ever been produced
   without a present uniting causal influence to produce the change? For
   instance, when Lazarus came forth from death to life, was there not a
   uniting causual interest to produce the change? and if we appeal to an
   experienced intelligent Christian, will he not own, will he not
   maintain, according to his views of revealed truth, that the
   transforming energy of the Spirit of God or of Christ in him, was the
   cause of his own vitality? Nay, would he not be shocked to hear any one
   maintain the contrary? 6. Perhaps it may be thought, that--though in
   the great laboratory of physical nature, in the bowels of the earth and
   in the surrounding atmosphere, a causal union be necessary to produce
   chemical effects; and that though in all works of mechanism a causal
   union is requisite to the existence of mechanical effects; and that,
   moreover, though the sun by his light and heat produces an effect upon
   objects by a causal union with them; yet, what shall we say of one body
   affecting a change of situation in another, at an immense distance?
   Does not the sun powerfully attract all the planets that surround him,
   however distant? and how can this be by causal union? This objection
   admits of two answers. 7. First, it has never been proved, that there
   is no causal union between these bodies adequate to the effect; while
   on the contrary several philosophers have at least attempted to show
   its existence. The solar system, for ought we know, may be perfectly
   mechanical, though we should never be able to perceive the intermediate
   parts. 8. Secondly, as to the universe in general depends on the causal
   presence of the first cause, so must every part of it; Scripture and
   reason assure us that in god we live, and move, and have our being.
   Therefore, whether there be any intermediate cause of gravitation or
   not, between the effect and the first cause, a causal union is still
   necessary to the effect. What difference there is, lies against the
   objector. For if there be no intermediate cause of gravitation, the
   presence, the energy, the causal union of the first cause is
   proportionally the more immediate. 9. Having shown that neither the
   carnal man nor the spiritual man is the immediate cause of the union
   subsisting between Christ and the Christian, it remains to be
   ascertained, what else is the cause? If it be not man it must be the
   divine spirit, either as the Spirit of the Father or of Christ. In one
   view this difference is not very material, but in another it is of
   considerable importance. Allow it to be from the Holy Spirit, in either
   sense, it secures the great point of salvation by grace, in opposition
   to our own merit. But, as it respects the nature of Christ's mediation,
   and particularly his federal headship and suretiship, it is of moment
   to ascertain, whether he or the Father, economically, be the immediate
   cause of the vital union. 10. The Scripture fully declares that the
   influence of the Spirit on the minds of men is from Christ. The Lord
   from heaven is a quickening Spirit--he quickeneth whom he will--he
   sends the Holy Ghost--he gives repentance, or the spirit of
   repentance--in him was life (without whom nothing was created,) and
   this life is the true light of men--he shines into the heart--his grace
   and strength constitute our sufficiency - &c. These and other passages
   innumerable show, that quickening influence proceeds from his fullness
   of life and grace. 11. That other passages ascribe spiritual effects to
   the Holy Spirit, or the Spirit of God, is of no force, except with such
   as deny the divine nature of Christ, who are confuted on other grounds.
   But supposing his divine nature in union with humanity, the Spirit of
   God is the Spirit of Christ, and vice versa. And in the divine economy
   of grace, Christ is the head or source of influence to the church. It
   is he who gives gifts to the rebellious, who endows with the spirit of
   life, and who bestows the living water to which divine influence is
   compared. 12. And how beautifully consistent must this appear when we
   consider, that as a covenant head he is the surety of his chosen
   people! The office of a surety engages to perform what is requisite in
   behalf of a person or persons as required by another. Thus Jesus not
   only brought in an everlasting righteousness in behalf of his people as
   their federal perfection, in lieu of those who could never attain to it
   by any obedience of their own; but it also belonged to his office to
   secure for them a voluntary, penitential, believing obedience to the
   equitable requisitions of the divine Governor. This can be effected
   only by divine influence, and that influence must needs proceed from
   him as the immediate cause; otherwise we make the creditor and surety
   to be the very same. God, as governor, demands obedience from all the
   subjects of his government; and Christ, as the surety of those who were
   given him, enables them to comply with those demands, that is, to
   submit, to repent, to believe with the heart, to love God, and to walk
   with him. 13. From the premises it follows plainly, that the immediate
   cause of vital union is the spirit of christ, which he bestows in the
   exercise of his office as the federal head of influence, and in virtue
   of his suretiship for his church and people. He as the true vine
   communicates life to the branches, and as the head of his church brings
   dead souls to be his living members. Faith is a fruit of the Spirit,
   and not the cause of a spiritual existence. Yet, 14. We maintain that
   faith forms a consequent union. Man being a subject of moral
   government, and therefore a free agent, at liberty to choose his end
   and means of happiness for which he is accountable; and God in infinite
   mercy proposing Jesus as the way, the truth, and the life; the
   all-sufficient and only Saviour of sinners--in whom we are required to
   believe and to trust with confidence, and whom we are encouraged to
   receive into our hearts, that he may dwell there by faith--the
   regenerate soul, by believing, unites itself to this object. 15. The
   former union is the immediate effect of sovereign favour; the latter
   union is the immediate effect of exercised grace; in the performance of
   an incumbent duty, or the discharge of moral obligation. Now since men
   are exhorted, warned, directed, reasoned, and expostulated with, on the
   ground of what they ought to do or abstain from doing, the Scripture
   abounds with such addresses. But lest any false inferences should be
   drawn, derogatory from the honours of sovereign grace, we are assured
   that every good and perfect gift cometh from the Father of lights. When
   we have done all we are unprofitable servants. Work out your own
   salvation, says Paul, with fear and trembling; for it is God who
   worketh in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. No one
   can come unto me except the Father who hath sent me draw him, that is,
   without divine influence; and whosoever cometh unto me, I will in no
   wise cast out. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Ye are
   saved by grace, through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the
   gift of God. Among many other parts of Scripture where grace and
   obligation are strikingly intermixed, and illustrative of the preceding
   remarks, the reader is particularly referred to the sixth and fifteenth
   chapters of St. John's Gospel. 16. Coroll. The old mode, adopted by
   many orthodox divines, of distinguishing the vital union between Christ
   and his people, first, on his part, and secondly, on their part, is
   founded on Scripture and the reason of the thing; and the former is the
   cause of the latter. And therefore, as the cause must ever precede the
   effect, the first union not only may be prior to the second, as in the
   case of happy infants, but also must be so in the case of adults.-W

   [656] John i. 12.

   [657] John v. 40.

   [658] The term here used, "moral congruity," is not happily chosen.
   Indeed our author, in the next sentence, professes himself to be at a
   loss what terms to use which may clearly convey the necessary
   distinction. By "moral" congruity or fitness he seems to mean personal
   perfection, or a perfection of state personally considered, without
   relation to a surety, or the righteousness which God has provided. But
   this is an acceptation of the term "moral" so unusual as to throw great
   perplexity into the argument. Beside, when contrasted with believing,
   it leaves the reader to suppose that to believe is not a moral act. But
   the supposition that "believing with the heart unto righteousness" is
   not a moral act, as contradistinguished from a natural one, leads to an
   endless confusion of ideas. Surely, to believe God's testimony
   concerning the Son and his righteousness is, if any thing be, a moral
   act of obedience to divine authority. How then can it be called a
   natural fitness only, as contrasted with what is moral? Nor is the
   distinction at all necessary in order to avoid the apprehended
   consequence of assigning to faith any merit of congruity. A few
   observations on this intricate subject may probably assist the reader
   in seeking scriptural and consistent notions. 1. Justification implies
   a charge, a plea, and a virtual declaration of approval. 2. The charge
   against Adam and all his posterity is twofold, including a breach of
   covenant, or a failure in federal perfection; and also disobedience in
   transgressing a divine rule. These considerations are perfectly
   distinct in their nature. A rule may be momentarily transgressed for a
   long series of years, as it was by Adam, and constantly is by his
   rebellious descendants, but a federal failure was, from the nature of
   perfect righteousness, the very first act of delinquency. 3. No plea
   can be valid against a federal delinquency, as was the case in Adam,
   but a participation of a federal perfection. Nothing less can answer
   the charge, and nothing more is requisite. This averts condemnation,
   and entitles to a virtual approval in reference to that part of the
   charge. 4. No plea can be valid against disobedience to divine
   authority, or the rule of moral government, but a personal, voluntary,
   actual compliance with that authoritative rule of government; which we
   find by divine revelation to be, in reference to fallen man, submission
   to the righteousness of God; or, as differently expressed, believing on
   the Son of God, receiving him as the Lord our righteousness, &c. 5. No
   man has possessed a federal perfection, except by imputation, beside
   the first Adam while he obeyed without failure, and the second Adam
   when he completed his work of humiliation. For no eminence of grace in
   a mere descendant of Adam could possibly attain to federal perfection,
   from the very nature of such perfection. Nor indeed can the perfect
   obedience of glorified saints rise higher than a conformity to the
   divine law as a rule; their federal perfection is still derived from
   their union to Christ, and a consequent imputation, which implies a
   virtual approval. Hence, 6. The federal perfection of Messiah is the
   proper and sole ground of an actual interest in reconciliation and
   justification. In other words, the righteousness of Christ, his perfect
   obedience unto death as our substitute, is that alone on account of
   which we can stand before God with acceptance, in reference to the
   charge of a federal failure in Adam. 7. An actual interest in this
   federal perfection is obtained only by a vital or an effectual union to
   the Lord our righteousness. This is plain from Scripture, and is
   perfectly rational. It is compared to the union of a vine and its
   branches, the head and members of the human body, &c. That a
   participation of nature between Christ and us, or an effectual union,
   is requisite for a ground of imputation is evident, not only from
   scriptural comparisons, and the rational consistence of such an idea,
   but also from the fact of the Saviour's incarnation. Without this union
   to us, our sin could not have been imputed to him; and without a vital
   union, his righteousness could not be imputed to us. This is fairly and
   fully implied in many parts of Scripture, as might be shown if
   necessary.--From whence it is plain, that union is the indispensable
   ground of imputation. 8. Whoever is the subject of a vital union to
   Christ, is in a justified state, as partaker of a federal perfection,
   prior to the performance of any moral duty whatever. But in order to
   explain and prove this it is requisite to attend to the following
   particulars. 9. Union to Christ is of two kinds, on his part by his
   spirit; and on our part by faith, as explained in a preceding note. In
   the former, we are passive; and in the latter, we are active. In the
   one he acts as a sovereign dispenser of benefits; in the other we act
   as accountable creatures. 10. By the order both of nature and of time,
   the union begins with him who is a quickening Spirit; and that of faith
   is consequent upon the other, and is the proper effect of it. 11. By
   his uniting act, which may be termed effectual calling, the enmity of
   sin is destroyed in the soul, and the Spirit of Christ is imparted,
   which as occasion offers, will manifest itself as the Spirit of faith,
   or love, &c. Hence, 12. To the soul thus in Christ, whether infant or
   adult, there is no condemnation arising from federal delinquency; for
   this charge is answered by the union on his part; and righteousness is
   imputed. 13. From the premises it follows, that the generally received
   theological maxim is perfectly just and plain, viz. that justification
   and regeneration are simultaneous.--Union is the immediate cause of
   both; and because the one is a relative and the other a vital effect,
   there is no interference as to the order of time. Thus an union of a
   tree and a branch by ingrafture, is attended with two simultaneous
   effects, the one relative and the other vital; it is related to the
   tree as a branch, and at the same time partakes of the vital sap. The
   union, however, must precede both, as to nature and time. 14. But where
   two effects are both real, as distinguished from relative, the one must
   precede the other, both as to nature and time. Thus union precedes
   vitality, and this of necessity must precede vital acts; and
   regeneration, as the act of the Spirit of Christ, must necessarily
   precede believing, which is one mode by which a vital principle
   operates. For to suppose that the operation produces, or is prior to
   the principle, either in nature or in time, is a direct contradiction.
   15. If the preceding steps of these remarks be thoroughly weighed, it
   will be found, that justification, according to Scripture, and just
   reasoning upon it, has for its foundation the federal perfection of
   Messiah, and takes place as the immediate result of union to him. 16.
   But since this union is twofold, the one as the effect of the other,
   that is, union by faith is the effect of union by the Spirit of Christ,
   and these, cause and effect, cannot possibly be simultaneous, there
   must necessarily be a twofold justification as the result of the
   corresponding unions. Though in that union which is first in the order
   of nature and of time, the person, whether infant or adult, is passive;
   the result however is the imputation of righteousness, which is
   Messiah's federal perfection, and which entitles to life eternal. And
   by that union which is the effect of the other, and consequently
   posterior in it in the order both of nature and of time, (and of which
   infants cannot be partakers,) this is, by the union effected by
   believing, the result is the imputation of the same righteousness in
   circumstances totally different. 17. These two different circumstances,
   clearly perceived, will developed the seeming difficulty. In the first,
   the person, whether infant or adult, is the passive possessor of
   decreed benefits, union righteousness, and life; in the second
   circumstance, the adult person, as a free and accountable agent, is
   required to determine for himself on what to found his plea of
   acceptance with God. If he found his plea on his own obedience past or
   intended, whether moral, ceremonial, or both; he shows at once both
   ignorance and rebellion. Ignorance, that he supposes it even possible
   for him, by his own obedience, to attain to that federal perfection
   which is justly required by the righteous Governor; and also in that he
   does not perceive the love and wisdom, the super abounding grace and
   wonderful mercy, of God as a sovereign Benefactor in providing the
   needful remedy. Rebellion, in that he rejects the counsel of God, and
   resists, by obstinate unbelief, the divine authority requiring
   submission to this righteousness as the way to favour and life. Hence,
   18. As all reasonings, expostulations, threats, promises and
   encouragements; all testimonies, declarations, appeals, inducements,
   and sanctions, are addressed to men as moral agents, with whom, in the
   business of accountability, it rests, what mode they will adopt for
   obtaining acceptance with God--whether by doing the work themselves, or
   by believing his testimony and receiving his gift--it fully accounts
   for justification by faith being the great point argued in the
   apostolic writings. 19. And it further appears, that justification by
   faith alone should be strenuously urged by all gospel ministers, while
   they have to do continually with persons whose inquiry is, "What shall
   we do to be saved?" To such as thus inquire after the way of salvation,
   who seek acceptance with God, who are about to choose for themselves
   "the way they will take," what answer can be given, in effect, but what
   is contained in the apostle's words? Romans 4:5 "To him that worketh
   not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
   counted for righteousness." The above statement not only agrees with
   these words, but also, as I humbly conceive, explains their import; and
   the embarrassment respecting the office and influence of faith in
   justification is removed, without expunging faith, or the act of
   believing, from the class of moral duties. 20. It may be objected, if
   there by any justification before believing, then an unbeliever may be
   justified; whereas the Scripture saith, "He that believeth not is
   condemned already." This objecting arises from a mistaken notion of the
   true meaning of such passages of Scripture. Condemnation, in the real
   import of Scripture, is leveled against the rejecters of Christ, or of
   the divine testimony, and these only, considered as free agents in
   seeking acceptance with God and final happiness. These, not believing
   in Christ, while prevailingly devoted to Moses or Mahomet, moral
   obedience or ceremonies, or indeed any other object whatever, reject in
   fact the testimony of God and his righteousness, and expose themselves
   to a double condemnation. They are condemned as being destitute of a
   perfect righteousness, and also for their actual disobedience to the
   divine authority. The sentence of the law is against them both as a
   covenant and as a rule; and the gospel which they reject will be a
   witness to prove the wickedness of their heart. But this can never take
   place in one who is vitally united to Christ. All allow that infants
   not believing are not to be ranked with unbelievers. To them no
   testimony is proposed, and therefore no testimony is rejected by them.
   Nor does any adult united to Christ reject the divine testimony, even
   before he believes. Let but the object of faith be presented to him,
   and his vital union secures the exercise of the living principle
   towards the proposed object in proportion as the terms are understood.
   A testimony not presented, or one presented in an unknown tongue,
   cannot be believed, notwithstanding the principle of faith. The
   existence of a principle does not necessarily imply its exercise,
   whether it be sense, reason, or faith. Men are not necessarily
   conversant with the objects of sense, because they possess the senses
   requisite for these purposes; nor are they always exercising the powers
   of the mind, however essential these powers are to human nature. In
   like manner, not exercising faith is a very different thing from not
   possessing the principle. A vital union and the spirit of faith are
   inseparably and essentially connected; but a vital union and believing
   are connected secundum quid, in certain circumstances. Without the
   circumstances of adult age, or a capacity of understanding, believing
   is impracticable. But how absurd would it be to say, that a sinner
   cannot be justified because he has not arrived at a certain advanced
   portion of understanding, or has not learned some language; as if a
   title to heaven depended on age, or knowing a language! And equally
   absurd is it to suppose that Christ cannot effect a vital union because
   the sinner's voluntary consent to it is wanting; as if God's high
   sovereignty were bound by the human will! That God requires the
   sinner's consent, as a matter of obligation, is a solemn fact; but God
   has not laid himself under any obligation that he will never unite a
   soul to Christ for justification of life but by the sinner's previous
   consent. He has declared, however, that the continued unbeliever, who
   is properly a willful rejecter of Christ and his righteousness, shall
   be condemned. Hence it is evident, that to make believing essential to
   a vital union, on the part of Christ; and to make the exercise of faith
   on a divine testimony essential to its existence, are erroneous
   conclusions, derogatory to gospel grace, and founded on wrong notions
   of moral government. 21. To make this, if possible, still more plain,
   the gospel finds men, as apostatized with Adam, in a state of
   condemnation; infants and adults alike are under the condemnatory
   sentence which is the result of a breach of covenant. This evil can be
   removed, and a restoration to favour be effected, only by an act of
   sovereign grace, whereby Christ becomes vitally united to the soul.
   Without this vital union there is, there can be, no faith. This being
   the case, a vital union is formed before faith can have any ground of
   existence; and consequently a justification which is a necessary result
   of this union takes place. For to him who is thus in Christ Jesus there
   is no condemnation; but he is passed from death unto life, as an object
   of mere grace and mercy. In this respect, an adult and in infant are
   perfectly on a par, while justified and regenerated for the kingdom of
   God. But God, in the character of a moral governor, has a further claim
   on every free agent; he exhibits to the view, and solicits, yea
   demands, a voluntary compliance with the plan of mercy through the
   blessed Redeemer, who was delivered for our offences, and was raised
   again for our justification. The regenerate person that is capable of
   acting for him self, as the subject of commands and invitations,
   complies; he becomes an active recipient of the appointed
   righteousness, which he now pleads in opposition to all charges
   presented against him. By faith, or believing God's testimony, he makes
   his appeal, and by faith alone he is justified. An investigation of the
   rationale of christian doctrines is not necessary for popular use, but
   may be peculiarly useful as a guard against inconsistencies, and a
   means of strengthening our attachment to those doctrines.--W.

   [659] This order, however, is a law to us, and compliance with it
   necessarily imports moral obedience; though the object received is the
   obedience of another. No one has room to expect success in his
   endeavors, but by complying with the divine requisition; and that
   requisition is, that we submit to the perfection of Messiah. And an act
   of submission to the righteousness of faith may well be an act of moral
   excellence, though that excellence has nothing meritorious on account
   of which a perfect righteousness should be imputed. A thing may have
   moral goodness without moral perfection. But in order to deny to faith
   the latter, it is not necessary to deprive it of the former. If we
   consistently maintain, that the moral excellence of faith constitutes
   no part of our justifying righteousness, it is all that the argument
   requires, in order to establish the conclusion intended.--W

   [660] That perfect obedience, is what is called righteousness in the
   New Testament, and that this righteousness, or perfect obedience, is by
   God's fixed unalterable rule the condition of justification, is, from
   the plain evidence of truth, confessed by a certain great man, whom
   nobody will think to be blinded by prejudice in favour of the doctrine
   we are maintaining, and one who did not receive this doctrine. M.
   Locke, in his Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the
   Scriptures, vol. 2 of his works, p. 474, writes thus: "To one that thus
   unbiased reads the Scripture, what Adam fell from, is visible, was the
   state of perfect obedience, which is called justice in the New
   Testament, though the word, which in the original signifies justice, be
   translated righteousness." Ibid. p. 476, 477. "For righteousness, or an
   exact obedience to the law, seems by the Scripture to have a claim of
   right to eternal life; Rom. iv. 4. To him that worketh, i.e., does the
   works of the law, is the reward not reckoned of grace but of debt. - On
   the other side, it seems the unalterable purpose of divine justice,
   that no unrighteous person, no one that is guilty of any breach of the
   law, should be in paradise; but that the wages of sin should be to
   every man, as it was to Adam, an exclusion of him out of that happy
   state of immortality, and bring death upon him. And this is so
   conformable to the eternal and established law of right and wrong, that
   it is spoke of too as it could not be otherwise. - Here then we have
   the standing and fixed measures of life and death; immortality and
   bliss belong to the righteous. Those who have lived in an exact
   conformity to the law of God are out of the reach of death; but an
   exclusion from paradise and loss of immortality, is the portion of
   sinners, of all those who have any way broke that law, and failed of a
   complete obedience to it, by the guilt of any one transgression. And
   thus mankind, by the law, are put upon the issues of life or death, as
   they are righteous or unrighteous, just or unjust, i.e. exact
   performers or transgressors of the law." Again, in p. 477. "The way of
   works then in short is, that law which requires perfect obedience,
   without any remission or abatement; so that by that law a man cannot be
   just or justified, without an exact performance of every tittle. Such a
   perfect obedience in the New Testament, is termed ??????????, which we
   translate righteousness." In which last passage it is also to be noted,
   that Mr. Locke, by the law of works, does not understand the ceremonial
   law, but the covenant of works; as he more fully expresses himself in
   the next paragraph but one. "Where this law of works was to be found,
   the New Testament tells us, viz. in the law delivered by Moses; John
   i.17.The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
   Christ. Chap. vii. 19. Did not Moses give you the law, says our
   Saviour, and yet none of you keep the law? And this is the law which he
   speaks of- verse 28. This do, and thou shalt live. This is that which
   St. Paul so often styles the law, without any other distinction; Rom.
   ii. 13.. Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers
   of the law are justified. It is needless to quote any more places, his
   epistles are all full of it, especially this to the Romans."

   [661] Thus Mr. Locke in his Reasonableness of Christianity, as
   delivered in the Scriptures, vol. 2d of his works, p. 478. "Nay,
   whatever God requires anywhere to be done, without making any allowance
   for faith, that is a part of the law of works. So that forbidding Adam
   to eat of the tree of knowledge, was part of the law of works. Only we
   must take notice here, that some of God's positive commands being for
   peculiar ends, and suited to particular circumstances of times, places,
   and persons, have a limited and only temporary obligation, by virtue of
   God's positive injunction: such was that part of Moses's law which
   concerned the outward worship of political constitution of the Jews,
   and is called the ceremonial and judaical law. Again, p. 479. "Thus
   then, as in the law in short, the civil and ritual part of the law
   delivered by Moses obliges not Christians, though to the Jews it were a
   part of the law of works; it being a part of the law of nature, that
   men ought to obey every positive law of God, whenever he shall please
   to make any such addition to the law of his nature."

   [662] Agreeable to this is what Mr. Locke says in his second
   Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, &c. vol. ii. of his
   works. p. 630, 631. "The believing him therefore to be the Messiah is
   very often, with great reason, put both for faith and repentance too,
   which are sometimes set down singly, where on is put for both, as
   implying the other."

   [663] If repentance justifies, or be that by which we obtain pardon of
   sin any other way than this, it must be either as a virtue or
   righteousness, or something amiable in us; or else it must be, that our
   sorrow and condemning what is past, is accepted as some atonement for
   it; both which are equally contrary to the gospel-doctrine of
   justification by Christ.

   [664] This distinction is just and scriptural as far as it goes, but it
   does not reach the bottom of the difficulty, since believing in order
   to justification is itself a part of obedience, and is expressly called
   "the obedience of faith." Hence justification by faith, in comparison
   of what precedes it, is only manifestative. The tree must be good, that
   is, the person must be vitally united to Christ, as the adequate cause
   of believing, otherwise he would be still carnal. The faith of a man
   spiritually dead or carnal, must needs be a dead faith; but to suppose
   that such faith unites to Christ, has neither Scripture nor any
   plausible reason to support it. To him that is in Christ Jesus by a
   vital union, there is no condemnation; and as there is no medium
   between condemnation and justification, he who is in Christ is
   justified, or "accepted in the beloved" Saviour. That union which
   Christ effects by his quickening Spirit, makes the tree good, and
   believing with the heart, in order to receive the promised
   righteousness, is the fruit of a good tree. Therefore the justification
   which is received as the consequence of believing is only manifestative
   of union; even as justification by works, as asserted by St. James, is
   manifestative of a living faith. As without works there is no
   sufficient evidence of union to Christ on our part, so without faith in
   Christ as our complete righteousness, there is no sufficient evidence
   of union with him on his part. The true Christian's works, are "works
   of faith and labours of love," performed in obedience to God's
   authority, directed to his glory, and inspired by gratitude for the
   blessings of his grace, and this is the first of all such works, called
   "the work of God," even to believe on Jesus Christ in whom alone is
   righteousness and life. By believing we receive the divine testimony
   respecting a gratuitous righteousness, and renounce all hope of
   obtaining justification by any other way. The justifying righteousness
   is only one, but the appointed ways of becoming interested in it are
   divers. One way is by the will of God our Saviour, the other by the
   will of man the accountable agent, each in its own order. The will of
   God gives the fundamental interest, and the will of man the consequent
   and manifestative interest. In the first way, we are interested in
   Christ's righteousness by one act continued, commencing with, and
   permanent as, the primary vital union; in the other way, it is by
   repeated acts, commencing with the first act of faith in Christ, and
   repeated with every succeeding reception of him. Among persons who have
   made any, even the smallest, progress in christian knowledge, there can
   be no dispute respecting the fundamental cause of justification. All
   such acknowledge, that the righteousness, or federal perfection of
   Jesus Christ, is that for the sake of which any of the fallen race of
   Adam can be justified. The difference of sentiment arises from the
   appointed method of obtaining an interest in this meritorious cause.
   For want of consideration, we too hastily infer, that if the Scripture
   states one appointed method, that it must be an exclusive
   appointment.--Hence one pleads from Scripture, and especially St.
   James's epistle, that this appointed method is by works, that is,
   evangelical obedience, of which faith is a leading part. Another pleads
   from Scripture, that it is by faith, not as an act of moral obedience,
   but as a suitable bond of union, to the exclusion of all works. And a
   third, from the same Scripture, pleads, that we are justified by an
   eternal immanent act of God, and that faith only brings us to enjoy a
   privilege which belongs to the elect from eternity. Now each of these
   schemes overlooks the important truth, that the immediate ground of
   justification is the vital union between Christ and the soul.
   Justification from eternity precedes vital union; justification by
   works denies the fact of a vital union being an adequate ground of a
   justifying sentence; and justification by faith alone, or believing in
   Christ, to the exclusion of a prior vital union on the part of the
   Spirit, confounds the work of man and the work of God. This last being
   the most difficult part of the subject, I beg leave to make a few
   observations upon it. 1. The claims of God, in reference to
   justification, are twofold. In the first instance, he claims from a man
   a federal perfection; and in the second instance, he claims compliance
   with his method of bestowing an interest in it. The former claim may be
   answered by the surety, and in fact is answered by his act of a vital
   union on his part. For by this he gives an interest in himself to the
   soul he savingly adopts. Thus there is no condemnation to you that are
   in Christ Jesus. But the latter claim can be answered only by the
   believer himself, when he actually receives Christ as his
   righteousness, and so answers the divine requisition. Thus, he that
   believeth in Christ is justified from all things. In the first
   instance, Christ pleads his own righteousness in behalf of the adopted
   sinner; in the last instance, the believer pleads the same
   righteousness in his own behalf. 2. The obligations of man, in
   reference to justification, are also of two kinds. In the first place,
   he stands obliged to be conformed to the law as a covenant, which
   demands a sinless perfection; and, in the second place, he is obliged
   to conform to the law as a rule. Now whatever God enjoins as a duty, is
   a part of this rule; whether it be to hate sin, to love God, to believe
   in Christ, or to observe whatever Christ hath commanded. Our obligation
   to be conformed to the law as a covenant, is discharged by Christ only
   as our surety; and our ability to discharge our obligation of being
   conformed to the law as a rule is from him. We are obliged to believe
   on him as our justifying righteousness, under pain of God's
   displeasure, but man will ever continue in unbelief until Christ slays
   his enmity, and enables him to believe. But to slay a sinner's enmity,
   to change his nature, or to give him ability to believe, is the effect
   of a vital union; for as there is no such ability without gracious
   influence, so there is no gracious influence without union to the
   source of spiritual life. When thus enabled, man exercises repentance
   towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Receiving him by faith
   alone, as our righteousness and life, the law is obeyed as the voice of
   God, requiring the obedience of faith. 3. The method of mercy, in
   reference to justification, includes the substitution of the Saviour,
   and our acceptance in him, without any works of righteousness on our
   part. In this respect, not by works of righteousness which we have
   done, whether faith, repentance, or any kind of obedience, but
   according to his mercy he saveth us--provides a Saviour and gives us a
   saving interest in him. Grace provides, and grace applies the remedy.
   Mercy imputes to Jesus our sins, and imputes to us his righteousness.
   He who knew no sin was by sovereign mercy made a sin-offering for us,
   that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Mercy laid the
   foundation, and placed us on it, that we might become living stones on
   him; and in consequence find him to be precious. 4. The rule of moral
   government, in reference to justification, is, that we believe on the
   Lord Jesus Christ as the end of the law for righteousness. For this end
   is the gospel proclaimed to all nations, even for "the obedience of
   faith." This is the language of divine government, "He that believeth
   shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be condemned." The
   unbeliever is condemned already, because he rejects the counsel of God,
   and neglects so great salvation. Mercy hath provided an adequate and
   all-sufficient remedy, and government requires our closing with it as
   the only ground of hope left us. An endeavour to set up our own
   obedience instead of the righteousness of Christ, is rebellion against
   the authority of God, and undervaluing his wisdom and grace. None
   deserve condemnation more than those who reject the only remedy. And
   even they who believe have no ground of boasting. For we are saved by
   grace, and justified by faith, and that is not of ourselves, but is the
   gift of God.--The influence of works in justification our author has
   well explained.--W
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE II

   pressing into the kingdom of god.

   luke xvi. 16.

   The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom
   of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.

   In these words two things may be observed: First, Wherein the work and
   office of John the Baptist consisted, viz. in preaching the kingdom of
   God, to prepare the way for its introduction to succeed the law and the
   prophets. By the law and the prophets, in the text, seems to be
   intended the ancient dispensation under the Old Testament, which was
   received from Moses and the prophets. These are said to be until John;
   not that the revelations given by them are out of use since that time,
   but that the state of the church, founded and regulated under God by
   them, the dispensation of which they were the ministers, and wherein
   the church depended mainly on light received from them, fully continued
   till John. He first began to introduce the New-Testament dispensation,
   or gospel-state of the church; which, with its glorious, spiritual, and
   eternal privileges and blessings, is often called the kingdom of
   heaven, or kingdom of God. John the Baptist preached, that the kingdom
   of God was at hand. "Repent," says he, "for the kingdom of heaven is at
   hand:" --"Since that time," says Christ, "the kingdom of God is
   preached." John the Baptist first began to preach it; and then after
   him, Christ and his disciples preached the same. Thus Christ preached,
   Matt. iv. 17. "From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say,
   Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." So the disciples were
   directed to preach, Matt. x. 7. "And, as ye go, preach, saying, the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand." It was not John the Baptist, but Christ,
   that fully brought in, and actually established, this kingdom of God;
   but he, as Christ's forerunner to prepare his way before him, did the
   first thing that was done towards introducing it. The old dispensation
   was abolished, and the new brought in by degrees; as the night
   gradually ceases, and gives place to the increasing day which succeeds
   in its room. First the day-star arises; next follows the light of the
   sun itself, but dimly reflected, in the dawning of the day; but this
   light increases, and shines more and more, and the stars that served
   for light during the foregoing night, gradually go out, and their light
   ceases, as being now needless, till at length the sun rises, and
   enlightens the world by his own direct light, which increases as he
   ascends higher above the horizon, till the day-star itself gradually
   disappears; agreeable to what John says of himself, John iii. 30. "He
   must increase, but I must decrease." John was the forerunner of Christ,
   and harbinger of the gospel-day; much as the morning-star is the
   forerunner of the sun. He had the most honourable office of any of the
   prophets; the other prophets foretold Christ to come, he revealed him
   as already come, and had the honour to be that servant who should come
   immediately before him, and actually introduce him, and even to be the
   instrument concerned in his solemn inauguration, as he was in baptizing
   him. He was the greatest of the prophets that came before Christ, as
   the morning-star is the brightest of all the stars, Matt. xi. 11. He
   came to prepare men's hearts to receive that kingdom of God which
   Christ was about more fully to reveal and erect. Luke i. 17. "To make
   ready a people prepared for the Lord."

   Secondly, We may observe wherein his success appeared, viz. in that
   since he began his ministry, every man pressed into that kingdom of God
   which he preached. The greatness of his success appeared in two things:

   1. In the generalness of it, with regard to the subject, or the persons
   in whom the success appeared; every man. Here is a term of
   universality; but it is not to be taken as universal with regard to
   individuals, but kinds; as such universal terms are often used in
   Scripture. When John reached, there was an extraordinary pouring out of
   the Spirit of God that attended his preaching. An uncommon awakening,
   and concern for salvation, appeared on the minds of all sorts of
   persons; and even in the most unlikely persons, and those from whom
   such a thing might least be expected; as the Pharisees, who were
   exceeding proud, and self-sufficient, and conceited of their own wisdom
   and righteousness, and looked on themselves fit to he teachers of
   others, and used to scorn to be taught; and the Sadducees, who were a
   kind of infidels, that denied any resurrection, angel, or spirit, or
   any future stale. So that John himself seems to be surprised to see
   them come to him, under such concern for their salvation; as in Matt.
   iii. 7. " But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to
   his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned
   you to flee from the wrath to come?" And besides these, the publicans,
   who were some of the most infamous sort of men, came to him, inquiring
   what they should do to be saved. And the soldiers, who were doubtless a
   very profane, loose, and profligate sort of persons, made the same
   inquiry, Luke iii. 12, and 14. "Then came also publicans to be
   baptized, and said

      DISCOURSE I

   justification by faith alone

   Rom. iv. 5.

   But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the
   ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

   The following things may be noted in this verse:

   1. That justification respects a man as ungodly. This is evident by
   these words,--that justifieth the ungodly; which cannot imply less,
   than that God, in the act of justification, has no regard to any thing
   in the person justified, as godliness, or any goodness in him; but that
   immediately before this act, God beholds him only as an ungodly
   creature; so that godliness in the person to be justified is not so
   antecedent to his justification as to be the ground of it. When it is
   said that God justifies the ungodly, it is absurd to suppose that our
   godliness, taken as some goodness in us, is the ground of our
   justification; as, when it is said that Christ gave sight to the blind,
   to suppose that sight was prior to, and the ground of, that act of
   mercy in Christ; or as, if it should be said that such an one by his
   bounty has made a poor man rich, to suppose that it was the wealth of
   this poor man that was the ground of this bounty towards him and was
   the price by which it was procured.

   2. It appears, that by him that worketh not, in this verse, is not
   meant one who merely does not comform to the ceremonial law; because he
   that worketh not and the ungodly, are evidently synonymous expressions,
   or what signify the same, as appears by the manner of their connexion;
   if not, to what purpose is the latter expression, the ungodly, brought
   in? The context gives no other occasion for it, but to show, that by
   the grace of the gospel, God in justification has no regard to any
   godliness of ours. The foregoing verse is, "Now to him that worketh, is
   the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." In that verse, it is
   evident, gospel grace consists in the reward being given without works;
   and in this verse, which immediately follows it, and in sense is
   connected with it, gospel-grace consists in a man's being justified as
   ungodly. By which it is most plain, that by him that worketh not, and
   him that is ungodly, are meant the same thing; and that therefore not
   only works of the ceremonial law are excluded in this business of
   justification, but works of morality and godliness.

   3. It is evident in the words, that by the faith here spoken of, by
   which we are justified, is not meant the same thing as a course of
   obedience or righteousness, since the expression by which the faith is
   here denoted, is believing on him that justifies the ungodly.--They
   that oppose the Solifidians, as they call them, greatly insist on it,
   that we should take the words of Scripture concerning this doctrine in
   their most natural and obvious meaning; and how do they cry out, of our
   clouding this doctrine with obscure metaphors, and unintelligible
   figures of speech? But is this to interpret Scripture according to its
   most obvious meaning, when the Scripture speaks of our believing on him
   that justifies the ungodly, or the breakers of his law, to say, that
   the meaning of it is performing a course of obedience to his law, and
   avoiding the breaches of it? Believing on God as a justifer, certainly
   is a different thing from submitting to God as a lawgiver; especially
   believing on him as a justifier of the ungodly, or rebels against the
   lawgiver.

   4. It is evident that the subject of justification is looked upon as
   destitute of any righteousness in himself, by that expression, it is
   counted or imputed to him for righteousness.--The phrase, as the
   apostle uses it here and in the context, manifestly imports, that God
   of his sovereign grace is pleased, in his dealings with the sinner, so
   to regard one that has no righteousness, that the consequence shall be
   the same as if he had. This however may be from the respect it bears to
   some thing that is indeed righteous. It is plain that this is the force
   of the expression in the preceding verses. In the last verse but one,
   it is manifest, the apostle lays the stress of his argument for the
   free grace of God--from that text of the Old Testament about
   Abraham--on the word counted or imputed; and this is the thing that he
   supposed God to show his grace in, viz. in this counting something for
   righteousness, in his consequential dealings with Abraham, that was no
   righteousness in itself. And in the next verse which immediately
   precedes the text, "Now to him that worketh, is the reward not reckoned
   of grace, but of debt," and word there translated reckoned, is the same
   that in the other verses is rendered imputed, and counted: and it is as
   much as if the apostle had said, "As to him that works, there is no
   need of any gracious reckoning or counting it for righteousness, and
   causing the reward to follow as if it were a righteousness; for if he
   has works, he has that which is a righteousness in itself, to which the
   reward properly belongs." This if further evident by the words that
   follow, Rom. iv. 6., "Even as David also described the blessedness of
   the man unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works." What can
   here be meant by imputing righteousness without works, but imputing
   righteousness to him that has none of his own? Rom. iv. 7, 8. "Saying,
   Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
   covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin." How
   are these words of David to the apostle's purpose? or how do they prove
   any such thing, as that righteousness is imputed without works, unless
   it be because the word imputed is used, and the subject of the
   imputation is mentioned as a sinner, and consequently destitute of a
   moral righteousness? For David says no such thing, as that he is
   forgiven without the works of the ceremonial law; there is no hint of
   the ceremonial law, or reference to it, in the words.---I will
   therefore venture to infer this doctrine from the words, for the
   subject of my present discourse, viz.

   That we are justified only by faith in Christ, and not by any manner of
   virtue or goodness of our own.

   Such an assertion as this, I am sensible, many would be ready to call
   absurd, as betraying a great deal of ignorance, and containing much
   inconsistence; but I desire every one's patience till I have done.

   In handling this doctrine, I would,

   I. Explain the meaning of it, and show how I would be understood by
   such an assertion.

   II. Proceed to the consideration of the evidence of the truth of it.

   III. Show how evangelical obedience is concerned in this affair.

   IV. Answer objections.

   V. Consider the importance of the doctrine.

   I. I would explain the meaning of the doctrine, or show in what sense I
   assert it, and would endeavor to evince the truth of it: which may be
   done in answer to these two inquiries, viz. 1. What is meant by being
   justified? 2. What is meant when it is said, that this is, "by faith
   alone, without any manner of virtue or goodness of our own?"

   First, I would show what justification is, or what I suppose is meant
   in Scripture by being justified.

   A person is said to be justified, when he is approved of God as free
   from the guilt of sin and its deserved punishment, and as having that
   righteousness belonging to him that entitles to the reward of life.
   That we should take the word in such a sense, and understand it as the
   judge's accepting a person as having both a negative and positive
   righteousness belonging to him, and looking on him therefore as not
   only free from any obligation to punishment, but also as just and
   righteous, and so entitled to a positive reward, is not only most
   agreeable to the etymology and natural import of the word, which
   signifies to pass one for righteousness in judgment, but also
   manifestly agreeable to the force of the word as used in Scripture.

   Some suppose that nothing more is intended in Scripture by
   justification, than barely the remission of sins. If so, it is very
   strange, if we consider the nature of the case; for it is most evident,
   and none will deny, that it is with respect to the rule or law of God
   we are under, that we are said in Scripture to be either justified or
   condemned. Now what is it to justify a person as the subject of a law
   or rule, but to judge him as standing right with respect to that rule?
   To justify a person in a particular case, is to approve of him as
   standing right, as subject to the law in that case; and to justify in
   general is to pass him in judgment, as standing right in a state
   correspondent to the law or rule in general: but certainly, in order to
   a person's being looked on as standing right with respect to the rule
   in general, or in a state corresponding with the law of God, more is
   needful than not having the guilt of sin; for whatever that law is,
   whether a new or an old one, doubtless something positive is needed in
   order to its being answered. We are no more justified by the voice of
   the law, or of him that judges according to it, by a mere pardon of
   sin, that Adam, our first surety, was justified by the law, at the
   first point of his existence, before he had fulfilled the obedience of
   the law, or had so much as any trial whether he would fulfill it or no.
   If Adam had finished his course of perfect obedience, he would have
   been justified: and certainly his justification would have implied
   something more than what is merely negative; he would have been
   approved of, as having fulfilled the righteousness of the law, and
   accordingly would have been adjudged to the reward of it. So Christ,
   our second surety, (in whose justification all whose surety he is, are
   virtually justified,) was not justified till he had done the work the
   Father had appointed him, and kept the Father's commandments through
   all trials; and then in his resurrection he was justified. When he had
   been put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, 1 Pet.
   iii. 18., then he that was manifest in the flesh was justified in the
   spirit, 1 Tim. iii. 16.; but God, when he justified him in raising him
   from the dead, did not only release him from his humiliation for sin,
   and acquit him from any further suffering or abasement for it, but
   admitted him to that eternal and immortal life, and to the beginning of
   that exaltation that was the reward of what he had done. And indeed the
   justification of a believer is no other than his being admitted to
   communion in the justification of this head and surety of all
   believers; for as Christ suffered the punishment of sin, not as a
   private person, but as our surety; so when after this suffering he was
   raised from the dead, he was therein justified, not as a private
   person, but as the surety and representative of all that should believe
   in him. So that he was raised again not only for his own, but also for
   our justification, according to the apostle, Rom. iv. 25. "Who was
   delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification."
   And therefore it is that the apostle says, as he does in Rom. viii. 34.
   "Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
   risen again."

   But that a believer's justification implies not only remission of sins,
   or acquittance from the wrath due to it, but also an admittance to a
   title to that glory which is the reward of righteousness, is more
   directly taught in the Scripture, particularly in Rom. v.1, 2. where
   the apostle mentions both these as joint benefits implied in
   justification: "Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
   God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access into
   this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God."
   So remission of sin, and inheritance among them that are sanctified,
   are mentioned together as what are jointly obtained by faith in Christ,
   Acts xxvi. 18. "That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
   inheritance among them that are sanctified, through faith that is in
   me." Both these are without doubt implied in that passing from death to
   life, which Christ speaks of as the fruit of faith, and which he
   opposes to condemnation, John v. 24. "Verily I say unto you, he that
   heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting
   life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
   unto life." I proceed now,

   Secondly, To show what is meant when it is said, that this
   justification is by faith only, and not by any virtue or goodness of
   our own.

   This inquiry may be subdivided into two, viz.

   1. How it is by faith. 2. How it is by faith alone, without any manner
   of goodness of ours.

   1. How justification is by faith.--Here the great difficulty has been
   about the import and force of the particle by, or what is that
   influence that faith has in the affair of justification that is
   expressed in Scripture by being justified by faith.

   Here, if I may humbly express what seems evident to me, though faith be
   indeed the condition of justification so as nothing else is, yet this
   matter is not clearly and sufficiently explained by saying that faith
   is the condition of justification; and that because the word seems
   ambiguous, both in common use, and also as used in divinity. In one
   sense, Christ alone performs the condition of our justification and
   salvation; in another sense, faith is the condition of justification;
   in another sense, other qualifications and acts are conditions of
   salvation and justification too. There seems to be a great deal of
   ambiguity in such expressions as are commonly used, (which yet we are
   forced to use,) such as condition of salvation, what is required in
   order to salvation or justification, the terms of the covenant, and the
   like; and I believe they are understood in very different sense by
   different persons. And besides, as the word condition is very often
   understood in the common use of language, faith is not the only thing
   in us that is the condition of justification; for by the word
   condition, as it is very often (and perhaps most commonly) used, we
   mean any thing that may have the place of a condition in a conditional
   proposition, and as such is truly connected with the consequent,
   especially if the proposition holds both in the affirmative and
   negative, as the condition is either affirmed or denied. If it be that
   with which, or which being supposed, a thing shall be, and without
   which, or it being denied, a thing shall not be, we in such a case call
   it a condition of that thing. But in this sense faith is not the only
   condition of salvation or justification; for there are many things that
   accompany and flow from faith, with which justification shall be, and
   without which it will not be, and therefore are found to be put in
   Scripture in conditional propositions with justification and salvation
   in multitudes of places; such are love to God, and love to our
   brethren, forgiving men their trespasses, and many other good
   qualifications and acts. And there are many other things besides faith,
   which are directly proposed to us, to be pursued or performed by us, in
   order to eternal life, which if they are done, or obtained, we shall
   have eternal life, and if not done, or not obtained, we shall surely
   perish. And if faith was the only condition of justification in this
   sense, I do not apprehend that to say faith was the condition of
   justification, would express the sense of that phrase of Scripture, of
   being justified by faith. There is a difference between being justified
   by a thing, and that thing universally, necessarily, and inseparably
   attending justification; for so do a great many things that we are not
   said to be justified by. It is not the inseparable connexion with
   justification that the Holy Ghost would signify (or that is naturally
   signified) by such a phrase, but some particular influence that faith
   has in the affair, or some certain dependence that effect has on its
   influence.

   Some, aware of this, have supposed, that the influence or dependence
   might well be expressed by faith's being the instrument of our
   justification; which has been misunderstood, and injuriously
   represented, and ridiculed by those that have denied the doctrine of
   justification by faith alone, as though they had supposed faith was
   used as an instrument in the hand of God, whereby he performed and
   brought to pass that act of his, viz. approving and justifying the
   believer. Whereas it was not intended that faith was the instrument
   wherewith God justifies, but the instrument wherewith we receive
   justification; not the instrument wherewith the justifier acts in
   justifying, but wherewith the receiver of justification acts in
   accepting justification. But yet, it must be owned, this is an obscure
   way of speaking, and there must certainly be some impropriety in
   calling it an instrument wherewith we receive or accept justification;
   for the very persons who thus explain the matter, speak of faith as
   being the reception or acceptance itself; and if so, how can it be the
   instrument of reception or acceptance? Certainly there is a difference
   between the act and the instrument. Besides, by their own descriptions
   of faith, Christ, the mediator by whom, and his righteousness by which,
   we are justified, is more directly the object of this acceptance and
   justification, which is the benefit arising there from more indirectly;
   and therefore, if faith be an instrument, it is more properly the
   instrument by which we receive Christ, than the instrument by which we
   receive justification.

   But I humbly conceive we have been ready to look too far to find out
   what that influence of faith in our justification is, or what is that
   dependence of this effect on faith, signified by the expression of
   being justified by faith, overlooking that which is most obviously
   pointed forth in the expression, viz. that (there being a mediator that
   has purchased justification) faith in this mediator is that which
   renders it a meet and suitable thing, in the sight of God, that the
   believer, rather than others, should have this purchased benefit
   assigned to him.--There is this benefit purchased, which God sees it to
   be a more meet and suitable thing that it should be assigned to some
   rather than others, because he sees them differently qualified; that
   qualification wherein the meetness to this benefit, as the case stands,
   consists, is that in us by which we are justified. If Christ had not
   come into the world and died, &c. to purchase justification, no
   qualification whatever in us could render it a meet or fit thing that
   we should be justified. But the case being as it now stands, viz. that
   Christ has actually purchased justification by his own blood for
   infinitely unworthy creatures, there may be certain qualifications
   found in some persons, which, either from the relation it bears to the
   mediator and his merits, or on some other account, is the thing that in
   the sight of God renders it a meet and condecent thing, that they
   should have an interest in this purchased benefit, and of which if any
   are destitute, it renders it an unfit and unsuitable thing that they
   should have it. The wisdom of God in his constitutions doubtless
   appears much in the fitness and beauty of them, so that those things
   are established to be done that are fit to be done, and that those
   things are connected in his constitution that are agreeable one to
   another. So God justifies a believer according to his revealed
   constitution, without doubt, because he sees something in this
   qualification that, as the case stands, renders it a fit thing that
   such should be justified; whether it be because faith is the
   instrument, or as it were the hand, by which he that has purchased
   justification is apprehended and accepted, or because it is the
   acceptance itself, or whatever else. To be justified, is to be approved
   by God as a proper subject of pardon, with a right to eternal life; and
   therefore, when it is said that we are justified by faith, what else
   can be understood by it, than that faith is that by which we are
   rendered approvable, fitly so, and indeed, as the case stands, proper
   subjects of this benefit?

   This is something different from faith being the condition of
   justification, though inseparably connected with justification. So are
   many other things besides faith; and yet nothing in us but faith
   renders it meet that we should have justification assigned to us; as I
   shall presently show in answer to the next inquiry, viz.

   2. How this is said to be by faith alone, without any manner of virtue
   or goodness of our own. This may seem to some to be attended with two
   difficulties, viz. how this can be said to be by faith alone, without
   any virtue or goodness of ours, when faith itself is a virtue, and one
   part of our goodness, and is not only some manner of goodness of ours,
   but is a very excellent qualification, and one chief part of the
   inherent holiness of a Christian? And if it be a part of our inherent
   goodness or excellency (whether it be this part or any other) that
   renders it a condecent or congruous thing that we should have this
   benefit of Christ assigned to us, what is this less than what they mean
   who talk of a merit of congruity? And moreover, if this part of our
   christian holiness qualifies us, in the sight of God, for this benefit
   of Christ, and renders it a fit or meet thing, in his sight, that we
   should have it, why should not other parts of holiness, and conformity
   of God, which are also very excellent, and have as much of the image of
   Christ in them, and are no less lovely in God's eyes, qualify us as
   much, and have as much influence to render us meet, in God's sight, for
   such a benefit as this? Therefore I answer,

   When it is said, that we are not justified by any righteousness or
   goodness of our own, what is meant is, that it is not out of respect to
   the excellency or goodness of any qualifications or acts in us
   whatsoever, that God judges it meet that this benefit of Christ should
   be ours; and it is not, in any wise, on account of any excellency or
   value that there is in faith, that it appears in the sight of God a
   meet thing, that he who believes should have this benefit of Christ
   assigned to him, but purely from the relation faith has to the person
   in whom this benefit is to be had, or as it unites to that mediator, in
   and by whom we are justified. Here, for the greater clearness, I would
   particularly explain myself under several propositions.

   (1.) It is certain that there is some union or relation that the people
   of Christ stand in to him, that is expressed in Scripture, from time to
   time, by being in Christ, and is represented frequently by those
   metaphors of being members of Christ, or being united to him as members
   to the head, and branches to the stock, [665] and is compared to a
   marriage union between husband and wife. I do not now pretend to
   determine of what sort this union is; nor is it necessary to my present
   purpose to enter into any manner of disputes about it. If any are
   disgusted at the word union, as obscure and unintelligible, the word
   relation equally serves my purpose. I do not now desire to determine
   any more about it, than all, of all sorts, will readily allow, viz.
   that there is a peculiar relation between true Christians and Christ,
   which there is not between him and others; and which is signified by
   those metaphorical expressions in Scripture, of being in Christ, being
   members of Christ, &c. [666]

   (2.) This relation or union to Christ, whereby Christians are said to
   be in Christ, (whatever it be,) is the ground of their right to his
   benefits. This needs no proof; the reason of the thing, at first blush,
   demonstrates it. It is exceeding evident also by Scripture, 1 John
   v.12. "He that hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath not the Son,
   hath not life." 1 Cor. i.30. "Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God
   is made unto us-righteousness." First we must be in him, and then he
   will be made righteousness or justification to us. Eph. i.6. "Who hath
   made us accepted in the beloved." Our being in him is the ground or our
   being accepted. So it is in those unions to which the Holy Ghost has
   thought fit to compare this. The union of the members of the body with
   the head, is the ground of their partaking of the life of the head; it
   is the union of the branches to the stock, which is the ground of their
   partaking of the sap and life of the stock; it is the relation of the
   wife to the husband, that is the ground of her joint interest in his
   estate; they are looked upon, in several respects, as one in law. So
   there is a legal union between Christ and true Christians; so that (as
   all except Socinians allow) one, in some respects, is accepted for the
   other by the Supreme Judge.

   (3.) And thus it is that faith is the qualification in any person that
   renders it meet in the sight of God that he should be looked upon as
   having Christ's satisfaction and righteousness belonging to him, viz.
   because it is that in him which, on his part, makes up this union
   between him and Christ. By what has been just now observed, it is a
   person's being, according to scripture phrase, in Christ, that is the
   ground of having his satisfaction and merits belong to him, and a right
   to the benefits procured thereby. The reason of it is plain; it is easy
   to see how our having Christ's merits and benefits belonging to us,
   following from our having (if I may so speak) Christ himself belonging
   to us, or our being united to him. And if so, it must also be easy to
   see how, or in what manner, that in a person, which on his part makes
   up the union between his soul and Christ, should be the thing on the
   account of which God looks on it as meet that he should have Christ's
   merits belonging to him. It is a very different thing for God to assign
   to a particular person a right to Christ's merits and benefits from
   regard to a qualification in him in this respect, from his doing it for
   him out of respect to the value or loveliness of that qualification, or
   as a reward of its excellency.

   As there is nobody but what will allow that there is a peculiar
   relation between Christ and his true disciples, by which they are in
   some sense in Scripture said to be on; so I suppose there is nobody but
   what will allow, that there may be something that the true Christ does
   on his part, whereby he is active in coming into this relation or
   union; some uniting act, or that which is done towards this union or
   relation (or whatever any please to call it) on the Christian's part.
   Now faith I suppose to be this act.

   I do not now pretend to define justifying faith, or to determine
   precisely how much is contained in it, but only to determine thus much
   concerning it, viz. That it is that by which the soul, which before was
   separate and alienated from Christ, unites itself to him, or ceases to
   be any longer in that state of alienation, and comes into that
   forementioned union or relation to him; or to use the scripture phrase,
   it is that by which the soul comes to Christ, and receives him; and
   this is evident by the Scriptures using these very expressions to
   signify faith. John vi. 35-39. "He that cometh to me, shall never
   hunger; and he that believeth on me, shall never thirst. But I said
   unto you, that ye also have seen me and believe not. All that the
   Father giveth me, shall come to me; and him that cometh to me, I will
   in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own
   will, but the will of him that sent me." Ver. 40. "And this is the will
   of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth
   on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last
   day." . Chap. 5.38-40. "Whom he hath sent, him ye believe not. Search
   the Scriptures, for--they are they which testify of me. And ye will not
   come unto me, that ye might have life." Ver. 43, 44. "I am come in my
   Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own
   name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe, which receive honour one
   of another--?" Chap. i.12. "But as many as received him, to them gave
   he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
   name." If it be said that these are obscure figures of speech, which,
   however, they might be well understood of old among those who commonly
   used such metaphors, are with difficulty understood now. I allow, that
   the expressions of receiving Christ and coming to Christ, are
   metaphorical expressions; and if I should allow them to be obscure
   metaphors, yet thus much at least is certainly plain in them, viz. that
   faith is that by which those who before were separated, and at a
   distance from Christ, (that is to say, were not so related and united
   to him as his people are,) cease to be any longer at such a distance,
   and come into that relation and nearness; unless they are so
   unintelligible, that nothing at all can be understood by them.

   God does not give those that believe an union with or an interest in
   the Saviour as a reward for faith, but only because faith is the soul's
   active uniting with Christ, or is itself the very act of unition, on
   their part. God sees it, that in order to an union being established
   between two intelligent active beings or persons, so as that they
   should be looked upon as one, there should be the mutual act of both,
   that each should receive other, as actively joining themselves one to
   another. God, in requiring this in order to an union with Christ as one
   of his people, treats men as reasonable creatures, capable of act and
   choice; and hence sees it fit that they only who are one with Christ by
   their own act, should be looked upon as one in law. What is real in the
   union between Christ and his people, is the foundation of what is
   legal; that is, it is something really in them, and between them,
   uniting them, that is the ground of the suitableness of their being
   accounted as one by the Judge. And if there be any act or qualification
   in believers of that uniting nature, that it is meet on that account
   the Judge should look upon them and accept them as one, no wonder that
   upon the account of the same act or qualification, he should accept the
   satisfaction and merits of the one for the other, as if these were
   their own satisfaction and merits. This necessarily follows, or rather
   is implied.

   And thus it is that faith justifies, or gives an interest in Christ's
   satisfaction and merits, and a right to the benefits procured thereby,
   viz. as it thus makes Christ and the believer one in the acceptance of
   the Supreme Judge. It is by faith that we have a title to eternal life,
   because it is by faith that we have the Son of God, by whom life is.
   The apostle John in these words, 1 John v.12. "He that hath the Son,
   hath life," seems evidently to have respect to those words of Christ of
   which he gives an account in his gospel, . chap. iii. 36. "He that
   believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not
   the Son, shall not see life." And where the Scripture speaks of faith
   as the soul's receiving or coming to Christ, it also speaks of this
   receiving, coming to, or joining with, Christ, as the ground of an
   interest in his benefits. To as many as received him, "to them gave he
   power to become the sons of God. [667] " Ye will not come unto me that
   ye might have life. [668] " And there is a wide difference between its
   being suitable that Christ's satisfaction and merits should be theirs
   who believe, because an interest in that satisfaction and merit is a
   fit reward of faith--or a suitable testimony of God's respect to the
   amiableness and excellency of that grace--and its being suitable that
   Christ's satisfaction and merits should be theirs, because Christ and
   they are so united, that in the eyes of the Judge they may be looked
   upon and taken as one.

   Although, on account of faith in the believer, it is in the sight of
   God fit and congruous, both that he who believes should be looked upon
   as in Christ, and also as having an interest in his merits, in the way
   that has been now explained; yet it appears that this is very wide from
   a merit of congruity, or indeed any moral congruity at all to either.
   [669] There is a twofold fitness to a state; I know not how to give
   them distinguishing names, otherwise than by calling the one a moral,
   and the other a natural fitness. A person has a moral fitness for a
   state, when his moral excellency commends him to it, or when his being
   put into such a good state is but a suitable testimony of regard to the
   moral excellency, or value, or amiableness of any of his qualifications
   or acts. A person has a natural fitness for a state, when it appears
   meet and condecent that he should be in such a state or circumstances,
   only from the natural concord or agreeableness there is between such
   qualifications and such circumstances; not because the qualifications
   are lovely or unlovely, but only because the qualifications and the
   circumstances are like one another, or do in their nature suit and
   agree or unite one to another. And it is on this latter account only
   that God looks on it fit by a natural fitness, that he whose heart
   sincerely unites itself to Christ as his Saviour, should be looked upon
   as united to that Saviour, and so having an interest in him; and not
   from any moral fitness there is between the excellency of such a
   qualification as faith, and such a glorious blessedness as the having
   an interest in Christ. God's bestowing Christ and his benefits on a
   soul in consequence of faith, out of regard only to the natural concord
   there is between such a qualification of a soul, and such an union with
   Christ, and interest in him, makes the case very widely different from
   what it would be, if he bestowed this from regard to any moral
   suitableness. For, in the former case, it is only from God's love of
   order that he bestows these things on the account of faith; in the
   latter, God doth it out of love to the grace of faith itself. God will
   neither look on Christ's merits as ours, nor adjudge his benefits to
   us, till we be in Christ; nor will he look upon us as being in him,
   without an active unition of our hearts and souls to him; because he is
   a wise being, and delights in order, and not in confusion, and that
   things should be together or asunder according to their nature; and his
   making such a constitution is a testimony of his love of order. [670]
   Whereas if it were out of regard to any moral fitness or suitableness
   between faith and such blessedness, it would be a testimony of his love
   to the act or qualification itself. The one supposes this divine
   constitution to be a manifestation of God's regard to the beauty of the
   act of faith; the other only supposes it to be a manifestation of his
   regard to the beauty of that order that there is in uniting those
   things that have a natural agreement, and congruity, and unition of the
   one with the other. Indeed a moral suitableness or fitness to a state
   includes a natural; for, if there be a moral suitableness that a person
   should be in such a state, there is also a natural suitableness; but
   such a natural suitableness as I have described, by no means
   necessarily includes a moral.

   This is plainly what our divines intend when they say, that faith does
   not justify as a work, or a righteousness, viz. that it does not
   justify as a part of our moral goodness or excellency, or that it does
   not justify as man was to have been justified by the covenant of works,
   which was, to have a title to eternal life given to him of God, in
   testimony of his pleasedness with his works, or his regard to the
   inherent excellency and beauty of his obedience. And this is certainly
   what the apostle Paul means, when he so much insists upon it, that we
   are not justified by works, viz. that we are not justified by them as
   good works, or by any goodness, value, or excellency of our works. For
   the proof of this I shall at present mention but one thing, and that
   is, the apostle from time to time speaking of our not being justified
   by works, as the thing that excludes all boasting, Eph. ii. 9. Rom.
   iii. 27. and chap iv. 2. Now which way do works give occasion for
   boasting, but as good? What do men use to boast of, but of something
   they suppose good or excellent? And on what account to they boast of
   any thing, but for the supposed excellency that is in it?

   From these things we may learn in what manner faith is the only
   condition of justification and salvation. For though it be not the only
   condition, so as alone truly to have the place of a condition in an
   hypothetical proposition, in which justification and salvation are the
   consequent, yet it is the condition of justification in a manner
   peculiar to it, and so that nothing else has a parallel influence with
   it; because faith includes the whole act of unition to Christ as a
   Saviour. The entire active uniting of the soul, or the whole of what is
   called coming to Christ, and receiving of him, is called faith in
   Scripture; and however other things may be no less excellent than
   faith, yet it is not the nature of any other graces or virtues directly
   to close with Christ as a mediator, any further than they enter into
   the constitution of justifying faith, and do belong to its nature.

   Thus I have explained my meaning, in asserting it as a doctrine of the
   gospel, that we are justified by faith only, without any manner of
   goodness of our own.

   I now proceed,

   II. To the proof of it; which I shall endeavour to produce in the
   following arguments.

   First, Such is our case, and the state of things, that neither faith,
   nor any other qualifications, or act or course of acts, does or can
   render it suitable that a person should have an interest in the
   Saviour, and so a title to his benefits, on account of any excellency
   therein, or any other way, than as something in him may unite him to
   the Saviour. It is not suitable that God should give fallen man an
   interest in Christ and his merits, as a testimony of his respect to any
   thing whatsoever as a loveliness in him; and that because it is not
   meet, till a sinner is actually justified, that any thing in him should
   be accepted of God, as any excellency or amiableness of his person; or
   that God, by any act, should in any manner or degree testify any
   pleasedness with him, or favour towards him, on the account of any
   thing inherent in him: and that for two reasons:

   1. The nature of things will not admit of it. And this appears from the
   infinite guilt that the sinner till justified is under; which arises
   from the infinite evil or heinousness of sin. But because that is what
   some deny, I would therefore first establish that point, and show that
   sin is a thing that is indeed properly of infinite heinousness; and
   then show the consequence, that it cannot be suitable, till the sinner
   is actually justified, that God should by any act testify pleasedness
   with or acceptance of any excellency or amiableness of his person.

   That the evil and demerit of sin is infinitely great, is most
   demonstrably evident, because what the evil or iniquity of sin consists
   in, is the violating of an obligation, or doing what we should not do;
   and therefore by how much the greater the obligation is that is
   violated, by so much the greater is the iniquity of the violation. But
   certainly our obligation to love or honour any being is great in
   proportion to the greatness or excellency of that being, or his
   worthiness to be loved and honoured. We are under greater obligations
   to love a more lovely being than a less lovely; and if a being be
   infinitely excellent or lovely, our obligations to love him are therein
   infinitely great. The matter is so plain, it seems needless to say much
   about it.

   Some have argued exceeding strangely against the infinite evil of sin,
   from its being committed against an infinite object, that then it may
   as well be argued, that there is also an infinite value or worthiness
   in holiness and love to God, because that also has an infinite object;
   whereas the argument, from parity of reason, will carry it in the
   reverse. The sin of the creature against God is ill deserving in
   proportion to the distance there is between God and the creature; the
   greatness of the object, and the meanness of the subject, aggravates
   it. But it is the reverse with regard to the worthiness of the respect
   of the creature to God; it is worthless (and not worthy) in proportion
   to the meanness of the subject. So much the greater the distance
   between God and the creature, so much the less is the creature's
   respect worthy of God's notice or regard. The unworthiness of sin or
   opposition to God rises and is great in proportion to the dignity of
   the object and inferiority of the subject; but on the contrary, the
   value of respect rises in proportion to the value of the subject; and
   that for this plain reason, viz. that the evil of disrespect is in
   proportion to the obligation that lies upon the subject to the object;
   which obligation is most evidently increased by the excellency and
   superiority of the object. But on the contrary, the worthiness of
   respect to a being is in proportion to the obligation that lies on him
   who is the object, (or rather the reason he has,) to regard the
   subject, which certainly is in proportion to the subject's value or
   excellency. Sin or disrespect is evil or heinous in proportion to the
   degree of what it denies in the object, and as it were takes from it,
   viz. its excellency and worthiness of respect; on the contrary, respect
   is valuable in proportion to the value of what is given to the object
   in that respect, which undoubtedly (other things being equal) is great
   in proportion to the subject's value, or worthiness of regard; because
   the subject in giving his respect, can give no more than himself: so
   far as he gives his respect, he gives himself to the object; and
   therefore his gift is of greater or lesser value in proportion to the
   value of himself.

   Hence, (by the way,) the love, honour, and obedience of Christ towards
   God, has infinite value, from the excellency and dignity of the person
   in whom these qualifications were inherent; and the reason why we
   needed a person of infinite dignity to obey for us, was because of our
   infinite comparative meanness, who had disobeyed, whereby our
   disobedience was infinitely aggravated. We needed one, the worthiness
   of whose obedience might be answerable to the unworthiness of our
   disobedience; and therefore needed one who was as great and worthy as
   we were unworthy.

   Another objection (that perhaps may be thought hardly worth mentioning)
   is, that to suppose sin to be infinitely heinous, is to make all sins
   equally heinous; for how can any sin be more than infinitely heinous?
   But all that can be argued hence is, that no sin can be greater with
   respect to that aggravation, the worthiness of the object against whom
   it is committed. One sin cannot be more aggravated than another in that
   respect, because the aggravation of every sin is infinite; but that
   does not hinder, that some sins may be more heinous than others in
   other respects: as if we should suppose a cylinder infinitely long, it
   cannot be greater in that respect, viz. with respect to the length of
   it; but yet it may be doubled and trebled, and made a thousand-fold
   more, by the increase of other dimensions. Of sins that are all
   infinitely heinous, some may be more heinous than others; as well as of
   divers punishments that are all infinitely dreadful calamities, so that
   there is no finite calamity, however great, but what is infinitely less
   dreadful, or more eligible, than any of them, yet some of them may be a
   thousand times more dreadful than others. A punishment may be
   infinitely dreadful by reason of the infinite duration of it; and
   therefore cannot be greater with respect to that aggravation of it,
   viz. its length of continuance, but yet may be vastly more terrible on
   other accounts.

   Having thus, as I imagine, made it clear, that all sin is infinitely
   heinous, and consequently that the sinner, before he is justified, is
   under infinite guilt in God's sight; it now remains that I show the
   consequences, or how it follows from hence, that it is not suitable
   that God should give the sinner an interest in Christ's merits, and so
   a title to his benefits, from regard to any qualifications, or act, or
   course of acts in him, on the account of any excellency or goodness
   whatsoever therein, but only as uniting to Christ; or (which fully
   implies it) that it is not suitable that God, by any act, should, in
   any manner or degree, testify any acceptance of, or pleasedness with,
   any thing, as any virtue, or excellency, or any part of loveliness, or
   valuableness in his person, until he is actually already interested in
   Christ's merits. From the premises it follows, that before the sinner
   is already interested in Christ, and justified, it is impossible God
   should have any acceptance of or pleasedness with the person of the
   sinner, as in any degree lovely in his sight, or indeed less the object
   of his displeasure and wrath. For, by the supposition, the sinner still
   remains infinitely guilty in the sight of God; for guilt is not removed
   but by pardon: but to suppose the sinner already pardoned, is to
   suppose him already justified; which is contrary to the supposition.
   But if the sinner still remains infinitely guilty in God's sight, that
   is the same thing as still to be beheld of God as infinitely the object
   of his displeasure and wrath, or infinitely hateful in his eyes; and if
   so, where is any room for any thing in him, to be accepted as some
   valuableness or acceptableness of him in God's sight, or for any act of
   favour of any kind towards him, or any gift whatsoever to him, in
   testimony of God's respect to an acceptance of something of him lovely
   and pleasing? If we should suppose that a sinner could have faith, or
   some other grace in his heart, and yet remain separate from Christ; and
   that he is not looked upon as being in Christ, or having any relation
   to him, it would not be meet that such true grace should be accepted of
   God as any loveliness of his person in the sight of God. If it should
   be accepted as the loveliness of the person as in some degree lovely to
   God; but this cannot be consistent with his still remaining under
   infinite guilt, or infinite unworthiness in God's sight, which that
   goodness has no worthiness to balance. While God beholds the man as
   separate from Christ, he must behold him as he is in himself; and so
   his goodness cannot be beheld by God, but as taken with his guilt and
   hatefulness, and as put in the scales with it; an so his goodness is
   nothing; because there is a finite on the balance against an infinite
   whose proportion to it is nothing. In such a case, if the man be looked
   on as he is in himself, the excess of the weight in one scale above
   another, must be looked upon as the quality of the man. These
   contraries being beheld together, one takes from another, as one number
   is subtracted from another; and the man must be looked upon in God's
   sight according to the remainder. For here, by the supposition, all
   acts of grace or favour, in not imputing the guilt as it is, are
   excluded, because that supposes a degree of pardon, and that supposes
   justification, which is contrary to what is supposed, viz. that the
   sinner is not already justified; and therefore things must be taken
   strictly as they are; and so the man is still infinitely unworthy and
   hateful in God's sight, and he was before, without diminution, because
   his goodness bears no proportion to his unworthiness, and therefore
   when taken together is nothing.

   Hence may be more clearly seen the force of that expression in the
   text, of believing on him that justifieth the ungodly; for though there
   is indeed something in man that is really and spiritually good, prior
   to justification, yet there is nothing that is accepted as any
   godliness or excellency of the person, till after justification.
   Goodness or loveliness of the person in the acceptance of God, in any
   degree, is not to be considered as prior but posterior in the order and
   method of God's proceeding in this affair. Though a respect to the
   natural suitableness between such a qualification, and such a state,
   does go before justification, yet the acceptance even of faith, as any
   goodness or loveliness of the believer, follows justification. The
   goodness is on the forementioned account justly looked upon as nothing,
   until the man is justified; and therefore the man is respected in
   justification, as in himself altogether hateful.-Thus, the nature of
   things will not admit of a man having an interest given him in the
   merits or benefits of a Saviour, on the account of any thing as a
   righteousness, or a virtue, or excellency in him.

   2. A divine constitution antecedent to that which establishes
   justification by a Saviour, (and indeed to any need of a Saviour,)
   stands in the way of it, viz. that original constitution or law which
   man was put under; by which constitution or law the sinner is
   condemned, till he has actually an interest in the Saviour, through
   whom he is set at liberty from that condemnation. But to suppose that
   God gives a man an interest in Christ in reward for his righteousness
   or virtue, is inconsistent with his still remaining under condemnation
   till he has an interest in Christ; because he supposes, that the
   sinner's virtue is accepted, and he accepted for it, before he has an
   interest in Christ; inasmuch as an interest in Christ is given as a
   reward of his virtue. But the virtue must first be accepted, before it
   is rewarded, and the man must first be accepted for his virtue, before
   he is rewarded for it with so great and glorious a reward; for the very
   notion of a reward, is some good bestowed in testimony of respect to
   and acceptance of virtue in the person rewarded. It does not consist
   with the honour of the majesty of the King of heaven and earth, to
   accept of any thing from a condemned malefactor, condemned by the
   justice of his own holy law, till that condemnation be removed. And
   then, such acceptance is inconsistent with, and contradictory to, such
   remaining condemnation; for the law condemns him that violates it, to
   be totally rejected and case off by God. But how can a man continue
   under this condemnation, i.e. continue utterly rejected and case off by
   God. But how can a man continue under this condemnation, i.e. continue
   utterly rejected and case off by God, and yet his righteousness or
   virtue be accepted, and he himself accepted on the account of it, so as
   to have so glorious a reward as an interest in Christ bestowed as a
   testimony of that acceptance?

   I know that the answer will be, that we now are not subject to that
   constitution which mankind were at first put under; but that God, in
   mercy to mankind, has abolished that rigorous constitution, and put us
   under a new law, and introduced a more mild constitution; and that the
   constitution or law itself not remaining, there is no need of supposing
   that the condemnation of it remains, to stand in the way of the
   acceptance of our virtue. And indeed there is no other way of avoiding
   this difficulty. The condemnation of the law must stand in force
   against man, till he is actually interested in the Saviour who has
   satisfied and answered the law, so as effectually to prevent any
   acceptance of his virtue, either before, or even in order to, such an
   interest, unless the law or constitution itself be abolished. But the
   scheme of those modern divines by whom this is maintained, seems to
   contain a great deal of absurdity and self-contradiction: they hold,
   that the old law given to Adam, which requires perfect obedience, is
   entirely repealed, and that instead of it we are put under a new law,
   which requires no more than imperfect sincere obedience, in compliance
   with our poor, infirm, impotent circumstances since the fall, whereby
   we are unable to perform that perfect obedience that was required by
   the first law; for they strenuously maintain, that it would be unjust
   in God to require any thing of us that is beyond our present power and
   ability to perform; and yet they hold, that Christ died to satisfy for
   the imperfections of our obedience, that so our imperfect obedience
   might be accepted instead of perfect. Now, how can these things hang
   together? I would ask, What law these imperfections of our obedience
   are a breach of? If they are not a breach of no law, then they are not
   sins; and if they be not sins, what need of Christ's dying to satisfy
   for them? but if they are sins, and so the breach of some law, what law
   is it? They cannot be a breach of their new law, for that requires no
   other than imperfect obedience, or obedience with imperfections; and
   they cannot be a breach of the old law, for that they say is entirely
   abolished, and we never were under it; and we cannot break a law that
   we never were under. They say it would not be just in God to exact of
   us perfect obedience, because it would not be just in God to require
   more of us than we can perform in our present state, and to punish us
   for failing of it; and therefore, by their own scheme, the
   imperfections of our obedience do not deserve to be punished. What need
   therefore of Christ's dying to satisfy for them? What need of Christ's
   suffering to satisfy for that which is no fault, and in its own nature
   deserves no suffering? What need of Christ's dying to purchase that our
   imperfect obedience should be accepted, when according to their scheme
   it would be unjust in itself that any other obedience than imperfect
   should be required? What need of Christ's dying to make way for God's
   accepting such an obedience, as it would in itself be unjust in him not
   to accept? Is there any need of Christ's dying to persuade God not to
   do unjustly? If it be said, that Christ died to satisfy that law for
   us, that so we might not be under that law, but might be delivered from
   it, that so there might be room for us to be under a more mild law;
   still I would inquire, What need of Christ's dying that we might not be
   under a law that (according to their scheme) it would in itself be
   unjust that we should be under, because in our present state we are not
   able to keep it? What need of Christ's dying that we might not be under
   a law that it would be unjust that we should be under, whether Christ
   died or no?

   Thus far I have argued principally from reason, and the nature of
   things:--I proceed now to the

   Second argument, which is, That this is a doctrine which the Holy
   Scriptures, the revelation that God has given us of his mind and
   will--by which alone we can never come to know how those who have
   offended God can come to be accepted of him, and justified in his
   sight--is exceeding full. The apostle Paul is abundant in teaching,
   that "we are justified by faith alone, without the works of the law!"
   There is no one doctrine that he insists so much upon, and that he
   handles with so much distinctness, explaining, giving reasons, and
   answering objections.

   Here it is not denied by any, that the apostle does assert, that we are
   justified by faith, without the works of the law, because the words are
   express; but only it is said that we take his words wrong, and
   understand that by them that never entered into his heart, in that when
   he excludes the works of the law, we understand him of the whole law of
   God, or the rule which he has given to mankind to walk by; whereas all
   that he intends is the ceremonial.

   Some that oppose this doctrine indeed say, that the apostle sometimes
   means that it is by faith, i.e. a hearty embracing the gospel in its
   first act only, or without any preceding holy life, that persons are
   admitted into a justified state; but, say they, it is by a persevering
   obedience that they are continued in a justified state, and it is by
   this that they are finally justified. But this is the same thing as to
   say, that a man on his first embracing the gospel is conditionally
   justified and pardoned. To pardon sin, is to free the sinner from the
   punishment of it, or from that eternal misery that is due to it; and
   therefore if a person is pardoned, or freed from this misery, on his
   first embracing the gospel, and yet not finally freed, but his actual
   freedom still depends on some condition yet to be performed, it is
   inconceivable how he can be pardoned otherwise than conditionally; that
   is, he is not properly actually pardoned, and freed from punishment,
   but only he has God's promise that he shall be pardoned on future
   conditions. God promises him, that now, if he perseveres in obedience,
   he shall be finally pardoned, or actually freed from hell; which is to
   make just nothing at all of the apostle's great doctrine of
   justification by faith alone. Such a conditional pardon is no pardon or
   justification at all, any more than all mankind have, whether they
   embrace the gospel or no; for they all have a promise of final
   justification on conditions of future sincere obedience, as much as he
   that embraces the gospel. But not to dispute about this, we will
   suppose that there may be something or other at the sinner's first
   embracing the gospel, that may properly be called justification or
   pardon, and yet that final justification, or real freedom from the
   punishment of sin, is still suspended on conditions hitherto
   unfulfilled; yet they who hold that sinners are thus justified on
   embracing the gospel, suppose that they are justified by this, no
   otherwise than as it is a leading act of obedience, or at least as
   virtue and moral goodness in them, and therefore would be excluded by
   the apostle as much as any other virtue or obedience, if it be allowed
   that he means the moral law, when he excludes works of the law. And
   therefore, if that point be yielded, that the apostle means the moral,
   and not only the ceremonial, law, their whole scheme falls to the
   ground.

   And because the issue of the whole argument from those texts in St.
   Paul's epistles depends on the determination of this point, I would be
   particular in the discussion of it.

   Some of our opponents in this doctrine of justification, when they
   deny, that by the law the apostle means the moral law, or the whole
   rule of life which God has given to mankind, seem to choose to express
   themselves thus, that the apostle only intends the Mosaic dispensation.
   But this comes to just the same thing as if they said, that the apostle
   only means to exclude the works of the ceremonial law; for when they
   say, that it is intended only that we are not justified by the works of
   the Mosaic dispensation, if they mean any thing by it, it must be, that
   we are not justified by attending and observing what is Mosaic in that
   dispensation, or by what was peculiar to it, and wherein it differed
   from the christian dispensation; which is the same as that which is
   ceremonial and positive, and not moral, in that administration. So that
   this is what I have to disprove, viz. that the apostle, when he speaks
   of works of the law in this affair, means only works of the ceremonial
   law, or those observances that were peculiar to the Mosaic
   administration.

   And here it must be noted, that nobody controverts it with them,
   whether the works of the ceremonial law be not included, or whether the
   apostle does not particularly argue against justification by
   circumcision, and other ceremonial observances; but all in question is,
   whether, when he denies justification by works of the law, he is to be
   understood only of the ceremonial law, or whether the moral law be not
   also implied and intended; and therefore those arguments which are
   brought to prove that the apostle meant the ceremonial law, are nothing
   to the purpose, unless they prove that the apostle meant those only.

   What is much insisted on is, that it was the judaizing Christians being
   so fond of circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law, and depending
   so much on them, which was the very occasion of the apostle's writing
   as he does against justification by the works of the law. But supposing
   it were so, that their trusting in works of the ceremonial law were the
   sole occasion of the apostle's writing, (which yet there is no reason
   to allow, as may appear afterwards,) if their trusting in a particular
   work, as a work of righteousness, was all that gave occasion to the
   apostle to write, how does it follow, that therefore the apostle did
   not upon that occasion write against trusting in all works of
   righteousness whatsoever? Where is the absurdity of supposing that the
   apostle might take occasion, from his observing some to trust in a
   certain work as a work of righteousness, to write to them against
   persons trusting in any works or righteousness at all, and that it was
   a very proper occasion too? Yea, it would have been unavoidable for the
   apostle to have argued against trusting in a particular work, in the
   quality of a work of righteousness, which quality was general, but he
   must therein argue against trusting in works of righteousness in
   general. Supposing it had been some other particular sort of works that
   was the occasion of the apostle's writing, as for instance, works of
   charity, and the apostle should hence take occasion to write to them
   not to trust in their works, could the apostle by that be understood of
   no other works besides works of charity? Would it have been absurd to
   understand him as writing against trusting in any work at all, because
   it was their trusting to a particular work that gave occasion to his
   writing?

   Another thing alleged, as an evidence that the apostle means the
   ceremonial law--when he says, we cannot be justified by the works of
   the law--is, that he uses this argument to prove it, viz. that the law
   he speaks of was given so long after the covenant with Abraham, in Gal.
   iii. 17. "And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before
   of God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years
   after, cannot disannul." But, say they, it was only the Mosaic
   administration, and not the covenant of works, that was given so long
   after. But the apostle's argument seems manifestly to be mistaken by
   them. The apostle does not speak of a law that began to exist four
   hundred and thirty years after; if he did, there would be some force in
   their objection; but he has respect to a certain solemn transaction,
   well known among the Jews by the phrase "the giving of the law," which
   was at mount Sinai, (Exod. xix. xx.) consisting especially in God's
   giving the ten commandments (which is the moral law) with a terrible
   voice, which law he afterwards gave in tables of stone. This
   transaction the Jews in the apostle's time misinterpreted; they looked
   upon it as God's establishing that law as a rule of justification.
   Against this conceit of theirs the apostle brings this invincible
   argument, viz. that God would never go about to disannul his covenant
   with Abraham, which was plainly a covenant of grace, by a transaction
   with his posterity, that was so long after it, and was plainly built
   upon it. He would not overthrow a covenant of grace that he had long
   before established with Abraham, for him and his seed, (which is often
   mentioned as the ground of God's making them his people,) by now
   establishing a covenant of works with them at mount Sinai, as the Jews
   and judaizing Christians supposed.

   But that the apostle does not mean only works of the ceremonial law,
   when he excludes works of the law in justification, but also of the
   moral law, and all works of obedience, virtue, and righteousness
   whatsoever, may appear by the following things.

   1. The apostle does not only say, that we are not justified by the
   works of the law, but that we are not justified by works, using a
   general term; as in our text, "to him that worketh not, but believeth
   on him that justifieth," &c.; and in the 6th verse, Rom. iv. 6."God
   imputeth righteousness without works;" and chap. xi.6. "And if by
   grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
   but if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no
   more work." So, Eph. ii. 8, 9. "For by grace are ye saved, through
   faith,--not of works;" by which, there is no reason in the world to
   understand the apostle of any other than works in general, as
   correlates of a reward, or good works, or works of virtue and
   righteousness. When the apostle says, we are justified or saved not by
   works, without any such term annexed, as the law, or any other
   addition, to limit the expression, what warrant have any to confine it
   to works of a particular law or institution, excluding others? Are not
   observances of other divine laws works, as well as of that? It seems to
   be allowed by the divines in the Arminian scheme, in their
   interpretation of several of those texts where the apostle only
   mentions works without any addition, that he means our own good works
   in general; but then, they say, he only means to exclude any proper
   merit in those works. But to say the apostle means one thing when he
   says, we are not justified by works, and another when he says, we are
   not justified by the works of the law, when we find the expressions
   mixed and used in the same discourse, and when the apostle is evidently
   upon the same argument, is very unreasonable; it is to dodge, and fly
   from Scripture, rather than open and yield ourselves to its teachings.

   2. In the third chapter of Romans, our having been guilty of breaches
   of the moral law, is an argument that the apostle uses, why we cannot
   be justified by the works of the law. Beginning with the 9th verse, he
   proves out of the Old Testament, that all are under sin: Rom. iii.
   9-15."There is none righteous, no not one: their throat is an open
   sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit: their mouth is
   full of cursing and bitterness; and their feet swift to shed blood."
   And so he goes on, mentioning only those things that are breaches of
   the moral law; and then when he has done, his conclusion is, in the
   19th and 20th verses, "Now we know that whatsoever things the law
   saith, it saith to them that are under that law, that every mouth may
   be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Therefore,
   by the deeds of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight."
   This is most evidently his argument, because all had sinned, (as it was
   said in the 9th verse,) and been guilty of those breaches of the moral
   law that he had mentioned, (and it is repeated over again, verse 23.)
   "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;" therefore
   none at all can be justified by the deeds of the law. Now if the
   apostle meant only, that we are not justified by the deeds of the
   ceremonial law, what kind of arguing would that be, Rom. iii. 14, 15.
   "Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to
   shed blood?" therefore they cannot be justified by the deeds of the
   Mosaic administration. They are guilty of the breaches of the moral
   law; and therefore they cannot be justified by the deeds of the
   ceremonial law! Doubtless, the apostle's argument is, that the very
   same law they have broken, can never justify them as observers of it,
   because every law necessarily condemns its violators. And therefore our
   breaches of the moral law argue no more, than that we cannot be
   justified by the law we have broken.

   And it may be noted, that the apostle's argument here is the same that
   I have already used, viz. that as we are in ourselves, and out of
   Christ, we are under the condemnation of that original law or
   constitution that God established with mankind; and therefore it is no
   way fit that any thing we do, any virtue or obedience of ours, should
   be accepted, or we accepted on the account of it.

   3. The apostle, in all the preceding part of this epistle, wherever he
   has the phrase, the law, evidently intends the moral law principally.
   As in the 12th verse of the foregoing chapter: Rom. ii. 12."For as many
   as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law." It is
   evidently the written moral law the apostle means, by the next verse
   but one. Rom. ii. 14. "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law,
   do by nature the things contained in the law;" that is, the moral law
   that the Gentiles have by nature. And so the next verse, Rom. ii. 15.
   "Which show the work of the law written in their hearts." It is the
   moral law, and not the ceremonial, that is written in the hearts of
   those who are destitute of divine revelation. And so in the 18th verse,
   "Thou approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed
   out of the law." It is the moral law that shows us the nature of
   things, and teaches us what is excellent; 20th verse, "Thou hast a form
   of knowledge and a truth in the law." It is the moral law, as is
   evident by what follows, verse 22, 23. Rom. ii. 22, 23. "Thou that
   sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery?
   Thou that abhorrest idols, does thou commit sacrilege? Thou that makest
   thy boast of the law, through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God?"
   Adultery, idolatry, and sacrilege, surely are the breaking of the
   moral, and not the ceremonial law. So in the 27th verse, "And shall not
   uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee,
   who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law?" i.e. the
   Gentiles, that you despise because uncircumcised, if they live moral
   and holy lives, in obedience to the moral law, shall condemn you though
   circumcised. And so there is not one place in all the preceding part of
   the epistle, where the apostle speaks of the law, but that he most
   apparently intends principally the moral law; and yet when the apostle,
   in continuance of the same discourse, comes to tell us, that we cannot
   be justified by the works of the law, then they will needs have it,
   that he means only the ceremonial law. Yea, though all this discourse
   about the moral law, showing how the Jews as well as Gentiles have
   violated it, is evidently preparatory and introductory to that
   doctrine, chap. iii. 20. "That no flesh," that is, none mankind,
   neither Jews nor Gentiles, "can be justified by the works of the law."

   4. It is evident that when the apostle says, we cannot be justified by
   the works of the law, he means the moral as well as ceremonial law, by
   his giving this reason for it, that "by the law is the knowledge of
   sin," as Rom. iii. 20. "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be
   justified in his sight; for by the law is the knowledge of sin." Now
   that law by which we come to the knowledge of sin, is the moral law
   chiefly and primarily. If this argument of the apostle be good, "that
   we cannot be justified by the deeds of the law" chiefly and primarily.
   If this argument of the apostle be good, "that we cannot be justified
   by the deeds of the law, because it is by the law that we come to the
   knowledge of sin;" then it proves that we cannot be justified by the
   deeds of the moral law, nor by the precepts of Christianity; for by
   them is the knowledge of sin. If the reason be good, then where the
   reason holds, the truth holds. It is a miserable shift, and a violent
   force put upon the words, to say that the meaning is, that by the law
   of circumcision is the knowledge of sin, because circumcision
   signifying the taking away of sin, puts men in the mind of sin. The
   plain meaning of the apostle is, that as the law most strictly forbids
   sin, it tends to convince us of sin, and bring our own consciences to
   condemn us, instead of justifying of us; that the use of it is to
   declare to us our own guilt and unworthiness, which is the reverse of
   justifying and approving of us as virtuous or worthy. This is the
   apostle's meaning, if we will allow him to be his own expositor; for he
   himself, in this very epistle, explains to us how it is that by the law
   we have the knowledge of sin, and that it is by the law's forbidding
   sin, chap. vii. 7. "I had not known sin, but by the law; for I had not
   known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet." There the
   apostle determines two things; first, That the way in which "by the law
   is the knowledge of sin," is by the law's forbidding sin: and secondly,
   which is more directly still to the purpose, he determines that it is
   the moral law by which we come to the knowledge of sin; "for," says he,
   "I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet."
   Now it is the moral, and not the ceremonial law, that says, "Thou shalt
   not covet." Therefore, when the apostle argues, that by the deeds of
   the law no flesh living shall be justified, because by the law is the
   knowledge of sin, his argument proves, (unless he was mistaken as to
   the force of his argument,) that we cannot be justified by the deeds of
   the moral law.

   5. It is evident that the apostle does not mean only the ceremonial
   law, because he gives this reason why we have righteousness, and a
   title to the privilege of God's children, not by the law, but by faith,
   "that the law worketh wrath." Rom. iv. 13-16. "For the promise that he
   should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed
   through the law, but through righteousness of faith. For if they which
   are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of
   none effect. Because the law worketh wrath; for where no law is, there
   is no transgression. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by
   grace." Now the way in which the law works wrath, by the apostle's own
   account, in the reason he himself annexes, is by forbidding sin, and
   aggravating the guilt of the transgression; Rom. iv. 15."for," says he,
   "where no law is, there is no transgression:" And so, chap. vii. 13.
   "That sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful." If,
   therefore, this reason of the apostle be good, it is much stronger
   against justification by the moral law than the ceremonial law; for it
   is by transgressions of the moral law chiefly that there comes wrath;
   for they are most strictly forbidden, and most terribly threatened.

   6. It is evident that when the apostle says, we are not justified by
   the works of the law, that he excludes all our own virtue, goodness, or
   excellency, by that reason he gives for it, viz. "That boasting might
   be excluded." Rom. iii. 26, 27, 28. "To declare, I say, at this time
   his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him
   which believeth in Jesus. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By
   what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith. Therefore we
   conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the
   law." Eph. ii. 8, 9. "For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and
   that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any
   man should boast." Now what are men wont to boast of, but what they
   esteem their own goodness and excellency? If we are not justified by
   works of the ceremonial law, yet how does that exclude boasting, as
   long as we are justified by our own excellency, or virtue, and goodness
   of our own, or works of righteousness which we have done?

   But it is said, that boasting is excluded, as circumcision was
   excluded, which was that the Jews especially used to glory in, and
   value themselves upon, above other nations.

   To this I answer, that the Jews were not only used to boast of
   circumcision, but were notorious for boasting of their moral
   righteousness. The Jews of those days were generally admirers and
   followers of the Pharisees, who were full of their boasts of their
   moral righteousness; as we may see by the example of the Pharisee
   mentioned in the 18th of Luke, which Christ mentions as describing the
   general temper of that sect: Luke xviii. 11. "Lord," says he, "I thank
   thee, that I am not as other men, an extortioner, nor unjust, nor an
   adulterer." The works that he boasts of were chiefly moral works: he
   depended on the works of the law for justification; and therefore
   Christ tells us, that the publican, that renounced all his own
   righteousness, Luke xviii. 14. "went down to his house justified rather
   than he." And elsewhere, we read of the Pharisees praying in the
   corners of the streets, and sounding a trumpet before them when they
   did alms. But those works which they so vainly boasted of were moral
   works. And not only so, but what the apostle in this very epistle
   condemns the Jews for, is their boasting of the moral law. Chap. ii.
   22, 23. "Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou
   commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?
   Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law,
   dishonourest thou God?" The law here mentioned that they made their
   boast of, was that of which adultery, idolatry, and sacrilege, were the
   breaches, which is the moral law. So that this is the boasting which
   the apostle condemns them for; and therefore, if they were justified by
   the works of this law, then how comes he to say that their boasting is
   excluded? And besides, when they boasted of the rites of the ceremonial
   law, it was under a notion of its being a part of their own goodness or
   excellency, or what made them holier and more lovely in the sight of
   God than other people; and if they were not justified by this part of
   their own supposed goodness or holiness, yet if they were by another,
   how did that exclude boasting? How was their boasting excluded, unless
   all goodness or excellency of their own was excluded?

   7. The reason given by the apostle why we can be justified only by
   faith, and not by the works of the law, in the 3d chapter of Gal. viz.
   Gal. iii. 10. "That they that are under the law, are under the curse,"
   makes it evident that he does not mean only the ceremonial law. In that
   chapter the apostle had particularly insisted upon it, that Abraham was
   justified by faith, and that it is by faith only, and not by the works
   of the law, that we can be justified, and become the children of
   Abraham, and be made partakers of the blessing of Abraham: and he gives
   this reason for it in the 10th verse: "For as many as are of the works
   of the law, are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
   that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
   law to do them." It is manifest that these words, cited from
   Deuteronomy, are spoken not only with regard to the ceremonial law, but
   the whole law of God to mankind, and chiefly the moral law; and that
   all mankind are therefore as they are in themselves under that curse,
   not only while the ceremonial law lasted, but now since that has
   ceased. And therefore all who are justified, are redeemed from that
   curse, by Christ's bearing it for them; as in verse 13. "Christ hath
   redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for
   it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree." Now
   therefore, either its being said, that he is cursed who continueth not
   in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them, is a
   good reason why we cannot be justified by the works of that law of
   which it is so said; or it is not; if it be, then it is a good reason
   why we cannot be justified by the works of the moral law, and of the
   whole rule which God has given to mankind to walk by; for the words are
   spoken of the moral as well as the ceremonial law, and reach every
   command or precept which God has given to mankind; and chiefly the
   moral precepts, which are most strictly enjoined, and the violations of
   which in both the New Testament and the Old, and in the books of Moses
   themselves, are threatened with the most dreadful curse.

   8. The apostle in like manner argues against our being justified by our
   own righteousness, as he does against being justified by the works of
   the law; and evidently uses the expressions, of our own righteousness,
   and works of the law, promiscuously, and as signifying the same thing.
   It is particularly evident by Rom. x.3. "For they being ignorant of
   God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
   righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
   God." Here it is plain that the same thing is asserted as in the two
   last verses but one of the foregoing chapter. Rom. ix. 31."But Israel,
   which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
   law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it, not by faith,
   but as it were by the works of the law." And it is very unreasonable,
   upon several accounts, to suppose that the apostle, by their own
   righteousness, intends only their ceremonial righteousness. For when
   the apostle warns us against trusting our own righteousness for
   justification, doubtless it is fair to interpret the expression in an
   agreement with other scriptures, where we are warned, not to think that
   it is for the sake of our own righteousness that we obtain God's favour
   and blessing; as particularly in Deut. ix. 4-6. "Speak not thou in
   thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before
   thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to
   possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord
   doth drive them out from before thee. Not for thy righteousness, or for
   the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but
   for the wickedness of these nations, the Lord thy God doth drive them
   out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which he sware
   unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Understand therefore, that
   the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it, for thy
   righteousness; for thou art a stiff-necked people." None will pretend
   that here the expression thy righteousness, signifies only a ceremonial
   righteousness, but all virtue or goodness of their own; yea, and the
   inward goodness of the heart, as well as the outward goodness of life;
   which appears by the beginning of the 5th verse, Deut. ix. 5. "Not for
   thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart;" and also by
   the antithesis in the 6th verse, Deut. ix. 6. "Not for thy
   righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked people." Their
   stiff-neckedness was their moral wickedness, obstinacy, and
   perverseness of heart. By righteousness, therefore, on the contrary, is
   meant their moral virtue, and rectitude of heart and life. This is what
   I would argue from hence, that the expression of our own righteousness,
   when used in Scripture with relation to the favour of God--and when we
   are warned against looking upon it as that by which that favour, or the
   fruits of it, are obtained--does not signify only a ceremonial
   righteousness, but all manner of goodness of our own.

   The Jews also, in the New Testament, are condemned for trusting in
   their own righteousness in this sense; Luke xviii. 9, &c. "And he spake
   this parable unto certain that trusted in themselves that they were
   righteous." This intends chiefly a moral righteousness; as appears by
   the parable itself, in which we have an account of the prayer of the
   Pharisee, wherein the things that he mentions as what he trusts in, are
   chiefly moral qualifications and performances, viz. That he was not an
   extortioner, unjust, nor an adulterer, &c.

   But we need not go to the writings of other penmen of the Scripture. If
   we will allow the apostle Paul to be his own interpreter, he--when he
   speaks of our own righteousness as that by which we are not justified
   or saved--does not mean only a ceremonial righteousness, nor does he
   only intend a way of religion and serving God, of our own choosing,
   without divine warrant or prescription; but by our own righteousness he
   means the same as a righteousness of our own doing, whether it be a
   service or righteousness of God's prescribing, or our own unwarranted
   performing. Let it be an obedience to the ceremonial law, or a gospel
   obedience, or what it will, if it be a righteousness of our own doing,
   it is excluded by the apostle in this affair, as is evident by Titus
   iii.5. "Not by works of righteousness which we have done."--But I would
   more particularly insist on this text; and therefore this may be the

   9th argument, That the apostle, when he denies justification by works,
   works of the law, and our own righteousness, does not mean works of the
   ceremonial law only. Tit. iii.3-7. "For we ourselves also were
   sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and
   pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
   But after that the kingdom and love of God our Saviour toward man
   appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
   according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
   renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly, through
   Jesus Christ our Saviour: that being justified by his grace we should
   be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life." Works of
   righteousness that we have done are here excluded, as what we are
   neither saved nor justified by. The apostle expressly says, we are not
   saved by them; and it is evident that when he says this, he has respect
   to the affair of justification. And that he means, we are not saved by
   them in not being justified by them, as by the next verse but one,
   which is part of the same sentence, Titus iii. 7."That being justified
   by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
   life."

   It is several ways manifest, that the apostle in this text, by "works
   of righteousness which we have done," does not mean only works of the
   ceremonial law. It appears by the 3d verse, Titus iii. 3. "For we
   ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
   divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
   hating one another." These are breaches of the moral law, that the
   apostle observes they lived in before they were justified: and it is
   most plain that it is this which gives occasion to the apostle to
   observe, as he does in the 5th verse, that it was not by works of
   righteousness which they had done, that they were saved or justified.

   But we need not go to the context, it is most apparent from the words
   themselves, that the apostle does not mean only works of the ceremonial
   law. If he had only said, it is not by our own works of righteousness;
   what could we understand by works of righteousness, but only righteous
   works, or, which is the same thing, good works? And to say, that it is
   by our own righteous works that we are justified, though not by one
   particular kind of righteous works, would certainly be a contradiction
   to such an assertion. But, the words are rendered yet more strong,
   plain, and determined in their sense, by those additional words, which
   we have done; which shows that the apostle intends to exclude all our
   own righteous or virtuous works universally. If it should be asserted
   concerning any commodity, treasure, or precious jewel, that it could
   not be procured by money, and not only so, but, to make the assertion
   the more strong, it should be asserted with additional words, that it
   could not be procured by money that men possess; how unreasonable would
   it be, after all, to say, that all that was meant was, that it could
   not be procured with brass money.

   And what renders the interpreting of this text, as intending works of
   the ceremonial law, yet more unreasonable, is, that these works were
   indeed no works of righteousness at all, but were only falsely supposed
   to be so by the Jews. And this our opponents in this doctrine also
   suppose is the very reason why we are not justified by them, because
   they are not works of righteousness, or because (the ceremonial law
   being now abrogated) there is no obedience in them. But how absurd is
   it to say, that the apostle, when he says we are not justified by works
   of righteousness that we have done, meant only works of the ceremonial
   law, and that for that very reason, because they are not works of
   righteousness? To illustrate this by the forementioned comparison: If
   it should be asserted, that such a thing could not be procured by money
   that men possess, how ridiculous would it be to say, that the meaning
   only was, that it could not be procured by counterfeit money, and that
   for that reason, because it was not money. What scripture will stand
   before men, if they will take liberty to manage scripture thus? Or what
   one text is there in the Bible that may not at this rate be explained
   all away, and perverted to any sense men please?

   But further, if we should allow that the apostle intends only to oppose
   justification by works of the ceremonial law in this text, yet it is
   evident by the expression he uses, that he means to oppose it under
   that notion, or in that quality, of their being works of righteousness
   of our own doing. But if the apostle argues against our being justified
   by works of the ceremonial law, under the notion of their being of that
   nature and kind, viz. works of our own doing; then it will follow, that
   the apostle's argument is strong against, not only those, but all of
   that nature and kind, even all that are of our own doing.

   If there were no other text in the Bible about justification but this,
   this would clearly and invincibly prove, that we are not justified by
   any of our own goodness, virtue, or righteousness, or for the
   excellency of righteousness of any thing that we have done in religion;
   because it is here so fully and strongly asserted; but this text
   abundantly confirms other texts of the apostle, where he denies
   justification by works of the law. No doubt can be rationally made, but
   that the apostle, when he shows, that God does not save us by "works of
   righteousness that we have done," verse 5. and that so we are
   "justified by grace," verse 7. herein opposing salvation by works, and
   salvation by grace--means the same works as he does in other places,
   where he in like manner opposes works and grace: as in Rom. xi. 6. "And
   if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more
   grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work
   is not more work." And the same works as in Rom. iv. 4. "Now to him
   that worketh, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." And
   the same works that are spoken of in the context of the 24th verse of
   the foregoing chapter, which the apostle there calls "works of the law,
   being justified freely by his grace." And of the 4th chapter, 16th
   verse, "Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace." Where in
   the context the righteousness of faith is opposed to the righteousness
   of the law; for here God's saving us according to his mercy, and
   justifying us by grace, is opposed to saving us by works of
   righteousness that we have done; in the same manner as in those places,
   justifying us by his grace, is opposed to justifying us by works of the
   law.

   10. The apostle could not mean only works of the ceremonial law, when
   he says, we are not justified by the works of the law, because it is
   asserted of the saints under the Old Testament as well as New. If men
   are justified by their sincere obedience, it will then follow that
   formerly, before the ceremonial law was abrogated, men were justified
   by the works of the ceremonial law, as well as the moral. For if we are
   justified by our sincere obedience, then it alters not the case,
   whether the commands be moral or positive, provided they be God's
   commands, and our obedience be obedience to God. And so the case must
   be just the same under the Old Testament, with the works of the moral
   law and ceremonial, according to the measure of the virtue of obedience
   there was in either. It is true, their obedience to the ceremonial law
   would have nothing to do in the affair of justification, unless it was
   sincere; and so neither would the works of the moral law. If obedience
   was the thing, then obedience to the ceremonial law, while that stood
   in force, and obedience to the moral law, had just the same sort of
   concern, according to the proportion of obedience that consists in
   each; as now under the New Testament, if obedience is what we are
   justified by, that obedience must doubtless comprehend obedience to all
   God's commands now in force, to the positive precepts of attendance on
   baptism and the Lord's supper, as well as moral precepts. If obedience
   be the thing, it is not because it is obedience to such a kind of
   commands, but because it is obedience. So that by this supposition, the
   saints under the Old Testament were justified, at least in part, by
   their obedience to the ceremonial law.

   But it is evident that the saints under the Old Testament were not
   justified, in any measure, by the works of the ceremonial law. This may
   be proved, proceeding on the foot of our adversaries' own
   interpretation of the apostle's phrase, "the works of the law," and
   supposing them to mean by it only the works of the ceremonial law. To
   instance in David, it is evident that he was not justified in any wise
   by the works of the ceremonial law, by Rom. iv. 6-8. "Even as David
   also describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth
   righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
   are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
   the Lord will not impute sin." It is plain that the apostle is here
   speaking of justification, from the preceding verse, and all the
   context; and the thing spoken of, viz. forgiving iniquities and
   covering sins, is what our adversaries themselves suppose to be
   justification, and even the whole of justification. This David,
   speaking of himself, says (by the apostle's interpretation) that he had
   without works. For it is manifest that David, in the words here cited,
   from the beginning of the 32d Psalm, has a special respect to himself:
   he speaks of his own sins being forgiven and not imputed to him; as
   appears by the words that immediately follow. Psalm xxxii. 3-5."When I
   kept silence, my bones waxed old; through my roaring all the day long.
   For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned
   into the drought of summer. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
   iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto
   the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin." Let us therefore
   understand the apostle which way we will respecting works, when he
   says, Romans iv .6. "David describes the blessedness of the man to whom
   the Lord imputes righteousness without works," whether of all manner of
   works, or only works of the ceremonial law, yet it is evident at least,
   that David was not justified by works of the ceremonial law. Therefore
   here is the argument: if our own obedience be that by which men are
   justified, then under the Old Testament, men were justified partly by
   obedience to the ceremonial law (as has been proved); but the saints
   under the Old Testament were not justified partly by the works of the
   ceremonial law; therefore men's own obedience is not that by which they
   are justified.

   11. Another argument that the apostle, when he speaks of the two
   opposite ways of justification, one by the works of the law, and the
   other by faith, does not mean only the works of the ceremonial law, may
   be taken from Rom. x. 5, 6. "For Moses describeth the righteousness
   which is of the law, that the man which doth those things, shall live
   by them. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaking on this
   wise," &c.--Here two things are evident.

   First, That the apostle here speaks of the same two opposite ways of
   justification, one by the righteousness which is of the law, the other
   by faith, that he had treated of in the former part of the epistle; and
   therefore it must be the same law that is here spoken of. The same law
   is here meant as in the last verses of the foregoing chapter, where he
   says, the Jews had Rom. ix. 31, 32."not attained to the law of
   righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by faith, but as
   it were by the works of the law;" as is plain, because the apostle is
   still speaking of the same thing; the words are a continuation of the
   same discourse, as may be seen at first glance, by any one that looks
   on the context.

   Secondly, It is manifest that Moses, when he describes the
   righteousness which is of the law, or the way of justification by the
   law, in the words here cited, Gal. iii. 12. "He that doth those things,
   shall live in them," does not speak only, nor chiefly, of the works of
   the ceremonial law; for none will pretend that God ever made such a
   covenant with man, that he who kept the ceremonial law should live in
   it, or that there ever was a time, that it was chiefly by the works of
   the ceremonial law that men lived and were justified. Yea, it is
   manifest by the forementioned instance of David, mentioned in the 4th
   of Romans, that there never was a time wherein men were justified in
   any measure by the works of the ceremonial law, as has been just now
   shown. Moses therefore, in those words which the apostle says, are a
   description of the righteousness which is of the law, cannot mean only
   the ceremonial law. And therefore it follows, that when the apostle
   speaks of justification by the works of the law, as opposite to
   justification by faith, he does not mean only the ceremonial law, but
   also the works of the moral law, which are the things spoken of by
   Moses, when he says, Gal. iii. 12. "He that doth those things, shall
   live in them." And these are the things which the apostle in this very
   place is arguing that we cannot be justified by; as is evident by the
   last verses of the preceding chapter; Rom. ix. 31, 32."But Israel,
   which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
   law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by faith,
   but as it were by the works of the law," &c. And in the 3d verse of
   this chapter, Rom. x. 3. "For they being ignorant of God's
   righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
   have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God."

   And further, how can the apostle's description that he here gives from
   Moses, of this exploded way of justification by the works of the law,
   consist with the Arminian scheme, of a way of justification by the
   virtue of a sincere obedience, that still remains as the true and only
   way of justification under the gospel? It is most apparent that it is
   the design of the apostle to give a description of both the legal
   rejected and the evangelical valid ways of justification, in that
   wherein they are distinguished the one from the other. But how is it,
   that "he who doth those things, shall live in them," that wherein the
   way of justification by the works of the law is distinguished from that
   in which Christians under the gospel are justified, according to their
   scheme; for still, according to them, it may be said, in the same
   manner, of the precepts of the gospel, he that doth these things, shall
   live in them. The difference lies only in the things to be done, but
   not at all in that the doing of them is not the condition of living in
   them, just in the one case, as in the other. The words, Gal. iii. 12.
   "He that doth them, shall live in them," will serve just as well for a
   description of the latter as the former. By the apostle's saying, the
   righteousness of the law is described thus, he that doth these things,
   shall live in them; but the righteousness of faith saith thus, plainly
   intimates that the righteousness of faith saith otherwise, and in an
   opposite manner. Besides, if these words cited from Moses are actually
   said by him of the moral law as well as ceremonial, as it is most
   evident they are, it renders it still more absurd to suppose them
   mentioned by the apostle, as the very note of distinction between
   justification by a ceremonial obedience, and a moral sincere obedience,
   as the Arminians must suppose.

   Thus I have spoken to a second argument, to prove that we are not
   justified by any manner of virtue or goodness of our own, viz. that to
   suppose otherwise, is contrary to the doctrine directly urged, and
   abundantly insisted on, by the apostle Paul in his epistles.

   I now proceed to a

   Third argument, viz. That to suppose that we are justified by our own
   sincere obedience, or any of our own virtue or goodness, derogates from
   gospel grace.

   That scheme of justification that manifestly takes from or diminishes
   the grace of God, is undoubtedly to be rejected; for it is the declared
   design of God in the gospel to exalt the freedom and riches of his
   grace, in that method of justification of sinners, and way of admitting
   them to his favour, and the blessed fruits of it, which it declares.
   The Scripture teaches, that the way of justification appointed in the
   gospel-covenant, is appointed for that end, that free grace might be
   expressed, and glorified; Rom. iv. 16. "Therefore it is of faith, that
   it might be by grace." The exercising and magnifying of free grace in
   the gospel-contrivance for the justification and salvation of sinners,
   is evidently the chief design of it. And this freedom and riches of
   grace in the gospel is every where spoken of in Scripture as the chief
   glory of it. Therefore that doctrine which derogates from the free
   grace of God in justifying sinners, as it is most opposite to God's
   design, so it must be exceedingly offensive to him.

   Those who maintain, that we are justified by our own sincere obedience,
   pretend that their scheme does not diminish the grace of the gospel;
   for they say, that the grace of God is wonderfully manifested in
   appointing such a way and method of salvation by sincere obedience, in
   assisting us to perform such an obedience, and in accepting our
   imperfect obedience, instead of perfect.

   Let us therefore examine that matter, whether their scheme, of a man's
   being justified by his own virtue and sincere obedience, does derogate
   from the grace of God or no; or whether free grace is not more exalted
   in supposing, as we do, that we are justified without any manner of
   goodness of our own. In order to this, I will lay down this
   self-evident

   Proposition, that whatsoever that be by which the abundant benevolence
   of the giver is expressed, and gratitude in the receiver is obliged,
   that magnifies free grace. This I suppose none will ever controvert or
   dispute.--And it is not much less evident, that it doth both show a
   more abundant benevolence in the giver when he shows kindness without
   goodness or excellency in the object, to move him to it; and that it
   enhances the obligation to gratitude in the receiver.

   1. It shows a more abundant goodness in the giver, when he shows
   kindness without any excellency in our persons or actions that should
   move the giver to love and beneficence. For it certainly shows the more
   abundant and overflowing goodness, or disposition to communicate good,
   by how much the less loveliness or excellency there is to entice
   beneficence. The less there is in the receiver to draw good-will and
   kindness, it argues the more of the principle of good-will and kindness
   in the giver. One that has but little of a principle of love and
   benevolence, may be drawn to do good, and to show kindness, when there
   is a great deal to draw him, or when there is much excellency and
   loveliness in the object to move good-will; when he whose goodness and
   benevolence is more abundant, will show kindness where there is less to
   draw it forth; for he does not so much need to have it drawn from
   without, he has enough of the principle within to move him of itself.
   Where there is most of the principle, there it is most sufficient for
   itself, and stands in least need of something without to excite it. For
   certainly a more abundant goodness more easily flows forth with less to
   impel or draw it, than where there is less; or, which is the same
   thing, the more any one is disposed of himself, the less he needs from
   without himself, to put him upon it, or stir him up to it. And
   therefore his kindness and goodness appears the more exceeding great,
   when it is bestowed without any excellency or loveliness at all in the
   receiver, or when the receiver is respected in the gift, as wholly
   without excellency. And much more still when the benevolence of the
   giver not only finds nothing in the receiver to draw it, but a great
   deal of hatefulness to repel it. The abundance of goodness is then
   manifested, not only in flowing forth without any thing extrinsic to
   put it forward, but in overcoming great repulsion in the object. And
   then does kindness and love appear most triumphant, and wonderfully
   great, when the receiver is not only wholly without all excellency or
   beauty to attract it, but altogether, yea infinitely, vile and hateful.

   2. It is apparent also that it enhances the obligation to gratitude in
   the receiver. This is agreeable to the common sense of mankind, that
   the less worthy or excellent the object of benevolence, or the receiver
   of kindness, is, the more he is obliged, and the greater gratitude is
   due. He therefore is most of all obliged, that receives kindness
   without any goodness or excellency in himself, but with a total and
   universal hatefulness. And as it is agreeable to the common sense of
   mankind, so it is agreeable to the common sense of mankind, so it is
   agreeable to the word of God. How often does God in the Scripture
   insist on this argument with men, to move them to love him, and to
   acknowledge his kindness! How much does he insist on this as an
   obligation to gratitude, that they are so sinful, and undeserving, and
   ill deserving!

   Therefore it certainly follows, that the doctrine which teaches, that
   God, when he justifies a man, and shows him such great kindness as to
   give him a right to eternal life, does not do it for any obedience, or
   any manner of goodness, of his; but that justification respects a man
   as ungodly, and wholly without any manner of virtue, beauty, or
   excellency. I say, this doctrine does certainly more exalt the free
   grace of God in justification, and man's obligation to gratitude for
   such a favour, than the contrary doctrine, viz. That God, in showing
   this kindness to man, respects him as sincerely obedient and virtuous,
   and as having something in him that is truly excellent and lovely, and
   acceptable in his sight, and that this goodness or excellency of man is
   the very fundamental condition of the bestowment of that kindness on
   him, or of distinguishing him from others by that benefit. But I hasten
   to a

   Fourth argument for the truth of the doctrine, That to suppose a man is
   justified by his own virtue or obedience, derogates from the honour of
   the Mediator, and ascribes that to man's virtue which belongs only to
   the righteousness of Christ: it puts man in Christ's stead, and makes
   him his own saviour, in a respect in which Christ only is his Saviour.
   And so it is a doctrine contrary to the nature and design of the
   gospel, which is to abase man, and to ascribe all the glory of our
   salvation to Christ the Redeemer. It is inconsistent with the doctrine
   of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which is a
   gospel-doctrine.

   Here I would explain what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness. Prove the thing intended by it to be true. Show that
   this doctrine is utterly inconsistent with the doctrine of our being
   justified by our own virtue or sincere obedience.

   First, I would explain what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness. Sometimes the expression is taken by our divines in a
   larger sense, for the imputation of all that Christ did and suffered
   for our redemption, whereby we are free from guilt, and stand righteous
   in the sight of God; and so implies the imputation both of Christ's
   satisfaction and obedience. But here I intend it in a stricter sense,
   for the imputation of that righteousness or moral goodness that
   consists in the obedience of Christ. And by that righteousness being
   imputed to us, is meant no other than this, that the righteousness of
   Christ is accepted for us, and admitted instead of that perfect
   inherent righteousness which ought to be in ourselves. Christ's perfect
   obedience shall be reckoned to our account, so that we shall have the
   benefit of it, as though we had performed it ourselves. And so we
   suppose that a title to eternal life is given us as the reward of this
   righteousness. The Scripture uses the word impute in this sense, viz.
   for reckoning any thing belonging to any person, to another person's
   account: as Philemon 18. Philemon i.18. "If he hath wronged thee, or
   oweth thee ought, put that on mine account." In the original it is NOT
   ENGLISH : impute that to me. It is a word of the same root with that
   which is translated impute, Rom. iv .6. "To whom God imputeth
   righteousness without works." And it is the very same word that is
   used, Rom. v.13., that is translated impute, "sin is not imputed when
   there is no law."

   The opposers of this doctrine suppose that there is an absurdity in
   supposing that God imputes Christ's obedience to us, it is to suppose
   that God is mistaken, and thinks that we performed that obedience which
   Christ performed. But why cannot that righteousness be reckoned to our
   account, and be accepted for us, without any such absurdity? Why is
   there any more absurdity in it, than in a merchant's transferring debt
   or credit from one man's account to another, when one man pays a price
   for another, so that it shall be accepted as if that other had paid it?
   Why is there any more absurdity in supposing that Christ's obedience is
   imputed to us, that that his satisfaction is imputed? If Christ has
   suffered the penalty of the law in our stead, then it will follow, that
   his suffering that penalty is imputed to us, that is accepted for us,
   and in our stead, and is reckoned to our account, as though we had
   suffered it. But why may not his obeying the law of God be as
   rationally reckoned to our account, as his suffering the penalty of the
   law? Why may not a price to bring into debt, be as rationally
   transferred from one person's account to another, as a price to pay a
   debt? Having thus explained what we mean by the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness, I proceed,

   Secondly, To prove that the righteousness of Christ is thus imputed.

   1. There is the very same need of Christ's obeying the law in our
   stead, in order to the reward, as of his suffering the penalty of the
   law in our stead, in order to our escaping the penalty; and the same
   reason why one should be accepted on our account, as the other. There
   is the same need of one as the other, that the law of God might be
   answered; one was as requisite to answer the law as the other. It is
   certain, that was the reason why there was need that Christ should
   suffer the penalty for us, even that the law might be answered; for
   this Scripture plainly teaches. This is given as the reason why Christ
   was made a curse for us, that the law threatened a curse to us, Gal.
   iii. 10, 13. But the same law that fixes the curse of God as the
   consequence of not continuing in all things written in the law to do
   them, verse 10. has as much fixed doing those things as an antecedent
   of living in them, ( as verse 12.) There is as much connexion
   established in one case as in the other. There is therefore exactly the
   same need, from the law, of perfect obedience being fulfilled in order
   to our obtaining the reward, as there is of death being suffered in
   order to our escaping the punishment; or the same necessity by the law,
   of perfect obedience preceding life, as there is of disobedience being
   succeeded by death. The law is, without doubt, as much of an
   established rule in one case as in the other.

   Christ by suffering the penalty, and so making atonement for us, only
   removes the guilt of our sins, and so sets us in the same state that
   Adam was in the first moment of his creation; and it is no more fit
   that we should obtain eternal life only on that account, than that Adam
   should have the reward of eternal life, or of a confirmed and
   unalterable state of happiness, the first moments of his existence,
   without any obedience at all. Adam was not to have the reward merely on
   account of his being innocent; if so, he would have had it fixed upon
   him at once, as soon as ever he was created; for he was as innocent
   then as he could be. But he was to have the reward on account of his
   activeness in obedience; not on account merely of his not having done
   ill, but on account of his doing well.

   So on the same account we have not eternal life merely as void of
   guilt, which we have by the atonement of Christ; but on the account of
   Christ's activeness in obedience, and doing well. Christ is our second
   federal head, and is called the second Adam, 1 Cor. xv. 22. because he
   acted that part for us which the first Adam should have done. When he
   had undertaken to stand in our stead, he was looked upon and treated as
   though he were guilty with our guilt; and by his bearing the penalty,
   he did as it were free himself from this guilt. But by this the second
   Adam did only bring himself into the state in which the first Adam was
   on the first moment of his existence, viz. a state of mere freedom from
   guilt; and hereby indeed was free from any obligation to suffer
   punishment; but this being supposed, there was need of something
   further, even a positive obedience, in order to his obtaining, as our
   second Adam, the reward of eternal life.

   God saw meet to place man first in a state of trial, and not to give
   him a title to eternal life as soon as he had made him; because it was
   his will that he should first give honour to his authority, by fully
   submitting to it, in will and act, and perfectly obeying his law. God
   insisted upon it, that his holy majesty and law should have their due
   acknowledgement and honour from man, such as became the relation he
   stood in to that Being who created him, before he would bestow the
   reward of confirmed and everlasting happiness upon him; and therefore
   God gave him a law that he might have opportunity, by giving due honour
   to his authority in obeying it, to obtain this happiness. It therefore
   became Christ--seeing that, in assuming man to himself, he sought a
   title to this eternal happiness for him after he had broken the
   law--that he himself should become subject to God's authority, and be
   in the form of a servant, that he might do that honour to God's
   authority for him, by his obedience, which God at first required of man
   as the condition of his having a title to that reward. Christ came into
   the world to render the honour of God's authority and law consistent
   with the salvation and eternal life of sinners; he came to save them,
   and yet withal to assert and vindicate the honour of the lawgiver, and
   his holy law. Now, if the sinner, after his sin was satisfied for, had
   eternal life bestowed upon him without active righteousness, the honour
   of his law would not be sufficiently vindicated. Supposing this were
   possible, that the sinner himself could, by suffering, pay the debt,
   and afterwards be in the same state that he was in before his
   probation, that is to say, negatively righteous, or merely without
   guilt; if he now at last should have eternal life bestowed upon him,
   without performing that condition of obedience; then God would recede
   from his law, and would give the promised reward, and his law never
   have respect and honour shown to it, in that way of being obeyed. But
   now Christ, by subjecting himself to the law, and obeying it, has done
   great honour to the law, and to the authority of God who gave it. That
   so glorious a person should become subject to the law, and fulfil it,
   has done much more to honour it, than if mere man had obeyed it. It was
   a thing infinitely honourable to God, that a person of infinite dignity
   was not ashamed to call him his God, and to adore and obey him as such.
   This was more to God's honour than if any mere creature, of any
   possible degree of excellence and dignity, had so done.

   It is absolutely necessary, that in order to a sinner's being
   justified, the righteousness of some other should be reckoned to his
   account; for it is declared, that the person justified is looked upon
   as (in himself) ungodly; but God neither will nor can justify a person
   without a righteousness; for justification is manifestly a forensic
   term, as the word is used in Scripture, and a judicial thing, or the
   act of a judge. So that if a person should be justified without a
   righteousness, the judgment would not be according to truth. The
   sentence of justification would be a false sentence, unless there be a
   righteousness performed that is by the judge properly looked upon as
   his. To say, that God does not justify the sinner without sincere,
   though an imperfect, obedience, does not help the case; for an
   imperfect righteousness before a judge is no righteousness. To accept
   of something that falls short of the rule, instead of something else
   that answers the rule, is not judicial act, or act of a judge, but a
   pure act of sovereignty. An imperfect righteousness is no righteousness
   before a judge; for "righteousness (as one observes) is a relative
   thing, and has always relation to a law. The formal nature of
   righteousness, properly understood, lies in a conformity of actions to
   that which is the rule and measure of them." Therefore that only is
   righteousness in the sight of a judge that answers the law. [671] The
   law is the judge's rule: if he pardons and hides what really is, and so
   does not pass sentence according to what things are in themselves, he
   either does not act the part of a judge, or else judges falsely. The
   very notion of judging is to determine what is, and what is not, in any
   one's case. The judge's work is twofold; it is to determine first what
   is fact, and then whether what is in fact be according to rule, or
   according to the law. If a judge has no rule or law established
   beforehand, by which he should proceed in judging, he has no foundation
   to go upon in judging, he has no opportunity to be a judge; nor is it
   possible that he should do the part of a judge. To judge without a law
   or rule by which to judge, is impossible; for the very notion of
   judging, is to determine whether the object of judgment be according to
   rule; and therefore God has declared, that when he acts as a judge, he
   will not justify the wicked, and cannot clear the guilty; and, by
   parity of reason, cannot justify without righteousness.

   And the scheme of the old law's being abrogated, and a new law
   introduced, will not help at all in this difficulty; for an imperfect
   righteousness cannot answer the law of God we are under, whether that
   be an old or a new one; for every law requires perfect obedience to
   itself. Every rule whatsoever requires perfect conformity to itself; it
   is a contradiction to suppose otherwise. For to say, that there is a
   law that does not require perfect obedience to itself, is to say that
   there is a law that does not require all that it requires. That law
   that now forbids sin, is certainly the law that we are now under, (let
   that be an old or a new one,) or else it is not sin. That which is not
   forbidden, and is the breach of the law, is no sin. But if we are now
   forbidden to commit sin, then it is by a law that we are now under; for
   surely we are neither under the forbiddings nor commanding of a law
   that we are not under. Therefore, if all sin is now forbidden, then we
   are now under a law that requires perfect obedience; and therefore
   nothing can be accepted as a righteousness in the sight of our Judge,
   but perfect righteousness. So that our Judge cannot justify us, unless
   he sees a perfect righteousness, some way belonging to us, either
   performed by ourselves, or by another, and justly and duly reckoned to
   our account.

   God doth, in the sentence of justification, pronounce a man perfectly
   righteousness, or else he would need a further justification after he
   is justified. His sins being removed by Christ's atonement, is not
   sufficient for his justification; for justifying a man, as has been
   already shown, is not merely pronouncing him innocent, or without
   guilt, but standing right with regard to the rule that he is under, and
   righteous unto life: but this, according to the established rule of
   nature, reason, and divine appointment, is a positive, perfect
   righteousness.

   As there is the same need that Christ's obedience should be reckoned to
   our account, as that his atonement should; so there is the same reason
   why it should. As if Adam had persevered, and finished his course of
   obedience, we should have received the benefit of his obedience, as
   much as now we have the mischief of his disobedience; so in like
   manner, there is reason that we should receive the benefit of the
   second Adam's obedience, as of his atonement of our disobedience.
   Believers are represented in Scripture as being so in Christ, as that
   they are legally one, or accepted as one, by the Supreme Judge: Christ
   has assumed our nature, and has so assumed all in that nature that
   belongs to him, into such an union with himself, that he is become
   their head, and has taken them to be his members. And therefore, what
   Christ has done in our nature, whereby he did honour to the law and
   authority of God by his acts, as well as the reparation to the honour
   of the law by his sufferings, is reckoned to the believer's account; so
   as that the believer should be made happy, because it was so well and
   worthily done by his Head, as well as freed from being miserable,
   because he has suffered for our ill and unworthy doing.

   When Christ had once undertaken with God to stand for us, and put
   himself under our law, by that law he was obliged to suffer and by the
   same law he was obliged to obey: by the same law, after he had taken
   man's guilt upon him, he himself, being our surety, could not be
   acquitted till he had suffered, nor rewarded till he had obeyed: but he
   was not acquitted as a private person, but as our head, and believers
   are acquitted in his acquittance; nor was he accepted to a reward for
   his obedience, as a private person, but as our head, and we are
   accepted to a reward in his acceptance. The Scripture teaches us, that
   when Christ was raised from the dead, he was justified; which
   justification, as I have already shown, implies both his acquittance
   from our guilt, and his acceptance to the exaltation and glory that was
   the reward of his obedience; but believers, as soon as they believe,
   are admitted to partake with Christ in this his justification: hence we
   are told, that he was "raised again for our justification," Rom. iv.
   25. which is true, not only of that part of his justification that
   consists in his acquittance, but also his acceptance to his reward. The
   Scripture teaches us, that he is exalted, and gone to heaven to take
   possession of our glory in our name, as our forerunner, Heb. vi. 20. We
   are, as it were, both raised up together with Christ, and also made to
   sit together with Christ in heavenly places, and in him, Eph. ii. 6.

   If it be objected here, that there is this reason, why what Christ
   suffered should be accepted on our account, rather than the obedience
   he performed, that he was obliged to obedience for himself, but was not
   obliged to suffer but only on our account; to this I answer, That
   Christ was not obliged, on his own account, to undertake to obey.
   Christ, in his original circumstances, was in no subjection to the
   Father, being altogether equal with him: he was under no obligation to
   put himself in man's stead, and under man's law; or to put himself into
   any state of subjection to God whatsoever. There was a transaction
   between the Father and the Son, that was antecedent to Christ's
   becoming man, and being made under the law, wherein he undertook to put
   himself under the law, and both to obey and to suffer; in which
   transaction these things were already virtually done in the sight of
   God; as is evident by this, that God acted on the ground of that
   transaction, justifying and saving sinners, as if the things undertaken
   had been actually performed long before they were performed indeed. And
   therefore, without doubt, in order to estimate the value and validity
   of what Christ did and suffered, we must look back to that transaction,
   wherein these things were first undertaken, and virtually done in the
   sight of God, and see what capacity and circumstances Christ acted in
   them, and we shall find that Christ was under no manner of obligation,
   either to obey the law, or to suffer its penalty. After this he was
   equally under obligation to both; for henceforward he stood as our
   surety or representative: and therefore this consequent obligation may
   be as much of an objection against the validity of his suffering the
   penalty, as against his obedience. But if we look to that original
   transaction between the Father and the Son, wherein both these were
   undertaken and accepted as virtually done in the sight of the Father,
   we shall find Christ acting with regard to both, as one perfectly in
   his own right, and under no manner of previous obligation to hinder the
   validity of either.

   2. To suppose that all Christ does is only to make atonement for us by
   suffering, is to make him our Saviour but in part. It is to rob him of
   half his glory as a Saviour. For if so, all that he does is to deliver
   us from hell; he does not purchase heaven for us. The adverse scheme
   supposes that he purchases heaven for us, in that he satisfies for the
   imperfections of our obedience, and so purchases that our sincere
   imperfect obedience might be accepted as the condition of eternal life;
   and so purchases an opportunity for us to obtain heaven by our own
   obedience. But to purchase heaven for us only in this sense, is to
   purchase it in no sense at all; for all of it comes to no more than a
   satisfaction for our sins, or removing the penalty by suffering in our
   stead. For all the purchasing they speak of, that our imperfect
   obedience should be accepted, is only to pay a debt for us; there is no
   positive purchase of any good. We are taught in Scripture that heaven
   is purchased for us; it is called the purchased possession, Eph. i. 14.
   The gospel proposes the eternal inheritance, not to be acquired, as the
   first covenant did, but as already acquired and purchased. But he that
   pays a man's debt for him, and so delivers him from slavery, cannot be
   said to purchase an estate for him, merely because he sets him at
   liberty, so that henceforward he has an opportunity to get an estate by
   his own hand-labour. So that according to this scheme, the saints in
   heaven have no reason to thank Christ for purchasing heaven for them,
   or redeeming them to God, and making them kings and priests, as we have
   an account that they do, in Rev. v. 9.

   3. Justification by the righteousness and obedience of Christ, is a
   doctrine that the Scripture teaches in very full terms; Rom. v.18, 19.
   "By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
   justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
   sinners; so, by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous."
   Here in one verse we are told, that we have justification by Christ's
   righteousness; and, that there might be no room to understand the
   righteousness spoken of, merely of Christ's atonement by his suffering
   the penalty, in the next verse it is put in other terms, and asserted,
   that it is by Christ's obedience we are made righteous. It is scarcely
   possible any thing should be more full and determined: the terms, taken
   singly, are such as fix their own meaning, and taken together, they fix
   the meaning of each other. The words show that we are justified by that
   righteousness of Christ which consists in his obedience, and that we
   are made righteous or justified by that obedience of his, that is, his
   righteousness, or moral goodness before God.

   Here possibly it may be objected, that this text means only, that we
   are justified by Christ's passive obedience.

   To this I answer, whether we call it active or passive, it alters not
   the case as to the present argument, as long as it is evident by the
   words, that it is not merely under the notion of an atonement for
   disobedience, or a satisfaction for unrighteousness, but under the
   notion of a positive obedience, and a righteousness, or moral goodness,
   that it justifies us, or makes us righteous; because both the words
   righteousness and obedience are used, and used too as the opposites to
   sin and disobedience, and an offence. Rom. iv. 18. "Therefore as by the
   offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so, by
   the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
   justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
   sinners; so, by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous."
   Now, what can be meant by righteousness, when spoken of as the opposite
   to sin, or moral evil, but moral goodness? What is the righteousness
   that is the opposite of an offence, but the behaviour that is well
   pleasing? and what can be meant by obedience, when spoken of as the
   opposite of disobedience, or going contrary to a command, but a
   positive obeying and an actual complying with the command? So that
   there is no room for any invented distinction of active and passive, to
   hurt the argument from this scripture; for it is evident by it, as any
   thing can be, that believers are justified by the righteousness and
   obedience of Christ, under the notion of his moral goodness;--his
   positive obeying, and actual complying with the commands of God, and
   that behaviour which, because of its conformity to his commands, was
   well-pleasing in his sight. This is all that ever any need to desire to
   have granted in this dispute.

   By this it appears, that if Christ's dying be here included in the
   words righteousness and obedience, it is not merely as a propitiation,
   or bearing a penalty of a broken law in our stead, but as his voluntary
   submitting and yielding himself to those sufferings, was an act of
   obedience to the Father's commands, and so was a part of his positive
   righteousness, or moral goodness.

   Indeed all obedience considered under the notion of righteousness, is
   something active, something done in voluntary compliance with a
   command; whether it may be done without suffering, or whether it be
   hard and difficult; yet as it is obedience, righteousness, or moral
   goodness, it must be considered as something voluntary and active. If
   any one is commanded to go through difficulties and sufferings, and he,
   in compliance with this command, voluntarily does it, he properly obeys
   in so doing; and as he voluntarily does it in compliance with a
   command, his obedience is as active as any whatsoever. It is the same
   sort of obedience, a thing of the very same nature, as when a man, in
   compliance with a command, does a piece of hard service, or goes
   through hard labour; and there is no room to distinguish between such
   obedience of it, as if it were a thing of quite a different nature, by
   such opposite terms as active and passive: all the distinction that can
   be pretended, is that which is between obeying an easy command and a
   difficult one. But is there from hence any foundation to make two
   species of obedience, one active and the other passive? There is no
   appearance of any such distinction ever entering into the hearts of any
   of the penmen of Scripture.

   It is true, that of late, when a man refuses to obey the precept of a
   human law, but patiently yields himself up to suffer the penalty of the
   law, it is called passive obedience: but this I suppose is only a
   modern use of the word obedience; surely it is a sense of the word that
   the Scripture is a perfect stranger to. It is improperly called
   obedience, unless there be such a precept in the law, that he shall
   yield himself patiently to suffer, to which his so doing shall be an
   active voluntary conformity. There may in some sense be said to be a
   conformity of the law in a person's suffering the penalty of the law;
   but no other conformity to the law is properly called obedience to it,
   but an active voluntary conformity to the precepts of it. The word obey
   is often found in Scripture with respect to the law of God to man, but
   never in any other sense.

   It is true that Christ's willingly undergoing those sufferings which he
   endured, is a great part of that obedience of righteousness by which we
   are justified. The sufferings of Christ are respected in Scripture
   under a twofold consideration, either merely as his being substituted
   for us, or put into our stead, in suffering the penalty of the law; and
   so his sufferings are considered as a satisfaction and propitiation for
   sin; or as he, in obedience to a law or command of the Father,
   voluntarily submitted himself to those sufferings, and actively yielded
   himself up to bear them; and so they are considered as his
   righteousness, and a part of his active obedience. Christ underwent
   death in obedience to the command of the Father, Psalm xl. 6, 7, 8.
   "Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou
   opened: burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not required. Then
   said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me: I
   delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy "law is within my heart."
   John x.17, 18. "I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man
   taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself: I have power to lay it
   down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I
   received of my Father." John xviii. 11. "The cup which my Father hath
   given me, shall I not drink it?" And this is part, and indeed the
   principal part, of that active obedience by which we are justified.

   It can be no just objection against this, that the command of the
   Father to Christ that he should lay down his life, was no part of the
   law that we had broken; and therefore, that his obeying this command
   could be no part of that obedience that he performed for us, but only
   that which we had broken or failed of obeying. For although it must be
   the same legislative authority, whose honour is repaired by Christ's
   obedience, that we have injured by our disobedience; yet there is no
   need that the law which Christ obeys should be precisely the same that
   Adam was to have obeyed, in that sense, that there should be no
   positive precepts wanting, nor any added. There was wanting the precept
   about the forbidden fruit, and there was added the ceremonial law. The
   thing required was perfect obedience. It is no matter whether the
   positive precepts were the same, if they were equivalent. The positive
   precepts that Christ was to obey, were much more than equivalent to
   what was wanting, because infinitely more difficult, particularly the
   command that he had received to lay down his life, which was his
   principal act of obedience, and which, above all other, is concerned in
   our justification. As that act of disobedience by which we fell, was
   disobedience to a positive precept that Christ never was under, viz.
   that of abstaining from the tree of knowledge of good and evil; so that
   act of obedience by which principally we are redeemed, is obedience to
   a positive precept that Adam never was under, viz. the precept of
   laying down his life. It was suitable that it should be a positive
   precept, that should try both Adam's and Christ's obedience. Such
   precepts are the greatest and most proper trial of obedience; because
   in them, the mere authority and will of the legislator is the sole
   ground of the obligation, (and nothing in the nature of the things
   themselves,) and therefore they are the greatest trial of any person's
   respect to that authority and will.

   The law that Christ was subject to, and obeyed, was in some sense the
   same that was given to Adam. There are innumerable particular duties
   required by the law only conditionally; and in such circumstances, are
   comprehended in some great and general rule of that law. Thus, for
   instance, there are innumerable acts of respect and obedience to men,
   which are required by the law of nature, (which was a law given to
   Adam,) which yet are not required absolutely, but upon many
   pre-requisite conditions; as, that there be men standing in such
   relations to us, and that they give forth such commands, and the like.
   So many acts of respect and obedience to God are included, in like
   manner, in the moral law conditionally, or such and such things being
   supposed; as Abraham's going about to sacrifice his son, the Jews'
   circumcising their children when eight days old, and Adam's not eating
   the forbidden fruit; they are virtually comprehended in that great
   general rule of the moral law, that we should obey God, and be subject
   to him in whatsoever he pleases to command us. Certainly the moral law
   does as much require us to obey God's positive commands, as it requires
   us to obey the positive commands of our parents. And thus all that
   Adam, and all that Christ was commanded, even his observing the rites
   and ceremonies of the Jewish worship, and his laying down his life, was
   virtually included in this same great law. [672]

   It is no objection against the last-mentioned thing, even Christ's
   laying down his life, it being included in the moral law given to Adam,
   because that law itself allowed of no occasion for any such thing; for
   the moral law virtually includes all right acts, on all possible
   occasions, even occasions that the law itself allows not: thus we are
   obliged by the moral law to mortify our lusts, and repent of our sins,
   though that law allows of no lust to mortify, of sin to repent of.

   There is indeed but one great law of God, and that is the same law that
   says, "if thou sinnest, thou shalt die;" and "cursed is every one that
   continues not in all things contained in this law to do them." All
   duties of positive institution are virtually comprehended in this law:
   and therefore, if the Jews broke the ceremonial law, it exposed them to
   the penalty of the law, or covenant of works, which threatened, "thou
   shalt surely die." The law is the eternal and unalterable rule of
   righteousness between God and man, and therefore is the rule of
   judgment, by which all that a man does shall be either justified or
   condemned; and no sin exposes to damnation, but by the law. So now he
   that refuses to obey the precepts that require an attendance on the
   sacraments of the New Testament, is exposed to damnation, by virtue of
   the law or covenant of works. It may moreover be argued, that all sins
   whatsoever are breaches of the law or covenant of works, because all
   sins, even breaches of the positive precepts, as well as others, have
   atonement by the death of Christ: but what Christ died for, was to
   satisfy the law, or to bear the curse of the law; as appears by Gal.
   iii. 10-13. and Rom. vii. 3, 4.

   So that Christ's laying down his life might be part of that obedience
   by which we are justified, though it was a positive precept not given
   to Adam. It was doubtless Christ's main act of obedience, because it
   was obedience to a command that was attended with immensely the
   greatest difficulty, and so to a command that was the greatest trial of
   his obedience. His respect shown to God in it, and his honour to God's
   authority, was proportionably great. It is spoken of in Scripture as
   Christ's principal act of obedience. Philip. ii. 7 ,8. "But made
   himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
   was made in the likeness of man: and being found in fashion as a man,
   he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
   the cross." Heb. v. 8. "Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience
   by the things that he suffered." It was mainly by this act of obedience
   that Christ purchased so glorious a reward for himself; Philip. ii. 8,
   9. "He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
   Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which
   is above every name." And it therefore follows from what has been
   already said, that it is mainly by this act of obedience that believers
   in Christ also have the reward of glory, or some to partake with Christ
   in his glory. We are as much saved by the death of Christ, as his
   yielding himself to die was an act of obedience, as we are, as it was a
   propitiation for our sins: for as it was not the only act of obedience
   that merited, he having performed meritorious acts of obedience through
   the whole course of his life; so neither was it the only suffering that
   was propitiatory; all his sufferings through the whole course of his
   life being propitiatory, as well as every act of obedience meritorious.
   Indeed this was his principal suffering; and it was as much his
   principal act of obedience.

   Hence we may see how that the death of Christ did not only make
   atonement, but also merited eternal life; and hence we may see how by
   the blood of Christ we are not only redeemed from sin, but redeemed
   unto God; and therefore the Scripture seems every where to attribute
   the whole of salvation to the blood of Christ. This precious blood is
   as much the main price by which heaven is purchased, as it is the main
   price by which we are redeemed from hell. The positive righteousness of
   Christ, or that price by which he merited, was of equal value with that
   by which he satisfied; for indeed it was the same price. He spilled his
   blood to satisfy, and by reason of the infinite dignity of his person,
   his sufferings were looked upon as of infinite value, and equivalent to
   the eternal sufferings of a finite creature. And he spilled his blood
   out of respect to the honour of God's majesty, and in submission to his
   authority, who had commanded him so to do: and his obedience therein
   was of infinite value; both because of the dignity of the person that
   performed it, and because he put himself to infinite expense to perform
   it, whereby the infinite degree of his regard to God's authority
   appeared.

   One would wonder what Arminians mean by Christ's merits. They talk of
   Christ's merits as much as any body, and yet deny the imputation of
   Christ's positive righteousness. What should there be that any one
   should merit or deserve any thing by, besides righteousness or
   goodness? If any thing that Christ did or suffered, merited or deserved
   any thing, it was by virtue of the goodness, or righteousness, or
   holiness of it. If Christ's sufferings and death merited heaven, it
   must be because there was an excellent righteousness and transcendent
   moral goodness in that act of laying down his life. And if by that
   excellent righteousness he merited heaven for us; then surely that
   righteousness is reckoned to our account, that we have the benefit of
   it, or, which is the same thing, it is imputed to us.

   Thus, I hope, I have made it evident, that the righteousness of Christ
   is indeed imputed to us. I proceed now to the

   Third and last thing under this argument, That this doctrine, of the
   imputation of Christ's righteousness, is utterly inconsistent with the
   doctrine of our being justified by our own virtue or sincere obedience.
   If acceptance to God's favour, and a title to life, be given to
   believers as the reward of Christ's obedience, then it is not given as
   the reward of our own obedience. In what respect soever Christ is our
   Saviour, that doubtless excludes our being our own saviours in that
   same respect. If we can be our own saviours in the same respect that
   Christ is, it will thence follow, that the salvation of Christ is
   needless in that respect; according to the apostle's reasoning, Gal. v.
   4. "Christ is rendered of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
   justified by the law." Doubtless, it is Christ's prerogative to be our
   Saviour in that sense wherein he is our Saviour. And therefore, if it
   be by his obedience that we are justified, then it is not by our own
   obedience.

   Here perhaps it may be said, that a title to salvation is not directly
   given as the reward of our obedience; for that is not by any thing of
   ours, but only by Christ's satisfaction and righteousness; but yet an
   interest in that satisfaction and righteousness if given as a reward of
   our obedience.

   But this does not at all help the case; for this is to ascribe as much
   to our obedience as if we ascribed salvation to it directly, without
   the intervention of Christ's righteousness. For it would be as a great
   thing for God to give us Christ, and his satisfaction and
   righteousness, in reward for our obedience, as to give us heaven
   immediately; it would be as great a reward, and as great a testimony of
   respect to our obedience. And if God gives as great a thing as
   salvation for our obedience, why could he not as well give salvation
   itself directly? and then there would have been no need of Christ's
   righteousness. And indeed if God gives us Christ, or an interest in
   him, properly in reward of our obedience, he does really give us
   salvation in reward for our obedience: for the former implies the
   latter; yea, it implies it, as the greater implies the less. So that
   indeed it exalts our virtue and obedience more, to suppose that God
   gives us Christ in reward of that virtue and obedience, than if he
   should give salvation without Christ.

   The thing that the Scripture guards and militates against, is our
   imagining that it is our own goodness, virtue, or excellency that
   instates us in God's acceptance and favour. But to suppose that God
   gives us an interest in Christ in reward for our virtue, is as great an
   argument that it instates us in God's favour, as if he bestowed a title
   to eternal life as its direct reward. If God gives us an interest in
   Christ as a reward of our obedience, it will then follow, that we are
   instated in God's acceptance and favour by our own obedience,
   antecedent to our having an interest in Christ. For a rewarding any
   one's excellency, evermore supposes favour and acceptance on the
   account of that excellency: it is the very notion of a reward, that it
   is a good thing, bestowed in testimony of respect and favour for the
   virtue or excellency rewarded. So that it is not by virtue of our
   interest in Christ and his merits, that we first come into favour with
   God, according to this scheme; for we are in God's favour before we
   have any interest in those merits; in that we have an interest in those
   merits given as a fruit of God's favour for our own virtue. If our
   interest in Christ be the fruit of God's favour, then it cannot be the
   ground of it. If God did not accept us, and had no favour for us for
   our own excellency, he never would bestow so great a reward upon us, as
   a right in Christ's satisfaction and righteousness. So that such a
   scheme destroys itself; for it supposes that Christ's satisfaction and
   righteousness are necessary for us to recommend us to the favour of
   God; and yet supposes that we have God's favour and acceptance before
   we have Christ's satisfaction and righteousness, and have these given
   as a fruit of God's favour.

   Indeed, neither salvation itself, nor Christ the Saviour, are given as
   a reward of any thing in man: they are not given as a reward of faith,
   nor any thing else of ours: we are not united to Christ as a reward of
   our faith, but have union with him by faith, only as faith is the very
   act of uniting or closing on our part. As when a man offers himself to
   a woman in marriage, he does not give himself to her as a reward of her
   receiving him in marriage. Her receiving him is not considered as a
   worthy deed in her for which he rewards her by giving himself to her;
   but it is by her receiving him that the union is made, by which she
   hath him for her husband. It is on her part the unition itself. By
   these things it appears how contrary to the gospel of Christ their
   scheme is, who say that faith justifies as a principle of obedience, or
   as a leading act of obedience; or (as others) the sum and comprehension
   of all evangelical obedience. For by this, the obedience or virtue that
   is in faith gives it its justifying influence; and that is the same
   thing as to say, that we are justified by our own obedience, virtue, or
   goodness.

   Having thus considered the evidence of the truth of the doctrine, I
   proceed now to the

   III. Thing proposed, viz. "To show in what sense the act of a christian
   life, or of evangelical obedience, may be looked upon to be concerned
   in this affair."

   From what has been said already, it is manifest that they cannot have
   any concern in this affair as good works, or by virtue of any moral
   goodness in them; not as works of the law, or as that moral excellency,
   or any part of it, which is the fulfilment of that great, universal,
   and everlasting law or covenant of works which the great lawgiver has
   established, as the highest and unalterable rule of judgment, which
   Christ alone answers, or does any thing towards it.

   It having been shown out of the Scripture, that it is only by faith, or
   the soul's receiving and uniting to the Saviour who has wrought our
   righteousness, that we are justified; it therefore remains, that the
   acts of a christian life cannot be concerned in this affair any
   otherwise than as they imply, and are the expressions of, faith, and
   may be looked upon as so many acts of reception of Christ the Saviour.
   But the determining what concerns acts of christian obedience can have
   in justification in this respect, will depend on the resolving of
   another point, viz. Whether any other act of faith besides the first
   act, has any concern in our justification, or how far perseverance in
   faith, or the continued and renewed acts of faith, have influence in
   this affair. And it seems manifest that justification is by the first
   act of faith, in some respects, in a peculiar manner, because a sinner
   is actually and finally justified as soon as he has performed one act
   of faith; and faith in its first act does, virtually at least, depend
   on God for perseverance, and entitles to this among other benefits. But
   yet the perseverance of faith is not excluded in this affair; it is not
   only certainly connected with justification, but it is not to be
   excluded from that on which the justification of a sinner has a
   dependence, or that by which he is justified.

   I have shown that the way in which justification has a dependence on
   faith, is, that it is the qualification on which the congruity of an
   interest in the righteousness of Christ depends, or wherein such a
   fitness consists. But the consideration of the perseverance of faith
   cannot be excluded out of this congruity or fitness, for it is
   congruous that he that believes in Christ should have an interest in
   Christ's righteousness, and so in the eternal benefits purchased by it,
   because faith is that by which the soul hath union or oneness with
   Christ; and there is a natural congruity in it, that they who are one
   with Christ should have a joint interest with him in his eternal
   benefits; but yet this congruity depends on its being an abiding union.
   As it is needful that the branch should abide in the vine, in order to
   its receiving the lasting benefits of the root; so it is necessary that
   the soul should abide in Christ, in order to its receiving those
   lasting benefits of God's final acceptance and favour. John xv. 6, 7.
   "If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch. If ye abide in
   me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
   be done unto you." Ver. 9, 10. "Continue ye in my love. If ye keep (or
   abide in) my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have
   kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love." There is the
   same reason why it is necessary that the union with Christ should
   remain, as why it should be begun; why it should continue to be, as why
   it should once be. If it should be begun without remaining, the
   beginning would be in vain. In order to the soul's being now in a
   justified state, and now free from condemnation, it is necessary that
   it should now be in Christ, and not merely that it should once have
   been in him. Rom. viii. 1. "There is no condemnation to them which are
   in Christ Jesus." The soul is saved in Christ, as being now in him,
   when the salvation is bestowed, and not merely as remembering that it
   once was in him. Philip. iii. 9. "That I may be found in him, not
   having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
   through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
   faith." 1 John ii. 28. "And now, little children, abide in him; that
   when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before
   him at his coming." In order to persons being blessed after death, it
   is necessary not only that they should once be in him, but that they
   should die in him. Rev. xiv. 13. "Blessed are the dead that die in the
   Lord."--And there is the same reason why faith, the uniting
   qualification, should remain, in order to the union's once being.

   So that although the sinner is actually and finally justified on the
   first acts of faith, yet the perseverance of faith, even then, comes
   into consideration, as one thing on which the fitness of acceptance to
   life depends. God, in the act of justification, which is passed on a
   sinner's first believing, has respect to perseverance, as being
   virtually contained in that first act of faith; and it is looked upon,
   and taken by him that justifies, as being as it were a property in that
   faith. God has respect to the believer's continuance in faith, and he
   is justified by that, as though it already were, because by divine
   establishment it shall follow; and it being by divine constitution
   connected with that first faith, as much as if it were a property in
   it, it is then considered as such, and so justification is not
   suspended; but were it not for this, it would be needful that is should
   be suspended, till the sinner had actually persevered in faith.

   And that it is so, that God in the act of final justification which he
   passes at the sinner's conversion, has respect to perseverance in
   faith, and future acts of faith, as being virtually implied in the
   first act, is further manifest by this, viz. That in a sinner's
   justification, at his conversion there is virtually contained a
   forgiveness as to eternal and deserved punishment, not only of all past
   sins, but also of all future infirmities and acts of sin that they
   shall be guilty of; because that first justification is decisive and
   final. And yet pardon, in the order of nature, properly follows the
   crime, and also follows those acts of repentance and faith that respect
   the crime pardoned, as is manifest both from reason and Scripture.
   David, in the beginning of Psalm xxxii. speaks of the forgiveness of
   sins which were doubtless committed long after he was first godly, as
   being consequent on those sins, and on his repentance and faith with
   respect to them; and yet this forgiveness is spoken of by the apostle
   in the 4th of Romans, as an instance of justification by faith.
   Probably the sin David there speaks of is the same that he committed in
   the matter of Uriah, and so the pardon the same with that release from
   death, or eternal punishment, which the prophet Nathan speaks of , 2
   Sam. xii. 13. "The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not
   die." Not only does the manifestation of this pardon follow the sin in
   the order of time, but the pardon itself, in the order of nature,
   follows David's repentance and faith with respect to this sin; for it
   is spoken of in the Psalm xxxii., as depending on it.

   But inasmuch as a sinner, in his first justification, is for ever
   justified and freed from all obligations to eternal punishment; it
   hence of necessity follows, that future faith and repentance are
   beheld, in that justification, as virtually contained in that first
   faith and repentance; because repentance of those future sins, and
   faith in a Redeemer, with respect to them, or, at least, the
   continuance of that habit and principle in the heart that has such an
   actual repentance and faith in its nature and tendency, is now made
   sure by God's promise.--If remission of sins, committed after
   conversion, in the order of nature, follows that faith and repentance
   that is after them, then it follows that future sins are respected in
   the first justification, no otherwise than as future faith and
   repentance are respected in it. And future repentance and faith are
   looked upon by him that justifies, as virtually implied in the first
   repentance and faith, in the same manner as justification from future
   sins is virtually implied in the first justification; which is the
   thing that was to be proved.

   And besides, if no other act of faith could be concerned in
   justification but the first act, it will then follow, that Christians
   ought never to seek justification by any other act of faith. For if
   justification is not to be obtained by after acts of faith, then surely
   it is not a duty to seek it by such acts: and so it can never be a duty
   for persons after they are once converted, by faith to seek to God, or
   believingly to look to him, for the remission of sin, or deliverance
   from the guilt of it, because deliverance from the guilt of sin is part
   of what belongs to justification. And if it be not proper for converts
   by faith to look to God through Christ for it, then it will follow,
   that it is not proper for them to pray for it; for christian prayer to
   God for a blessing, is but an expression of faith in God for that
   blessing; prayer is only the voice of faith. But if these things are
   so, it will follow that the petition of the Lord's prayer, forgive us
   our debts, is not proper to be put up by disciples of Christ, or to be
   used in christian assemblies; and that Christ improperly directed his
   disciples to use that petition, when they were all of them, except
   Judas, converted before. The debt that Christ directs his disciples to
   pray for the forgiveness of, can mean nothing else but the punishment
   that sin deserves, or the debt that we owe to divine justice, the ten
   thousand talents we owe our Lord. To pray that God would forgive our
   debts, is undoubtedly the same thing as to pray that God would release
   us from obligation to due punishment; but releasing from obligation to
   the punishment due to sin, and forgiving the debt that we owe to divine
   justice, is what appertains to justification.

   And then to suppose that no after acts of faith are concerned in the
   business of justification, and so that it is not proper for any ever to
   seek justification by such acts, would be for ever to cut off those
   Christians that are doubtful concerning their first act of faith, from
   the joy and peace of believing. As the business of a justifying faith
   is to obtain pardon and peace with God, by looking to God, and trusting
   in him for these blessings; so the joy and peace of that faith is in
   the apprehension of pardon and peace obtained by such a trust. This a
   Christian that is doubtful of his first act of faith cannot have from
   that act, because, by the supposition, he is doubtful whether it be an
   act of faith, and so whether he did obtain pardon and peace by that
   act. The proper remedy, in such a case, is now by faith to look to God
   in Christ for these blessings; but he is cut off from this remedy,
   because he is uncertain whether he has warranted so to do; for he does
   not know but that he has believed already; and if so, then he has no
   warrant to look to God by faith for these blessings now, because, by
   the supposition, no new act of faith is a proper means of obtaining
   these blessings. And so he can never properly obtain the joy of faith;
   for there are acts of true faith that are very weak, and the first act
   may be so as well as others: it may be like the first motion of the
   infant in the womb; it may be so weak an act, that the Christian, by
   examining it, may never be able to determine whether it was a true act
   of faith or no; and it is evident from fact, and abundant experience,
   that many Christians are for ever at a loss to determine which was
   their first act of faith. And those saints who have had a good degree
   of satisfaction concerning their faith, may be subject to great
   declensions and falls, in which case they are liable to great fears of
   eternal punishment; and the proper way of deliverance, is to forsake
   their sin by repentance, and by faith now to come to Christ for
   deliverance from the deserved eternal punishment; but this it would not
   be, if deliverance from that punishment was not this way to be
   obtained.

   But what is a still more plain and direct evidence of what I am now
   arguing for, is, that the act of faith which Abraham exercised in the
   great promise of the covenant of grace that God made to him, of which
   it is expressly said, Gal. iii. 6. "It was accounted to him for
   righteousness"--the grand instance and proof that the apostle so much
   insists upon throughout the 4th chapter of Romans, and 3d chapter of
   Galatians, to confirm his doctrine of justification by faith alone--was
   not Abraham's first act of faith, but was exerted long after he had by
   faith forsaken his own country, Heb. xi. 8. and had been treated as an
   eminent friend of God.

   Moreover, the apostle Paul, in the 3d chapter of Philip. tells us how
   earnestly he sought justification by faith, or to win Christ and obtain
   that righteousness which was by the faith of him, in what he did after
   his conversion. Verse 8, 9. "For whom I have suffered the loss of all
   things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found
   in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that
   which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
   by faith." And in the two next verses he expresses the same thing in
   other words, and tells us how he went through sufferings, and became
   conformable to Christ's death, that he might be a partaker with Christ
   in the benefit of his resurrection; which the same apostle elsewhere
   teaches us, is especially justification. Christ's resurrection was his
   justification; in this, he that was put to death in the flesh, was
   justified by the Spirit; and he that was delivered for our offences,
   rose again for our justification. And the apostle tells us in the
   verses that follow in that 3d chapter of Philippians, that he thus
   sought to attain the righteousness which is through the faith of
   Christ, and so to partake of the benefit of his resurrection, still as
   though he had not already attained, but that he continued to follow
   after it.

   On the whole, it appears, that the perseverance of faith is necessary,
   even to the congruity of justification; and that not the less, because
   the sinner is justified, and perseverance promised, on the first act of
   faith, but God, in that justification, has respect, not only to the
   past act of faith, but to his own promise of future acts, and to the
   fitness of a qualification beheld as yet only in his own promise. And
   that perseverance in faith is thus necessary to salvation, not merely
   as a sine qua non, nor as an universal concomitant of it, but by reason
   of such an influence and dependence, seems manifest by many scriptures:
   I would mention two or three; Heb. iii. 6. "Whose house are we, if we
   hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
   end." Verse 14. "For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the
   beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end." Chap. vi. 12. "Be
   ye followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
   promises." Rom. xi. 20. "Well, because of unbelief they were broken
   off; but thou standest by faith. Be not high minded, but fear."

   And, as the congruity to a final justification depends on perseverance
   in faith, as well as the first act, so oftentimes the manifestation of
   justification in the conscience, arises as great deal more from after
   acts, than the first act. And all the difference whereby the first act
   of faith has a concern in this affair that is peculiar, seems to be, as
   it were, only an accidental difference, arising from the circumstance
   of time, or its being first in order of time; and not from any peculiar
   respect that God has to it, or any influence it has of a peculiar
   nature, in the affair of our salvation.

   And thus it is that a truly christian walk, and the acts of an
   evangelical, child-like, believing obedience, are concerned in the
   affair of our justification, and seem to be sometimes so spoken of in
   Scripture, viz. as an expression of a persevering faith in the Son of
   God, the only Saviour. Faith unites to Christ, and so gives a congruity
   to justification, not merely as remaining a dormant principle in the
   heart, but as being and appearing in its active expressions. The
   obedience of a Christian, so far as it is truly evangelical, and
   performed with the Spirit of the Son sent forth into the heart, has all
   relation to Christ, the Mediator, and is but an expression of the
   soul's believing unition to Christ. All evangelical works are works of
   that faith that worketh by love; and every such act of obedience,
   wherein it is inward, and the act of the soul, is only a new effective
   act of reception of Christ, and adherence to the glorious Saviour.
   Hence that of the apostle, Gal. ii.20. "I live; yet not I, but Christ
   liveth in me; and the life that I now live in the flesh, is by the
   faith of the Son of God." And hence we are directed, in whatever we do,
   whether in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus
   Christ, Col. iii.17.

   And that God in justification has respect, not only to the first act of
   faith, but also to future persevering acts, as expressed in life, seems
   manifest by Rom. i. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God
   revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, "The just shall live by
   faith." And Heb. x.38, 39. "Now the just shall live by faith; but if
   any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are
   not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe, to
   the saving of the soul."

   So that as was before said of faith, so may it be said of a child-like
   believing obedience, it has no concern in justification by any virtue
   or excellency in it; but only as there is a reception of Christ in it.
   And this is no more contrary to the apostle's frequent assertion of our
   being justified without the works of the law, than to say that we are
   justified by faith; for faith is as much a work, or act of christian
   obedience, as the expressions of faith, in spiritual life and walk. And
   therefore, as we say that faith does not justify as a work, so we say
   of all these effective expressions of faith.

   This is the reverse of the scheme of our modern divines, who hold, that
   faith justifies only as an act or expression of obedience; whereas, in
   truth, obedience has no concern in justification, any otherwise than as
   an expression of faith.

   I now proceed to the

   IV. Thing proposed, viz. To answer objections.

   Object. 1. We frequently find promises of eternal life and salvation,
   and sometimes of justification itself, made our own virtue and
   obedience. Eternal life is promised to obedience, in Rom. ii.7. "To
   them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honour,
   and immortality; eternal life:" and the like in innumerable other
   places. And justification itself is promised to that virtue of a
   forgiving spirit or temper in us, Matt. vi.14. "For, if ye forgive men
   their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye
   forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
   trespasses." All allow that justification in great part consists in the
   forgiveness of sins.

   To this I answer,

   1. These things being promised to our virtue and obedience, argues no
   more, that that there is a connexion between them and evangelical
   obedience; which, I have already observed, is not the thing in dispute.
   All that can be proved by obedience and salvation being connected in
   the promise, is, that obedience and salvation are connected in fact;
   which nobody denies; and whether it be owned or denied, is, as has been
   shown, nothing to the purpose. There is no need that an admission to a
   title to salvation, should be given on the account of our obedience, in
   order to the promises being true. If we find such a promise, that he
   that obeys shall be saved, or he that is holy shall be justified; all
   that is needful, in order to such promises being true, is, that it be
   really so, that he that obeys shall be saved, and that holiness and
   justification shall indeed go together. That proposition may be a
   truth, that he that obeys shall be saved; because obedience and
   salvation are connected together in fact; and yet an acceptance to a
   title to salvation not be granted upon the account of any of our own
   virtue or obedience. What is a promise, but only a declaration of
   future truth, for the comfort and encouragement of the person to whom
   it is declared? Promises are conditional propositions; and, as has been
   already observed, it is not the thing in dispute, whether other things
   besides faith may not have the place of the condition in such
   propositions wherein pardon and salvation are the consequent.

   2. Promises may rationally be made to signs and evidences of faith, and
   yet the thing promised not be upon the account of the sign, but the
   thing signified. Thus, for instance, human government may rationally
   make promises of such and such privileges to those that can show such
   evidences of their being free of such a city, or members of such a
   corporation, or descended of such a family; when it is not at all for
   the sake of that which is the evidence or sign, in itself considered,
   that they are admitted to such a privilege, but only and purely for the
   sake of that which it is an evidence of. And though God does not stand
   in need of signs to know whether we have true faith or not, yet our own
   consciences do; so that it is much for our comfort that promises are
   made to signs of faith. Finding in ourselves a forgiving temper and
   disposition, may be a most proper and natural evidence to our
   consciences, that our hearts have, in a sense of our own utter
   unworthiness, truly closed and fallen in with the way of free and
   infinitely gracious forgiveness of our sins by Jesus Christ; whence we
   may be enabled, with the greater comfort, to apply to ourselves the
   promises of forgiveness by Christ.

   3. It has been just now shown, how that acts of evangelical obedience
   are indeed concerned in our justification itself, and are not excluded
   from that condition that justification depends upon, without the least
   prejudice to that doctrine of justification by faith, without any
   goodness of our own, that has been maintained; and therefore it can be
   no objection against this doctrine, that we have sometimes in Scripture
   promises of pardon and acceptance made to such acts of obedience.

   4. Promises of particular benefits implied in justification and
   salvation, may especially be fitly made to such expressions and
   evidences of faith as they have a peculiar natural likeness and
   suitableness to. As forgiveness is promised to a forgiving spirit in
   us; obtaining mercy is fitly promised to mercifulness in us, and the
   like; and that upon several accounts, they are the most natural
   evidences of our heart's closing with those benefits by faith; for they
   do especially show the sweet accord and consent that there is between
   the heart and these benefits; and by reason of the natural likeness
   that there is between the virtue and the benefit, the one has the
   greater tendency to bring the other to mind; the practice of the virtue
   tends the more to renew the sense, and refresh the hope, of the
   blessing promised; and also to convince the conscience of the justice
   of being denied the benefit, if the duty be neglected. Besides the
   sense and manifestation of divine forgiveness in our own
   consciences--yea, and may exercises of God's forgiving mercy, (as it
   respects God's fatherly displeasure,) granted after justification,
   through the course of a Christian's life--may be given as the proper
   rewards of a forgiving spirit, and yet this not be at all to the
   prejudice of the doctrine we have maintained; as will more fully
   appear, when we come to answer another objection hereafter to be
   mentioned.

   Object. 2. Our own obedience, and inherent holiness, is necessary to
   prepare men for heaven; and therefore is doubtless what recommends
   persons to God's acceptance, as the heirs of heaven.

   To this I answer,

   1. Our own obedience being necessary in order to a preparation for an
   actual bestowment of glory, is no argument that it is the thing upon
   the account of which we are accepted to a right to it. God may, and
   does do many things to prepare the saints for glory, after he has
   accepted them as the heirs of glory. A parent may do much to prepare a
   child for an inheritance in its education, after the child is an heir;
   yea, there are many things necessary to fit a child for the actual
   possession of the inheritance, yet not necessary in order to its having
   a right to the inheritance.

   2. If every thing that is necessary to prepare men for glory must be
   the proper condition of justification, then perfect holiness is the
   condition of justification. Men must be made perfectly holy, before
   they are admitted to the enjoyment of the blessedness of heaven; for
   there must in no wise enter in there any spiritual defilement. And
   therefore, when a saint dies, he leaves all his sin and corruption when
   he leaves the body.

   Object. 3. Our obedience is not only indissolubly connected with
   salvation, and preparatory to it, but the Scripture expressly speaks of
   bestowing eternal blessings as rewards for the good deeds of the
   saints. Matt. x. 42. "Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these
   little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, he
   shall in no wise lose his reward." 1 Cor. iii. 8. "Every man shall
   receive his own reward, according to his own labour." And in many other
   places. This seems to militate against the doctrine that has been
   maintained, two ways: (1.) The bestowing a reward, carries in it a
   respect to a moral fitness in the thing rewarded to the reward; the
   very notion of a reward being a benefit bestowed in testimony of
   acceptance of, and respect to, the goodness or amiableness of some
   qualification or work in the person rewarded. Besides, the Scripture
   seems to explain itself in this matter, in Rev. iii. 4. "Thou hast a
   few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments; and
   they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy." This is here
   given as the reason why they should have such a reward, "because they
   were worthy;" which, though we suppose it to imply no proper merit, yet
   it at least implies a moral fitness, or that the excellency of their
   virtue in God's sight recommends them to such a reward; which seems
   directly repugnant to what has been supposed, viz. that we are
   accepted, and approved of God, as the heirs of salvation, not out of
   regard to the excellency of our own virtue or goodness, or any moral
   fitness therein to such a reward, but only on account of the dignity
   and moral fitness of Christ's righteousness. (2.) Our being eternally
   rewarded for our own holiness and good works, necessarily supposes that
   our future happiness will be greater or smaller, in some proportion as
   our own holiness and obedience is more or less; and that there are
   different degrees of glory, according to different degrees of virtue
   and good works, is a doctrine very expressly and frequently taught us
   in Scripture. But this seems quite inconsistent with the saints all
   having their future blessedness as a reward of Christ's righteousness:
   for if Christ's righteousness be imputed to all, and this be what
   entitles each one to glory, then it is the same righteousness that
   entitles one to glory which entitles another. But if all have glory as
   the reward of the same righteousness, why have not all the same glory?
   Does not the same righteousness merit as much glory when imputed to one
   as when imputed to another?

   In answer to the first part of this objection, I would observe, that it
   does not argue that we are justified by our good deeds, that we shall
   have eternal blessings in reward for them; for it is in consequence of
   our justification, that our good deeds become rewardable with spiritual
   and eternal rewards. The acceptableness, and so the rewardableness, of
   our virtue, is not antecedent to justification, but follows it, and is
   built entirely upon it; which is the reverse of what those in the
   adverse scheme of justification suppose, viz. that justification is
   built on the acceptableness and reward of our virtue. They suppose that
   a saving interest in Christ is given as a reward of our virtue, or,
   (which is the same thing,) as a testimony of God's acceptance of our
   excellency in our virtue. But the contrary is true; that God's respect
   to our virtue as our amiableness in his sight, and his acceptance of it
   as rewardable, is entirely built on our interest in Christ already
   established. So that the relation to Christ, whereby believers in
   scripture language are said to be in Christ, is the very foundation of
   our virtues and good deeds being accepted of God, and so of their being
   rewarded; for a reward is a testimony of acceptance. For we, and all
   that we do, are accepted only in the beloved, Eph. i.6. Our sacrifices
   are acceptable, only through our interest in him, and through his
   worthiness and preciousness being, as it were, made ours. 1 Pet. ii. 4,
   5. "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men,
   but chosen of God, and precious. Ye also as lively stones, are built up
   a spiritual house, an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
   acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." Here being actually built on this
   stone, precious to God, is mentioned as all the ground of the
   acceptableness of our good works to God, and their becoming also
   precious in his eyes. So, Heb. xiii. 21. "Make you perfect in every
   good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in
   his sight, through Jesus Christ." And hence we are directed, whatever
   we offer to God, to offer it in Christ's name, as expecting to have it
   accepted no other way, than from the value that God has to that name.
   Col. iii. 17. "And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name
   of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him." To act
   in Christ's name, is to act under him as our head, and as having him to
   stand for us, and represent us to God-ward.

   The reason of this may be seen from what has been already said, to show
   it is not meet that any thing in us should be accepted of God as any
   excellency of our persons, until we are actually in Christ, and
   justified through him. The loveliness of the virtue of fallen creatures
   is nothing in the sight of God, till he beholds them in Christ, and
   clothed with his righteousness. 1. Because till then we stand condemned
   before God, by his own holy law, to his utter rejection and abhorrence.
   And, 2. Because we are infinitely guilty before him; and the loveliness
   of our virtue bears no proportion to our guilt, and must therefore pass
   for nothing before a strict judge. And, 3. Because our good deeds and
   virtuous acts themselves are in a sense corrupt; and the hatefulness of
   the corruption of them, if we are beheld as we are in ourselves, or
   separate from Christ, infinitely outweighs the loveliness of the good
   that is in them. So that if no other sin was considered but only that
   which attends the act of virtue itself, the loveliness vanishes into
   nothing in comparison of it; and therefore the virtue must pass for
   nothing, out of Christ. Not only are our best duties defiled, in being
   attended with the exercises of sin and corruption which precede,
   follow, and are intermingled with them; but even the holy acts
   themselves, and the gracious exercises of the godly, are defective.
   Though the act most simply considered is good, yet take the acts in
   their measure and dimensions, and the manner in which they are exerted,
   and they are sinfully defective; there is that defect in them that may
   well be called the corruption of them. That defect is properly sin, an
   expression of a vile sinfulness of heart, and what tends to provoke the
   just anger of God: not because the exercise of love and other grace is
   not equal to God's loveliness; for it is impossible the love of
   creatures (men or angels) should be so; but because the act is so very
   disproportionate to the occasion given for love or other grace,
   considering God's loveliness, the manifestation that is made of it, the
   exercises of kindness, the capacity of human nature, and our advantages
   (and the like) together.--A negative expression of corruption may be as
   truly sin, and as just cause of provocation, as a positive. Thus if a
   worthy and excellent person should, from mere generosity and goodness,
   exceedingly lay out himself, and with great expense and suffering save
   another's life, or redeem him from some extreme calamity; and if that
   other person should never thank him for it, or express the least
   gratitude any way; this would be a negative expression of his
   ingratitude and baseness; but is equivalent to an act of ingratitude,
   or positive exercise of a base unworthy spirit; and is truly an
   expression of it, and brings as much blame as if he by some positive
   act had much injured another person. And so it would be (only in a
   lesser degree) if the gratitude was but very small, bearing no
   proportion to the benefit and obligation: as if, for so great and
   extraordinary a kindness, he should express no more gratitude than
   would have been becoming towards a person who had only given him a cup
   of water when thirsty, or shown him the way in a journey when at a
   loss, or had done him some such small kindness. If he should come to
   his benefactor to express his gratitude, and should do after this
   manner, he might truly be said to act unworthily and odiously; he would
   show a most ungrateful spirit. His doing after such a manner might
   justly be abhorred by all; and yet the gratitude, that little there is
   of it, most simply considered, and so far as it goes, is good. And so
   it is with respect to our exercise of love, and gratitude, and other
   graces, towards God; they are defectively corrupt and sinful, and, take
   them as they are, in their manner and measure, might justly be odious
   and provoking to God, and would necessarily be so, were we beheld out
   of Christ. For in that this defect is sin, it is infinitely hateful;
   and so the hatefulness of the very act infinitely outweighs the
   loveliness of it; because all sin has infinite hatefulness and
   heinousness; but our holiness has but little value and loveliness, as
   has been elsewhere demonstrated.

   Hence, though it be true that the saints are rewarded for their good
   works, yet it is for Christ's sake only, and not for the excellency of
   their works in themselves considered, or beheld separately from Christ;
   for so they have no excellency in God's sight, or acceptableness to
   him, as has now been shown. It is acknowledged that God, in rewarding
   the holiness and good works of believers, does in some respect give
   them happiness as a testimony of his respect to the loveliness of their
   holiness and good works in his sight; for that is the very notion of a
   reward. But it is in a very different sense from what would have been
   if man had not fallen; which would have been to bestow eternal life on
   man, as a testimony of God's respect to the loveliness of what man did,
   considered as in itself, and as in man separately by himself, and not
   beheld as a member of Christ. In which sense also, the scheme of
   justification we are opposing necessarily supposes the excellency of
   our virtue to be respected and rewarded; for it supposes a saving
   interest in Christ itself to be given as a reward of it.

   Two things come to pass, relating to the saints' reward for their
   inherent righteousness, by virtue of their relation to Christ. 1. The
   guilt of their persons is all done away, and the pollution and
   hatefulness that attends and is in their good works, is hid. 2. Their
   relation to Christ adds a positive value and dignity to their good
   works in God's sight. That little holiness, and those faint and feeble
   acts of love, and other grace, receive an exceeding value in the sight
   of God, by virtue of God's beholding them as in Christ, and as it were
   members of one so infinitely worthy in his eyes; and that because God
   looks upon the persons as of greater dignity on this account. Isa.
   xliii .4. "Since thou was precious in my sight, thou hast been
   honourable." God, for Christ's sake, and because they are members of
   his own righteousness and dear Son, sets an exceeding value upon their
   persons; and hence it follows, that he also sets a great value upon
   their good acts and offering. The same love and obedience in a person
   of greater dignity and value in God's sight, is more valuable in his
   eyes than in one of less dignity. Love is valuable in proportion to the
   dignity of the person whose love it is; because, so far as any one
   gives his love to another, he gives himself, in that he gives his
   heart. But this is a more excellent offering, in proportion as the
   person whose self is offered is more worth. Believers are become
   immensely more honourable in God's esteem by virtue of their relation
   to Christ, than man would have been considered as by himself, though he
   had been free from sin; as a mean person becomes more honourable when
   married to a king. Hence God will probably reward the little weak love,
   and poor and exceeding imperfect obedience of believers in Christ, with
   more glorious reward than he would have done Adam's perfect obedience.
   According to the tenor of the first covenant, the person was to be
   accepted and rewarded, only for the work's sake; but by the covenant of
   grace, the work is accepted and rewarded, only for the person's sake;
   the person being beheld antecedently as a member of Christ, and clothed
   with his righteousness. So that though the saints' inherent holiness is
   rewarded, yet this very reward is indeed not the less founded on the
   worthiness and righteousness of Christ. None of the value that their
   works have in his sight, nor any of the acceptance they have with him,
   is out of Christ, and out of his righteousness; but his worthiness as
   mediator is the prime and only foundation on which all is built, and
   the universal source whence all arises. God indeed doth great things
   out of regard to the saints' loveliness, but it is only as a secondary
   and derivative loveliness. When I speak of a derivative loveliness, I
   do not mean only, that the qualifications themselves accepted as
   lovely, are derived from Christ, from his power and purchase; but that
   the acceptance of them as a loveliness, and all the value that is set
   upon them, and all their connexion with the reward, is founded in, and
   derived from, Christ's righteousness and worthiness.

   If we suppose that not only higher degrees of glory in heaven, but
   heaven itself, is in some respect given in reward for the holiness and
   good works of the saints, in this secondary an derivative sense, it
   will not prejudice the doctrine we have maintained. It is no way
   impossible that God may bestow heaven's glory wholly out of respect to
   Christ's righteousness, and yet in reward for man's inherent holiness,
   in different respects, and different ways. It may be only Christ's
   righteousness that God has respect to, for its own sake, the
   independent acceptableness and dignity of it being sufficient of itself
   to recommend all that believe in Christ to a title to this glory; and
   so it may be only by this that persons enter into a title to heaven, or
   have their prime right to it: and yet God may also have respect to the
   saints' own holiness, for Christ's sake, and as deriving a value from
   Christ's merit, which he may testify in bestowing heaven upon them. The
   saints being beheld as members of Christ, their obedience is looked
   upon by God as something of Christ's, it being the obedience of the
   members of Christ; as the sufferings of the members of Christ are
   looked upon, in some respect, as the sufferings of Christ. Hence the
   apostle, speaking of his sufferings, says, Col. i.24. "Who now rejoice
   in my suffering for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
   afflictions of Christ in my flesh." To the same purpose is Matt. xxv.
   35, &c. I was an hungred, naked, sick, and in prison, &c. And so that
   in Rev. xi. 8. "And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the
   great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
   Lord was crucified."

   By the merit and righteousness of Christ, such favour of God towards
   the believer may be obtained, as that God may hereby be already, as it
   were, disposed to make them perfectly and eternally happy. But yet this
   does not hinder, but that God in his wisdom may choose to bestow this
   perfect and eternal happiness in this way, viz. in some respect as a
   reward of their holiness and obedience. It is not impossible but that
   the blessedness may be bestowed as a reward for that which is done
   after that an interest is already obtained in that favour, which (to
   speak of God after the manner of men) disposes God to bestow the
   blessedness. Our heavenly Father may already have that favour for a
   child, whereby he may be thoroughly ready to give the child an
   inheritance, because he is his child; which he is by the purchase of
   Christ's righteousness: and yet that the Father may choose to bestow
   the inheritance on the child in a way of reward for his dutifulness,
   and behaving in a manner becoming a child. And so great a reward may
   not be judged more than a meet reward for his dutifulness; but that so
   great a reward is judged meet, does not arise from the excellency of
   the obedience absolutely considered, but from his standing in so near
   and honourable a relation to God, as that of a child, which is obtained
   only by the righteousness of Christ. And thus the reward, and the
   greatness of it, arises properly from the righteousness of Christ;
   though it be indeed in some sort the reward of their obedience. As a
   father might justly esteem the inheritance no more than a meet reward
   for the obedience of his child, and yet esteem it more than a meet
   reward for the obedience of a servant. The favour whence a believer's
   heavenly Father bestows the eternal inheritance, and his title as an
   heir, is founded in that relation he stands in to him as a child,
   purchased by Christ's righteousness; though he in wisdom chooses to
   bestow it in such a way, and therein to testify his acceptance of the
   amiableness of his obedience in Christ.

   Believers having a title to heaven by faith antecedent to their
   obedience, or its being absolutely promised to them before, does not
   hinder but that the actual bestowment of heaven may also be a testimony
   of God's regard to their obedience, though performed afterwards. Thus
   it was with Abraham, the father and pattern of all believers: God
   bestowed upon him that blessing of multiplying his seed as the stars of
   heaven, and causing that in his seed all the families of the earth
   should be blessed, in reward for his obedience in offering up his son
   Isaac, Gen. xxii. 16, 17, 18. "And said, By myself have I sworn, saith
   the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld
   thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
   multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the
   sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate
   of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
   blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice." And yet the very same
   blessings had been from time to time promised to Abraham, in the most
   positive terms, and the promise, with great solemnity, confirmed and
   sealed to him; as chap. xii. 2, 3. chap. xiii. 16. chap. xv. 1, 4-7,
   &c. chap. xvii. throughout; chap. xviii. 10, 18.

   From what has been said we may easily solve the difficulty arising from
   that text in Rev. iii. 4. "They shall walk with me in white, for they
   are worthy;" which is parallel with that text in Luke xx. 35. "But they
   which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
   resurrection from the dead." I allow (as in the objection) that this
   worthiness does doubtless denote a moral fitness to the reward, or that
   God looks on these glorious benefits as a meet testimony of his regard
   to the value which their persons and performances have in his sight.

   1. God looks on these glorious benefits as a meet testimony of his
   regard to the value which their persons have in his sight. But he sets
   this value upon their persons purely for Christ's sake. They are such
   jewels, and have such preciousness in his eyes, only because they are
   beheld in Christ, and by reason of the worthiness of the head they are
   the members of, and the stock they are grafted into. And the value that
   God sets upon them on this account is so great, that God thinks meet,
   from regard to it, to admit them to such exceeding glory. The saints,
   on account of their relation to Christ, are such precious jewels in
   God's sight, that they are thought worthy of a place in his own crown.
   Mal. iii. 17. Zech. ix. 16. So far as the saints are said to be
   valuable in God's sight, on whatever account, so far may they properly
   be said to be worthy, or meet for that honour which is answerable to
   the value or price which God sets upon them. A child or wife of a
   prince is worthy to be treated with great honour; and therefore if a
   mean person should be adopted to be a child of a prince, or should be
   espoused to a prince, it would be proper to say, that she was worthy of
   such and such honour and respect, and there would be no force upon the
   words in saying, that she ought to have such respect paid her, for she
   is worthy, though it be only on account of her relation to the prince
   that she is so.

   2. From the value God sets upon their persons, for the sake of Christ's
   worthiness, he also sets a high value on their virtue and performances.
   Their meek and quiet spirit is of great price in his sight. Their
   fruits are pleasant fruits, their offerings are an odour of sweet smell
   to him; and that because of the value he sets on their persons, as has
   been already observed and explained. This preciousness or high
   valuableness of believers is a moral fitness to a reward; and yet this
   valuableness is all in the righteousness of Christ, that is the
   foundation of it. The thing respected is not excellency in them
   separately by themselves, or in their virtue by itself, but the value
   in God's account arises from other considerations; which is the natural
   import of Luke xx. 35. "They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain
   that world," &c. and Luke xxi. 36. "That ye may be accounted worthy to
   escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
   the Son of man." 2 Thess. i.5. "That ye may be counted worthy of the
   kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer."

   There is a vast difference between this scheme, and what is supposed in
   the scheme of those that oppose the doctrine of justification by faith
   alone. This lays the foundation of first acceptance with God, and all
   actual salvation consequent upon it, wholly in Christ and his
   righteousness. On the contrary, in their scheme, a regard to man's own
   excellency or virtue is supposed to be first, and to have the place of
   the first foundation in actual salvation, though not in that
   ineffectual redemption, which they suppose common to all. They lay the
   foundation of all discriminating salvation in man's own virtue and
   moral excellency. This is the very bottom stone in this affair; for
   they suppose that it is from regard to our virtue, that even a special
   interest in Christ itself is given. The foundation being thus contrary,
   the whole scheme becomes exceeding diverse and contrary; the one is
   utterly inconsistent with our being justified by Christ's
   righteousness, the other not at all.

   From what has been said, we may understand, not only how the
   forgiveness of sin granted in justification is indissolubly connected
   with a forgiving spirit in us, but how there may be many exercises of
   forgiving mercy granted in reward for our forgiving those who trespass
   against us. For none will deny but that there are many acts of divine
   forgiveness towards the saints, that do not presuppose an unjustified
   state immediately preceding that forgiveness. None will deny, that
   saints who never fell from a justified state, yet commit many sins
   which God forgives afterwards, by laying aside his fatherly
   displeasure. This forgiveness may be in reward for our forgiveness,
   without any prejudice to the doctrine that has been maintained, as well
   as other mercies and blessings consequent on justification.

   With respect to the second part of the objection, that relates to the
   different degrees of glory, and the seeming inconsistence there is in
   it, that the degrees of glory in different saints should be greater or
   lesser according to their inherent holiness and good works, and yet,
   that every one's glory should be purchased with the price of the very
   same imputed righteousness,--I answer, That Christ, by his
   righteousness, purchased for every one complete and perfect happiness,
   according to his capacity. But this does not hinder but that the
   saints, being of various capacities, may have various degrees of
   happiness, and yet all their happiness be the fruit of Christ's
   purchase. Indeed it cannot be properly said, that Christ purchased any
   particular degree of happiness, so that the value of Christ's
   righteousness in the sight of God, is sufficient to raise a believer so
   high in happiness, and no higher, and so that if the believer were made
   happier, it would exceed the value of Christ's righteousness; but in
   general, Christ purchased eternal life, or perfect happiness for all,
   according to their several capacities. The saints are as so many
   vessels of different sizes, cast into the sea of happiness, where every
   vessel is full; this Christ purchased for all. But after all, it is
   left to God's sovereign pleasure to determine the largeness of the
   vessel; Christ's righteousness meddles not with this matter. Eph. iv.
   4, 5, 6, 7. "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called
   in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism,"
   &c.--"But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure
   of the gift of Christ." God may dispense in this matter according to
   what rule he pleases, not the less for what Christ has done: he may
   dispense either without condition, or upon what condition he pleases to
   fix. It is evident that Christ's righteousness meddles not with this
   matter; for what Christ did was to fulfill the covenant of works; but
   the covenant of works did not meddle at all with this. If Adam had
   persevered in perfect obedience, he and his posterity would have had
   perfect and full happiness; every one's happiness would have so
   answered his capacity, that he would have been completely blessed; but
   God would have been at liberty to have made some of one capacity, and
   others of another, as he pleased.--The angels have obtained eternal
   life, or a state of confirmed glory, by a covenant of works, whose
   condition was perfect obedience; but yet some are higher in glory than
   others, according to the several capacities that God, according to his
   sovereign pleasure, hath given them. So that it being still left with
   God, notwithstanding the perfect obedience of the second Adam, to fix
   the degree of each one's capacity by what rule he pleases, he hath been
   pleased to fix the degree of capacity, and so of glory, by the
   proportion of the saints' grace and fruitfulness here. He gives higher
   degrees of glory, in reward for higher degrees of holiness and good
   works, because it pleases him; and yet all the happiness of each saint
   is indeed the fruit of the purchase of Christ's obedience. If it had
   been but one man that Christ had obeyed and died for, and it had please
   God to make him of a very large capacity, Christ's perfect obedience
   would have purchased that his capacity should be filled, and then all
   his happiness might properly be said to be the fruit of Christ's
   perfect obedience; though, if he had been of a less capacity, he would
   not have had so much happiness by the same obedience; and yet would
   have had as much as Christ merited for him. Christ's righteousness
   meddles not with the degree of happiness, any otherwise than as he
   merits that it should be full and perfect, according to the capacity;
   and so it may be said to be concerned in the degree of happiness, as
   perfect is a degree with respect to imperfect; but it meddles not with
   the degrees of perfect happiness.

   This matter may be yet better understood, if we consider that Christ
   and the whole church of saints are, as it were, one body, of which he
   is the Head, and they members of different place and capacity: now the
   whole body, head, and members, have communion in Christ's
   righteousness; they are all partakers of the benefit of it; Christ
   himself the Head is rewarded for it, and every member is partaker of
   the benefit and reward. But it does by no means follow, that every part
   should equally partake of the benefit, but every part in proportion to
   its place and capacity; the Head partakes of far more than other parts,
   and the more noble members partake of more than the inferior. As it is
   in a natural body that enjoys perfect health, the head, and the heart,
   and lungs, have a greater share of this health, they have it more
   seated in them, than the hands and feet, because they are parts of
   greater capacity; though the hands and feet are as much in perfect
   health as those nobler parts of the body. So it is in the mystical body
   of Christ, all the members are partakers of the benefit of the Head;
   but it is according to the different capacity and place they have in
   the body; and God determines that place and capacity as he pleases; he
   makes whom he pleases the foot, and whom he pleases the hand, and whom
   he pleases the lungs, &c. 1 Cor. xii. 18. "God hath set the members
   every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him." God
   efficaciously determines the place and capacity of every member, by the
   different degrees of grace and assistance in the improvement of it in
   this world. Those that he intends for the highest place in the body, he
   gives them most of his Spirit, the greatest share of the divine nature,
   the Spirit and nature of Christ Jesus the Head, and that assistance
   whereby they perform the most excellent works, and do most abound in
   them.

   Object. 4. It may be objected against what has been supposed, (viz.
   That rewards are given to our good works, only in consequence of an
   interest in Christ, or in testimony of God's respect to the excellency
   or value of them in his sight, as built on an interest in Christ's
   righteousness already obtained,) That the Scripture speaks of an
   interest in Christ itself, as being given out of respect to our moral
   fitness. Matt. x.37, 38, 39. "He that loveth father or mother more than
   me, is not worthy of me: he that loveth son or daughter more than me,
   is not worthy of me: he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth
   after me, is not worthy of me: he that findeth his life, shall lose
   it," &c. Worthiness here at least signifies a moral fitness, or an
   excellency that recommends. And this place seems to intimate as though
   it were from respect to a moral fitness that men are admitted even to
   an union with Christ, and interest in him; and therefore this
   worthiness cannot be consequent on being in Christ, and by the
   imputation of his worthiness, or from any value that is in us, or in
   our actions in God's sight, as beheld in Christ.

   To this I answer, That though persons when they are accepted, are not
   accepted as worthy, yet when they are rejected, they are rejected as
   unworthy. He that does not love Christ above other things, but treats
   him with such indignity, as to set him below earthly things, shall be
   treated as unworthy of Christ; his unworthiness of Christ, especially
   in that particular, shall be marked against him, and imputed to him.
   And though he be a professing Christian, and live in the enjoyment of
   the gospel, and has been visibly ingrafted into Christ, and admitted as
   one of his disciples, as Judas was; yet he shall be thrust out in
   wrath, as a punishment of his vile treatment of Christ. The
   forementioned words do not imply, that if a man does love Christ above
   father and mother, &c. that he would be worthy; the most they imply is,
   that such a visible Christian shall be treated and thrust out as
   unworthy. He that believes is not received for the worthiness or moral
   fitness of faith; but yet the visible Christian is cast out by God, for
   the unworthiness and moral unfitness of unbelief. A being accepted as
   one of Christ's, is not the reward of believing; but being thrust out
   from being one of Christ's disciples, after a visible admission as
   such, is properly a punishment of unbelief. John iii. 18, 19. "He that
   believeth on him, is not condemned; but he that believeth not, is
   condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
   begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come
   into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their
   deeds were evil." Salvation is promised to faith as a free gift, but
   damnation is threatened to unbelief as a debt, or punishment due to
   unbelief. They who believed while in the wilderness, did not enter into
   Canaan, because of the worthiness of their faith; but God sware in his
   wrath, that they that believed not should not enter in, because of the
   unworthiness of their unbelief. Admitting a soul to an union with
   Christ is an act of free and sovereign grace; but excluding at death,
   and at the day of judgment, those professors of Christianity who have
   had the offers of a Saviour, and enjoyed great privileges as God's
   people, is a judicial proceeding, and a just punishment of their
   unworthy treatment of Christ. The design of this saying of Christ is to
   make them sensible of the unworthiness of their treatment of Christ,
   who professed him to be their Lord and Saviour, and set him below
   father and mother, &c. and not to show the worthiness of loving him
   above father and mother. If a beggar should be offered any great and
   precious gift, but as soon as offered, should trample it under his
   feet, it might be taken from him, as unworthy to have it. Or if a
   malefactor should have his pardon offered him, that he might be freed
   from execution, and should only scoff at it, his pardon might be
   refused him, as unworthy of it; though if he had received it, he would
   not have had it for his worthiness, or as being recommended to it by
   his virtue; for his being a malefactor supposes him unworthy, and its
   being offered him to have it only on accepting, supposes that the king
   looks for no worthiness, nothing in him for which he should bestow
   pardon as a reward. This may teach us how to understand Acts xiii. 46.
   "It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken
   unto you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy
   of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles."

   Object. 5. It is objected against the doctrine of justification by
   faith alone, That repentance is evidently spoken of in Scripture as
   that which is in a special manner the condition of remission of sins;
   but remission of sins is by all allowed to be that wherein
   justification does (at least) in great part consist.

   But it must certainly arise from a misunderstanding of what the
   Scripture says about repentance, to suppose that faith and repentance
   are two distinct things, that in like manner are the conditions of
   justification. For it is most plain from the Scripture, that the
   condition of justification, or that in us by which we are justified, is
   but one, and that is faith. Faith and repentance are not two distinct
   conditions of justification, nor are they two distinct things that
   together make one condition of justification; but faith comprehends the
   whole of that by which we are justified, or by which we come to have an
   interest in Christ, and there is nothing else has a parallel concern
   with it in the affair of our salvation. And this the divines on the
   other side themselves are sensible of, and therefore they suppose that
   the faith the apostle Paul speaks of, which he says we are justified by
   alone, comprehends in it repentance.

   And therefore, in answer to the objection, I would say, That when
   repentance is spoken of in Scripture as the condition of pardon,
   thereby is not intended any particular grace, or act, properly distinct
   from faith, that has a parallel influence with it in the affair of our
   pardon or justification; but by repentance is intended nothing distinct
   from active conversion, (or conversion actively considered,) as it
   respects the term from which. Active conversion is a motion or exercise
   of the mind that respects two terms, viz. sin and God; and by
   repentance is meant this conversion, or active change of the mind, so
   far as it is conversant about the term from which, or about sin. This
   is what the word repentance properly signifies; which, in the original
   of the New Testament, is NOT ENGLISH, and signifies a change of the
   mind, or, which is the same thing, the turning or the conversion of the
   mind. Repentance is this turning, as it respects what is turned from.
   Acts xxvi. 20. "Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I showed unto them of
   Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and
   then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God." Both
   these are the same turning, but only with respect to opposite terms: in
   the former, is expressed the exercise of mind about sin in this
   turning; in the other, the exercise of mind turning towards God.

   If we look over the scriptures that speak of evangelical repentance, we
   shall presently see that repentance is to be understood in this sense;
   as Matt. ix. 13. "I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
   repentance." Luke xiii. 3. "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
   perish." And chap. xv. 7, 10. "There is joy in heaven over one sinner
   that repenteth," i.e. over one sinner that is converted. Acts xi. 18.
   "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life." This
   is said by the Christians of the circumcision at Jerusalem, upon
   Peter's giving an account of the conversion of Cornelius and his
   family, and their embracing the gospel, though Peter had said nothing
   expressly about their sorrow for sin. And again, Acts xvii. 30. "But
   now commandeth all men every where to repent." And Luke xvi. 30. "Nay,
   father Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead, they would
   repent." 2 Pet. iii. 9. "The Lord is not slack concerning his promise,
   as some men count slackness, but is long-suffering to us-ward, not
   willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
   repentance." It is plain that in these and other places, by repentance
   is meant conversion.

   Now it is true, that conversion is the condition of pardon and
   justification: but if it be so, how absurd is it to say, that
   conversion is one condition of justification, and faith another, as
   though they were two distributively distinct and parallel conditions!
   Conversion is the condition of justification, because it is that great
   change by which we are brought from sin to Christ, and by which we
   become believers in him: agreeable to Matt. xxi. 32. "And ye, when ye
   had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him." When
   we are directed to repent, that our sins may be blotted out, it is as
   much as to say, Let your minds and hearts be changed, that your sins
   may be blotted out. But if it be said, Let your hearts be changed, that
   you may be justified; and believe, that you may be justified; does it
   therefore follow, that the heart being changed is one condition of
   justification, and believing another? But our minds must be changed,
   that we may believe, and so may be justified.

   And besides, evangelical repentance, being active conversion, is not to
   be treated of as a particular grace, properly and entirely distinct
   from faith, as by some it seems to have been. What is conversion, but
   the sinful, alienated soul's closing with Christ, or the sinner's being
   brought to believe in Christ? That exercise of soul in conversion that
   respects sin, cannot be excluded out of the nature of faith in Christ:
   there is something in faith, or closing with Christ, that respects sin,
   and that is evangelical repentance. That repentance which in Scripture
   is called, repentance for the remission of sins, is that very principle
   or operation of the mind itself that is called faith, so far as it is
   conversant about sin. Justifying faith in a Mediator is conversant
   about two things: it is conversant about sin or evil to be rejected and
   to be delivered from, and about positive good to be accepted and
   obtained by the Mediator; as conversant about the former of these, it
   is evangelical repentance, or repentance for remission of sins. Surely
   they must be very ignorant, or at least very inconsiderate, of the
   whole tenor of the gospel, who think that the repentance by which
   remission of sins is obtained, can be completed, as to all that is
   essential to it, without any respect to Christ, or application of the
   mind to the Mediator, who alone has made atonement for sin. Surely so
   great a part of salvation as remission of sins, is not to be obtained
   without looking or coming to the great and only Saviour. It is true,
   repentance, in its more general abstracted nature, is only a sorrow for
   sin, and forsaking of it, which is a duty of natural religion; but
   evangelical repentance, or repentance for remission of sins, hath more
   than this essential to it; a dependence of soul on the Mediator for
   deliverance from sin, is of the essence of it.

   That justifying repentance has the nature of faith, seems evident by
   Acts xix. 4. "Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of
   repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
   which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." The latter
   words, "saying unto the people, that they should believe on him," &c.
   are evidently exegetical of the former, and explain how he preached
   repentance for the remission of sins. When it is said, that he preached
   repentance for the remission of sin, saying, that they should believe
   on Christ, it cannot be supposed but that his saying, that they should
   believe on Christ, was intended as directing them what to do that they
   might obtain the remission of sins. So, 2 Tim. ii .25. "In meekness
   instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give
   them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth." That acknowledging
   of the truth which there is in believing, is here spoken of as what is
   retained in repentance. And on the other hand, that faith includes
   repentance in its nature, is evident by the apostle's speaking of sin
   as destroyed in faith, Gal. ii. 18.--In the preceding verses the
   apostle mentions an objection against the doctrine of justification by
   faith alone, viz. that it tends to encourage men in sin, and so to make
   Christ the minister of sin. This objection he rejects and refutes with
   this, "If I build again the things that I destroyed, I make myself a
   transgressor." If sin be destroyed by faith, it must be by repentance
   of sin included in it; for we know that it is our repentance of sin, or
   the NOT ENGLISH , or turning of the mind from sin, that is our
   destroying our sin.

   That in justifying faith which directly respects sin, or the evil to be
   delivered from by the Mediator, is as follows: a sense of our own
   sinfulness, and the hatefulness of it, and a hearty acknowledgement of
   its desert of the threatened punishment, looking to the free mercy of
   God in a Redeemer, for deliverance from it and its punishment.

   Concerning this, here described, three things may be noted: 1. That it
   is the very same with that evangelical repentance to which remission of
   sins is promised in Scripture. 2. That it is of the essence of
   justifying faith, and is the same with that faith, so far as it is
   conversant about evil to be delivered from by the Mediator. 3. That
   this is indeed the proper and peculiar condition of remission of sins.

   1. All of it is essential to evangelical repentance, and is indeed the
   very thing meant by that repentance, to which remission of sins is
   promised in the gospel. As to the former part of the description, viz.
   a sense of our own sinfulness, and hatefulness of it, and a hearty
   acknowledgement of its desert of wrath, none will deny it to be
   included in repentance: but this does not comprehend the whole essence
   of evangelical repentance; but what follows does also properly and
   essentially belong to its nature, looking to the free mercy of God in a
   Redeemer, for deliverance from it, and the punishment of it. That
   repentance to which remission is promised, not only always has this
   with it, but it is contained in it, as what is of the proper nature and
   essence of it: and respect is ever had to this in the nature of
   repentance, whenever remission is promised to it; and it is especially
   from respect to this in the nature of repentance, that it has that
   promise made to it. If this latter part be missing, it fails of the
   nature of that evangelical repentance to which remission of sins is
   promised. If repentance remains in sorrow for sin, and does not reach
   to a looking to the free mercy of God in Christ for pardon, it is not
   that which is the condition of pardon, neither shall pardon be obtained
   by it. Evangelical repentance is an humiliation for sin before God; but
   the sinner never comes and humbles himself before God in any other
   repentance, but that which includes hoping in his mercy for remission:
   if sorrow be not accompanied with that, there will be no coming to God
   in it, but a flying further from him. There is some worship of God in
   justifying repentance; but that is not in any other repentance which
   has not a sense of and faith in the divine mercy to forgive sin; Psalm
   cxxx .4. "There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared."
   The promise of mercy to a true penitent, in Prov. xxviii. 13. is
   expressed in these terms, "Whoso confesseth and forsaketh his sins,
   shall have mercy." But there is faith in God's mercy in that
   confessing. The psalmist, (Psalm xxxii.) speaketh of the blessedness of
   the man whose transgression is forgiven--and whose sin is covered, to
   whom the Lord imputes not sin--says, that while he kept silence his
   bones waxed old: but he acknowledged his sin unto God, his iniquity he
   did not hide; he said, he would confess his transgression to the Lord,
   and then God forgave the iniquity of his sin. The manner of expression
   plainly holds forth, that then he began to encourage himself in the
   mercy of God, but his bones waxed old while he kept silence; and
   therefore the apostle Paul, in the 4th of Romans, brings this instance,
   to confirm the doctrine of justification by faith alone, that he had
   been insisting on. When sin is aright confessed to God, there is always
   faith in that act. That confessing of sin which is joined with despair,
   as in Judas, is not the confession to which the promise is made. In
   Acts ii. 38. the direction given to those who were pricked in their
   heart with a sense of the guilt of sin, was to repent, and be baptized
   in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins. Being
   baptized in the name of Christ for the remission of sins, implied faith
   in Christ for the remission of sins. Repentance for the remission of
   sins was typified of old by the priest's confessing the sins of the
   people over the scape-goat, laying his hands on him, Lev. xvi. 21.
   denoting it is that repentance and confession of sin only that obtains
   remission, which is made over Christ the great sacrifice, and with
   dependence on him. Many other things might be produced from the
   Scripture, that in like manner confirm this point; but these may be
   sufficient.

   2. All the forementioned description is of the essence of justifying
   faith, and not different from it, so far as it is conversant about sin,
   or the evil to be delivered from by the Mediator. For it is doubtless
   of the essence of justifying faith, to embrace Christ as a Saviour from
   sin and its punishment; and all that is contained in that act is
   contained in the nature of faith itself. But in the act of embracing
   Christ as a Saviour from our sin and its punishment, is implied a sense
   of our sinfulness, and a hatred of our sins, or a rejecting them with
   abhorrence, and a sense of our desert of punishment. Embracing Christ
   as a Saviour from sin, implies the contrary act, viz. a rejecting sin.
   If we fly to the light to be delivered from darkness, the same act is
   contrary to darkness, viz. a rejecting of it. In proportion to the
   earnestness with which we embrace Christ as a Saviour from sin, in the
   same proportion is the abhorrence with which we reject sin, in the same
   act. Yea, suppose there be in the nature of faith, as conversant about
   sin, no more than the hearty embracing of Christ as a Saviour from the
   punishment of sin, this act will imply in it the whole of the
   above-mentioned description. It implies a sense of our own sinfulness.
   Certainly in the hearty embracing of a Saviour from the punishment of
   our sinfulness, there is the exercise of a sense that we are sinful. We
   cannot heartily embrace Christ as a Saviour from the punishment of that
   which we are not sensible we are guilty of. There is also in the same
   act, a sense of our desert of the threatened punishment. We cannot
   heartily embrace Christ as a Saviour from that which we are not
   sensible that we have deserved. For if we are not sensible that we have
   deserved the punishment, we shall not be sensible that we have any need
   of a Saviour from it, or, at least, shall not be convinced but that God
   who offers the Saviour, unjustly makes him needful; and we cannot
   heartily embrace such an offer. And further, there is implied in a
   hearty embracing Christ as a Saviour from punishment, not only a
   conviction of conscience, that we have deserved the punishment, such as
   the devils and damned have; but there is a hearty acknowledgment of it,
   with the submission of the soul, so as, with the accord of the heart,
   to own that God might be just in the punishment. If the heart rises
   against the act or judgment of God, in holding us obliged to the
   punishment, when he offers us his Son as a Saviour from the punishment,
   we cannot with the consent of the heart receive him in that character:
   but if persons thus submit to the righteousness of so dreadful a
   punishment of sin, this carries in it a hatred of sin.

   That such a sense of our sinfulness, and utter unworthiness, and desert
   of punishment, belongs to the nature of saving faith, is what the
   Scripture from time to time holds forth; as particularly in Matt. xv.
   26-28. "But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's
   bread, and to cast it to dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs
   eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's table. Then Jesus
   answered, and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith."--And Luke
   vii. 6-9. "The centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord,
   trouble not thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under
   my roof. Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee;
   but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed: for I also am a man
   set under authority," &c.--"When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled
   at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that followed
   him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
   Israel." And also ver. 37, 38. "And behold, a woman in the city, which
   was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's
   house, brought an alabaster-box of ointment, and stood at his feet
   behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe
   them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them
   with the ointment." Together with ver. 50. "He said unto the woman, Thy
   faith hath saved thee; go in peace."

   These things do not necessarily suppose that repentance and faith are
   words of just the same signification; for it is only so much in
   justifying faith as respects the evil to be delivered from by the
   Saviour, that is called repentance. Besides, both repentance and faith,
   take them only in their general nature, are entirely distinct;
   repentance is a sorrow for sin, and forsaking of it; and faith is a
   trusting in God's sufficiency and truth. But faith and repentance, as
   evangelical duties, or justifying faith, and repentance for remission
   of sins, contain more in them, and imply a respect to a mediator, and
   involve each other's nature; [673] though they still bear the name of
   faith and repentance, from those general moral virtues--that
   repentance, which is a duty of natural religion, and that faith, which
   was a duty required under the first covenant--that are contained in
   this evangelical act; which severally appear, when this act is
   considered with respect to its different terms and objects.

   It may be objected here, that the Scripture sometimes mentions faith
   and repentance together, as if they were entirely distinct things; as
   in Mark i. 15. "Repent ye, and believe the gospel." But there is no
   need of understanding these as two distinct conditions of salvation,
   but the words are exegetical one of another. It is to teach us after
   what manner we must repent, viz. as believing the gospel, and after
   what manner we must believe the gospel, viz. as repenting. These words
   no more prove faith and repentance to be entirely distinct, than those
   fore-mentioned, Matt. xxi. 32. "And ye, when ye had seen it, repented
   not afterwards, that ye might believe him." Or those, 2 Tim. ii. 25.
   "If peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of
   the truth." The apostle, in Acts xix. 4. seems to have reference to
   these words of John the Baptist, "John baptized with the baptism of
   repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe," &c.
   where the latter words, as we have already observed, are to explain how
   he preached repentance.

   Another Scripture where faith and repentance are mentioned together, is
   Acts xx. 21. "Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
   repentance towards God, and faith towards the Lord Jesus Christ." It
   may be objected, that in this place, faith and repentance are not only
   spoken of as distinct things, but having distinct objects.

   To this I answer, That faith and repentance, in their general nature,
   are distinct things; and repentance for the remission of sins, or that
   in justifying faith that respects the evil to be delivered from, so far
   as it regards that term, which is what especially denominates it
   repentance, has respect to God as the object, because he is the Being
   offended by sin, and to be reconciled, but that in this justifying act,
   whence it is denominated faith, does more especially respect Christ.
   But let us interpret it how we will, the objection of faith being here
   so distinguished from repentance, is as much of an objection against
   the scheme of those that oppose justification by faith alone, as
   against this scheme; for they hold that the justifying faith the
   apostle Paul speaks of, includes repentance, as has been already
   observed.

   3. This repentance that has been described, is indeed the special
   condition of remission of sins. This seems very evident by the
   Scripture, as particularly, Mark i. 4. "John did baptize in the
   wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of
   sins." So, Luke iii. 3. "And he came into all the country about Jordan,
   preaching the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins." Luke
   xxiv. 47. "And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
   in his name among all nations." Acts v. 31. "Him hath God exalted with
   his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance
   unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins." Chap. ii. 38. "Repent, and be
   baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
   remission of sins." And, chap. iii. 19. "Repent ye therefore, and be
   converted, that your sins may be blotted out." The like is evident by
   Lev. xxvi. 40-42. Job xxxiii. 27, 28. Psal. xxxii. 5. Prov. xxviii. 13.
   Jer. iii. 13. And 1 John i.9. and other places.

   And the reason may be plain from what has been said. We need not wonder
   that what in faith especially respects sin, should be especially the
   condition of remission of sins; or that this motion or exercise of the
   soul, as it rejects and flies from evil, and embraces Christ as a
   Saviour from it, should especially be the condition of being free from
   that evil; and in like manner, as the same principle or motion, as it
   seeks good, and cleaves to Christ as the procurer of that good, should
   be the condition of obtaining that good. Faith with respect to good is
   accepting, and with respect to evil it is rejecting. Yea this rejecting
   evil is itself an act of acceptance; it is accepting freedom or
   separation from that evil; and this freedom or separation is the
   benefit bestowed in remission. No wonder that what in faith immediately
   respects this benefit, and is our acceptance of it, should be the
   special condition of our having it. It is so with respect to all the
   benefits that Christ has purchased. Trusting in God through Christ for
   such a particular benefit that we need, is the special condition of
   obtaining that benefit. When we need protection from enemies, the
   exercise of faith with respect to such a benefit, or trusting in Christ
   for protection from enemies, is especially the way to obtain that
   particular benefit, rather than trusting in Christ for something else;
   and so of any other benefit that might be mentioned. So prayer (which
   is the expression of faith) for a particular mercy needed, is
   especially the way to obtain that mercy. [674] So that no argument can
   be drawn from hence against the doctrine of justification by faith
   alone. And there is that in the nature of repentance, which peculiarly
   tends to establish the contrary of justification by works: for nothing
   so much renounces our own worthiness and excellency, as repentance; the
   very nature of it is to acknowledge our own utter sinfulness and
   unworthiness, and to renounce our own goodness, and all confidence in
   self; and so to trust in the propitiation of the Mediator, and ascribe
   all the glory of forgiveness to him.

   Object. 6. The last objection I shall mention, is that paragraph in the
   3d chapter of James, where persons are said expressly to be justified
   by works: Ver. 21. "Was not Abraham our father justified by works?"
   Ver. 24. "Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
   faith only." Ver. 25. "Was not Rahab the harlot justified by works?"

   In answer to this objection, I would,

   1. Take notice of the great unfairness of the divines that oppose us,
   in the improvement they make of this passage against us. All will
   allow, that in that proposition of St. James, "By works a man is
   justified, and not by faith only," one of the terms, either the word
   faith, or else the word justify, is not to be understood precisely in
   the same sense as the same terms when used by St. Paul; because they
   suppose, as well as we, that it was not the intent of the apostle James
   to contradict St. Paul in that doctrine of justification by faith
   alone, in which he had instructed the churches. But if we understand
   both the terms, as used by each apostle, in precisely the same sense,
   then what one asserts is a precise, direct, and full contradiction of
   the other, the one affirming and the other denying the very same thing.
   So that all the controversy from this text comes to this, viz. which of
   these two terms shall be understood in a diversity from St. Paul. They
   say that it is the word faith; for they suppose, that when the apostle
   Paul uses the word, and makes faith that by which alone we are
   justified, that then by it is understood a compliance with and practice
   of Christianity in general; so as to include all saving christian
   virtue and obedience. But as the apostle James uses the word faith in
   this place, they suppose thereby is to be understood only an assent of
   the understanding to the truth of gospel doctrines, as distinguished
   from good works, and that may exist separate from them, and from all
   saving grace. We, on the other hand, suppose that the word justify is
   to be understood in a different sense from the apostle Paul. So that
   they are forced to go as far in their scheme, in altering the sense of
   terms from Paul's use of them, as we. But yet at the same time that
   they freely vary the sense of the former of them, viz. faith, yet when
   we understand the latter, viz. justify, in a different sense from St.
   Paul, they exclaim against us. What necessity of framing this
   distinction, but only to serve an opinion? At this rate a man may
   maintain any thing, though never so contrary to Scripture, and elude
   the clearest text in the Bible! though they do not show us why we have
   not as good warrant to understand the word justify in a diversity from
   St. Paul, as they the word faith. If the sense of one of the words must
   be varied on either scheme, to make the apostle James's doctrine
   consistent with the apostle Paul's; and if varying the sense of one
   term or the other be all that stands in the way of their agreeing with
   either scheme; and if varying the sense of the latter be in itself as
   fair as of the former, then the text lies as fair for one scheme as the
   other, and can no more fairly be an objection against our scheme than
   theirs. And if so, what becomes of all this great objection from this
   passage in James?

   2. If there be no more difficulty in varying the sense of one of these
   terms than another, from any thing in the text itself, so as to make
   the words suit with either scheme, then certainly that is to be chosen
   that is most agreeable to the current of Scripture, and other places
   where the same matter is more particularly and fully treated of; and
   therefore that we should understand the word justify in this passage of
   James, in a sense in some respects diverse from that in which St. Paul
   uses it. For by what has been already said, it may appear, that there
   is no doctrine in the whole Bible more fully asserted, explained, and
   urged, than the doctrine of justification by faith alone, without any
   of our own righteousness.

   3. There is a very fair interpretation of this passage of St. James, no
   way inconsistent with this doctrine of justification, which I have
   shown that other scriptures abundantly teach, which the words
   themselves will as well allow of, as that which the objectors put upon
   them, and much better agrees with the context; and that is, that works
   are here spoken of as justifying as evidences. A man may be said to be
   justified by that which clears him, or vindicates him, or makes the
   goodness of his cause manifest. When a person has a cause tried in a
   civil court, and is justified or cleared, he may be said in different
   senses to be justified or cleared, by the goodness of his cause, and by
   the goodness of the evidences of it. He may be said to be cleared by
   what evidences his cause to be good; but not in the same sense as he is
   by that which makes his cause to be good. That which renders his cause
   good, is the proper ground of his justification; it is by that that he
   is himself a proper subject of it; but evidences justify, only as they
   manifest that his cause is good in fact, whether they are of such a
   nature as to have any influence to render it so or no. It is by works
   that our cause appears to be good; but by faith our cause not only
   appears to be good, but becomes good; because thereby we are united to
   Christ. That the word justify should be sometimes understood to signify
   the former of these, as well as the latter, is agreeable to the use of
   the word in common speech; as we say such an one stood up to justify
   another, i.e. he endeavoured to show or manifest his cause to be
   good.-And it is certain that the word is sometimes used in this sense
   in Scripture, when speaking of our being justified before God; as where
   it is said, we shall be justified by our words, Matt. xii. 37. "For by
   thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be
   condemned." It cannot be meant that men are accepted before God on the
   account of their words; for God has told us nothing more plainly, than
   that it is the heart that he looks at; and that when he acts as judge
   towards men, in order to justifying or condemning, he tries the heart,
   Jer. xi. 20. "But, O Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that
   triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them; for
   unto thee have I revealed my cause." Psalm vii. 8, 9. "The Lord shall
   judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
   according to mine integrity that is in me. O let the wickedness of the
   wicked come to an end; but establish the just; for the righteous God
   trieth the hearts and reins." Ver. 11. "God judgeth the righteous." And
   many other places to the like purpose. And therefore men can be
   justified by their words, no otherwise than as evidences or
   manifestations of what is in the heart. And it is thus that Christ
   speaks of the words in this very place, as is evident by the context,
   ver. 34, 35. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A
   good man out of the good treasure of the heart," &c. The words, or
   sounds themselves, are neither parts of godliness nor evidences of
   godliness, but as signs of what is inward.

   God himself, when he acts towards men as judge, in order to a
   declarative judgment, makes use of evidences, and so judges men by
   their works. And therefore, at the day of judgment, God will judge men
   according to their works: for though God will stand in no need of
   evidence to inform him what is right, yet it is to be considered, that
   he will then sit in judgment, not as earthly judges do, to find out
   what is right in a cause, but to declare and manifest what is right:
   and therefore the day is called by the apostle, "the day of the
   revelation of the righteous judgment of God." Rom. ii. 5.

   To be justified, is to be approved of and accepted: but a man may be
   said to be approved and accepted in two respects; the one is to be
   approved really, and the other to be approved and accepted
   declaratively. Justification is twofold; it is either the acceptance
   and approbation of the judge itself, or the manifestation of that
   approbation, by a sentence or judgment declared by the judge, either to
   our own consciences, or to the world. If justification be understood in
   the former sense, for the approbation itself, that is only that by
   which we become fit to be approved: but if it be understood in the
   latter sense, for the manifestation of this approbation, it is by
   whatever is a proper evidence of that fitness. In the former, only
   faith is concerned; because it is by that only in us that we become fit
   to be accepted and approved: in the latter, whatever is an evidence of
   our fitness, is alike concerned. And therefore, take justification in
   this sense, and then faith, and all other graces and good works, have a
   common and equal concern in it: for any other grace, or holy act, is
   equally an evidence of a qualification for acceptance or approbation,
   as faith.

   To justify has always, in common speech, signified indifferently,
   either simply approbation, or testifying that approbation; sometimes
   one, and sometimes the other; because they are both the same, only as
   one is outwardly what the other is inwardly. So we, and it may be all
   nations, are wont to give the same name to two things, when one is only
   declarative of the other. Thus sometimes judging, intends only judging
   in our thoughts; at other times, testifying and declaring judgment. So
   such words as justify, condemn, accept, reject, prize, slight, approve,
   renounce, are sometimes put for mental acts, at other times, for an
   outward treatment. So in the sense in which the apostle James seems to
   use the word justify for manifestative justification, a man is
   justified not only by faith, but also by works; as a tree is manifested
   to be good, not only by immediately examining the tree, but also by the
   fruit, [675] Prov. xx. 11. "Even a child is known by his doing, whether
   his work be pure, and whether it be right."

   The drift of the apostle does not require that he should be understood
   in any other sense; for all that he aims at, as appears by a view of
   the context, is to prove that good works are necessary. The error of
   those that he opposed was this, That good works were not necessary to
   salvation; that if they did but believe that there was but one God, and
   that Christ was the Son of God, and the like, and were baptized, they
   were safe, let them live how they would; which doctrine greatly tended
   to licentiousness. The evincing the contrary of this is evidently the
   apostle's scope.

   And that we should understand the apostle, of works justifying as an
   evidence, and in a declarative judgment, is what a due consideration of
   the context will naturally lead us to.-For it is plain, that the
   apostle is here insisting on works, in the quality of a necessary
   manifestation and evidence of faith, or as what the truth of faith is
   made to appear by: as ver. 18. "Show me thy faith without thy works,
   and I will show thee my faith by my works." And when he says, ver. 26.
   "As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
   also." It is much more rational and natural to understand him as
   speaking of works, as the proper signs and evidences of the reality,
   life, and goodness of faith. Not that the very works or actions done
   are properly the life of faith, as the spirit in the body; but it is
   the active, working nature of faith, of which the actions or works done
   are the signs, that is itself the life and spirit of faith. The sign of
   a thing is often in scripture language said to be that thing; as it is
   in that comparison by which the apostle illustrates it. Not the actions
   themselves of a body, are properly the life or spirit of the body; but
   the active nature, of which those actions or motions are the signs, is
   the life of the body. That which makes men pronounce any thing to be
   alive, is, that they observe it has an active operative nature; which
   they observe no otherwise than by the actions or motions which are the
   signs of it. It is plainly the apostle's aim to prove, that if faith
   hath not works, it is a sign that it is not a good sort of faith; which
   would not have been to his purpose, if it was his design to show that
   it is not by faith alone, though of a right sort, that we have
   acceptance with God, but that we are accepted on the account of
   obedience as well as faith. It is evident, by the apostle's reasoning,
   that the necessity of works, is not from their having a parallel
   concern in our salvation with faith; but he speaks of works only as
   related to faith, and expressive of it; which, after all, leaves faith
   the alone fundamental condition, without any thing else having a
   parallel concern with it in this affair; and other things conditions,
   only as several expressions and evidences of it.

   That the apostle speaks of works justifying only as a sign, or
   evidence, and in God's declarative judgment, is further confirmed by
   verse 21. "Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had
   offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?" Here the apostle seems
   plainly to refer to that declarative judgment of God concerning
   Abraham's sincerity, manifested to him, for the peace and assurance of
   his own conscience, after his offering up Isaac his son on the altar,
   Gen. xxii. 12. "Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not
   withheld thy son, thine only son, from me." But here it is plain, and
   expressed in the very words of justification or approbation, that this
   work of Abraham offering up his son on the altar, justified him as an
   evidence. When the apostle James says, we are justified by works, he
   may and ought to be understood in a sense agreeable to the instance he
   brings for the proof of it: but justification in that instance appears
   by the words of justification themselves, to be by works as an
   evidence. And where this instance of Abraham's obedience is elsewhere
   mentioned in the New Testament, it is mentioned as a fruit and evidence
   of his faith. Heb. xi. 17. "By faith Abraham, when he was tried,
   offered up Isaac; and he that had received the promises, offered up his
   only-begotten son."

   And in the other instance when the apostle mentions, ver. 25. "Likewise
   also we not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received
   the messengers, and had sent them out another way?" The apostle refers
   to a declarative judgment, in that particular testimony which was given
   of God's approbation of her as a believer, in directing Joshua to save
   her when the rest of Jericho was destroyed, Josh. vi. 25. "And Joshua
   saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household, and all that
   she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day: because she hid
   the messengers which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho." This was accepted
   as an evidence and expression of her faith. Heb. xi. 31. "By faith the
   harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had
   received the spies with peace." The apostle in saying, "Was not Rahab
   the harlot justified by works?" by the manner of his speaking has
   reference to something in her history; but we have no account in her
   history of any other justification of her but this.

   4. If, notwithstanding, any choose to take justification in St. James's
   precisely as we do in Paul's epistles, for God's acceptance or
   approbation itself, and not any expression of that approbation; what
   has been already said concerning the manner in which acts of
   evangelical obedience are concerned in the affair of our justification,
   affords a very easy, clear, and full answer. For it we take works as
   acts or expressions of faith, they are not excluded; so a man is not
   justified by faith only, but also by works; i.e., he is not justified
   only by faith as a principle in the heart, or in its first and more
   immanent acts, but also by the effective acts of it in life, which are
   the expressions of the life of faith, as the operations and actions of
   the body are of the life of that; agreeable to verse 26.

   What has been said in answer to these objections, may also, I hope,
   abundantly serve for an answer to another objection, often made against
   this doctrine, viz. that it encourages licentiousness in life. For,
   from what has been said, we may see that the Scripture doctrine of
   justification by faith alone, without any manner of goodness or
   excellency of ours, does in no wise diminish either the necessity or
   benefit of a sincere evangelical universal obedience. Man's salvation
   is not only indissolubly connected with obedience, and damnation with
   the want of it, in those who have opportunity for it, but depends upon
   it in many respects. It is the way to salvation, and the necessary
   preparation for it; eternal blessings are bestowed in reward for it,
   and our justification in our own consciences and at the day of
   judgment, depends on it, as the proper evidence of our acceptable
   state; and that even in accepting of us as entitled to life in our
   justification, God has respect to this, as that on which the fitness of
   such an act of justification depends: so that our salvation does as
   truly depend upon it, as if we were justified for the moral excellency
   of it. And besides all this, the degree of our happiness to all
   eternity is suspended on, and determined by, the degree of this. So
   that this gospel-scheme of justification is as far from encouraging
   licentiousness, and contains as much to encourage and excite to strict
   and universal obedience, and the utmost possible eminency of holiness,
   as any scheme that can be devised, and indeed unspeakably more.

   I come now to the

   V. And last thing proposed, which is to consider the "importance of
   this doctrine."

   I know there are many who make as though this controversy was of no
   great importance; that it is chiefly a matter of nice speculation,
   depending on certain subtle distinctions, which many that make use of
   them do not understand themselves; and that the difference is not of
   such consequence as to be worth being zealous about; and that more hurt
   is done by raising disputes about it than good.

   Indeed I am far from thinking that it is of absolute necessity persons
   should understand, and be agreed upon, all the distinctions needful
   particularly to explain and defend this doctrine against all cavils and
   objections. Yet all Christians should strive after an increase of
   knowledge; and none should content themselves without some clear and
   distinct understanding in this point. But we should believe in the
   general, according to the clear and abundant revelations of God's word,
   that it is none of our own excellency, virtue, or righteousness, that
   is the ground of our being received from a state of condemnation into a
   state of acceptance in God's sight, but only Jesus Christ, and his
   righteousness and worthiness, received by faith. This I think to be of
   great importance, at least in application to ourselves; and that for
   the following reasons.

   1. The Scripture treats of this doctrine, as a doctrine of very great
   importance. That there is a certain doctrine of justification by faith,
   in opposition to justification by the works of the law, which the
   apostle Paul insists upon as of the greatest importance, none will
   deny; because there is nothing in the Bible more apparent. The apostle,
   under the infallible conduct of the Spirit of God, thought it worth his
   most strenuous and zealous disputing about and defending. He speaks of
   the contrary doctrine as fatal and ruinous to the souls of men, in the
   latter end of the 9th chapter of Romans, and beginning of the 10th. He
   speaks of it as subversive of the gospel of Christ, and calls it
   another gospel, and says concerning it, if any one, "though an angel
   from heaven, preach it, let him be accursed;" Gal. i. 6-9. compared
   with the following part of the epistle. Certainly we must allow the
   apostles to be good judges of the importance and tendency of doctrines;
   at least the Holy Ghost in them. And doubtless we are safe, and in no
   danger of harshness and censoriousness, if we only follow him, and keep
   close to his express teachings, in what we believe and say of the
   hurtful and pernicious tendency of any error. Why are we to blame, for
   saying what the Bible has taught us to say, or for believing what the
   Holy Ghost has taught us to that end that we might believe it?

   2. The adverse scheme lays another foundation of man's salvation than
   God hath laid. I do not now speak of that ineffectual redemption that
   they suppose to be universal, and what all mankind are equally subjects
   of; but, I say, it lays entirely another foundation of man's actual,
   discriminating salvation, or that salvation wherein true Christians
   differ from wicked men. We suppose the foundations of this to be
   Christ's worthiness and righteousness: on the contrary, that scheme
   supposes it to be men's own virtue; even so, that this is the ground of
   a saving interest in Christ itself. It takes away Christ out of the
   place of the bottom stone, and puts in men's own virtue in the room of
   him: so that Christ himself in the affair of distinguishing actual
   salvation, is laid upon this foundation. And the foundation being so
   different, I leave it to every out to judge whether the difference
   between the two schemes consists only in punctilios of small
   consequence. The foundation being contrary, makes the whole scheme
   exceeding diverse and opposite; the one is a gospel scheme, the other a
   legal one.

   3. It is in this doctrine that the most essential difference lies
   between the covenant of grace and the first covenant. The adverse
   scheme of justification supposes that we are justified by our works, in
   the very same sense wherein man was to have been justified by his works
   under the first covenant. By that covenant our first parents were not
   to have had eternal life given them for any proper merit in their
   obedience; because their perfect obedience was a debt that they owed
   God. Nor was it to be bestowed for any proportion between the dignity
   of their obedience, and the value of the reward; but only it was to be
   bestowed from a regard to a moral fitness in the virtue of their
   obedience, to the reward of God's favour; and a title to eternal life
   was to be given them, as a testimony of God's pleasedness with their
   works, or his regard to the inherent beauty of their virtue. And so it
   is the very same way that those in the adverse scheme suppose that we
   are received into God's special favour now, and to those saving
   benefits that are the testimonies of it. I am sensible the divines of
   that side entirely disclaim the popish doctrine of merit; and are free
   to speak of our utter unworthiness, and the great imperfections of all
   our services. But after all, it is our virtue, imperfect as it is, that
   recommends men to God, by which good men come to have a saving interest
   in Christ, and God's favour, rather than others; and these things are
   bestowed in testimony of God's respect to their goodness. So that
   whether they will allow the term merit or no, yet they hold, that we
   are accepted by our own merit, in the same sense, though not in the
   same degree, as under the first covenant.

   But the great and most distinguishing difference between that covenant
   and the covenant of grace is, that by the covenant of grace we are not
   thus justified by our own works, but only by faith in Jesus Christ. It
   is on this account chiefly that the new covenant deserves the name of a
   covenant of grace, as is evident by Rom. iv. 16. "Therefore it is of
   faith, that it might be by grace." And chap. iii. 20, 24. "Therefore by
   the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
   sight;"-"Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
   that is in Jesus Christ." And chap xi. 6. "And if by grace, then it is
   no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of
   works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work." Gal.
   v.4. "Whosoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from
   grace." And therefore the apostle, in the same epistle to the
   Galatians, speaking of the doctrine of justification by works as
   another gospel, adds, "which is not another," chap. 1. verse 6, 7. It
   is no gospel at all; it is law. It is no covenant of grace, but of
   works; not an evangelical, but a legal doctrine. Certainly that
   doctrine wherein consists the greatest and most essential difference
   between the covenant of grace and the first covenant, must be a
   doctrine of great importance. That doctrine of the gospel by which all
   others it is worthy of the name of gospel, is doubtless a very
   important doctrine of the gospel.

   4. This is the main thing for which fallen men stood in need of divine
   revelation, to teach us how we who have sinned may come to be again
   accepted of God; or, which is the same thing, how the sinner may be
   justified. Something beyond the light of nature is necessary to
   salvation chiefly on this account. Mere natural reason afforded no
   means by which we could come to the knowledge of this, it depending on
   the sovereign pleasure of the Being that we had offended by sin. This
   seems to be the great drift of that revelation which God has given, and
   of all those mysteries it reveals, all those great doctrines that are
   peculiarly doctrines of revelation, and above the light of nature. It
   seems to have been very much on this account, that it was requisite the
   doctrine of the Trinity itself should be revealed to us; that by a
   discovery of the concern of the several divine persons in the great
   affair of our salvation, we might the better understand and see how all
   our dependence in this affair is on God, and our sufficiency all in
   him, and not in ourselves; that he is all in all in this business,
   agreeable to 1 Cor. i. 29-31. "That no flesh should glory in his
   presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that,
   according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
   Lord." What is the gospel, but only the glad tidings of a new way of
   acceptance with God unto life, a way wherein sinners may come to be
   free from the guilt of sin, and obtain a title to eternal life? And if,
   when this way is revealed, it is rejected, and another of man's
   devising be put in the room of it, without doubt, it must be an error
   of great importance, and the apostle might well say it was another
   gospel.

   5. The contrary scheme of justification derogates much from the honour
   of God and the Mediator. I have already shown how it diminishes the
   glory of the Mediator, in ascribing that to man's virtue and goodness,
   which belongs alone to his worthiness and righteousness. By the
   apostle's sense of the matter it renders Christ needless. Gal. v.4.
   "Christ is become of not effect to you, whosoever of you are justified
   by the law." If that scheme of justification be followed in its
   consequences, it utterly overthrows the glory of all the great things
   that have been contrived, and done, and suffered in the work of
   redemption. Gal. ii. 21. "If righteousness come by the law, Christ is
   dead in vain." It has also been already shown how it diminishes the
   glory of divine grace, (which is the attribute God hath especially set
   himself to glorify in the work of redemption,) and so that it greatly
   diminishes the obligation to gratitude in the sinner that is saved.
   Yea, in the sense of the apostle, it makes void the distinguishing
   grace of the gospel. Gal. v. 4. "Whosoever of you are justified by the
   law, are fallen from grace." It diminishes the glory of the grace of
   God and the Redeemer, and proportionably magnifies man. It makes the
   goodness and excellency of fallen man to be something, which I have
   shown are nothing. I have also already shown, that it is contrary to
   the truth of God in the threatening of his holy law, to justify the
   sinner for his virtue. And whether it were contrary to God's truth or
   no, it is a scheme of things very unworthy of God. It supposes that
   God, when about to lift up a poor forlorn malefactor condemned to
   eternal misery for sinning against his Majesty, and to make him
   unspeakably and eternally happy by bestowing his Son and himself upon
   him, as it were, sets all this to gale, for the price of his virtue and
   excellency. I know that those whom we oppose acknowledge, that the
   price is very disproportionate to the benefit bestowed; and say, that
   God's grace is wonderfully manifested in accepting so little virtue,
   and bestowing so glorious a reward for such imperfect righteousness.
   But seeing we are such infinitely sinful and abominable creatures in
   God's sight, and by our infinite guilt have brought ourselves into such
   wretched and deplorable circumstances-and all our righteousnesses are
   nothing, and ten thousand times worse than nothing, if God looks upon
   them as they are in themselves-is it not immensely more worthy of the
   infinite majesty and glory of God, to deliver and make happy such
   wretched vagabonds and captives, without any money or price of theirs,
   or any manner of expectation of excellency or virtue in them, in any
   wise to recommend them? Will it not betray a foolish exalting opinion
   of ourselves, were a mean one of God, to have thought of offering any
   thing of ours, to recommend us to the favour of being brought from
   wallowing, like filthy swine, in the mire of our sins, and from the
   enmity and misery of devils in the lowest hell, to the state of God's
   dear children in the everlasting arms of his love in heavenly glory; or
   to imagine that it is the constitution of God, that we should bring our
   filthy rags, and offer them to him as the price of this?

   6. The opposite scheme does most directly tend to lead men to trust in
   their own righteousness for justification, which is a thing fatal to
   the soul. This is what men are of themselves exceeding prone to do,
   (and that though they are never so much taught the contrary,) through
   the partial and high thoughts they have of themselves, and their
   exceeding dullness of apprehending any such mystery as our being
   accepted for the righteousness of another. But this scheme directly
   teaches men to trust in their own righteousness for justification; in
   that it teaches them that this is indeed what they must be justified
   by, being the way of justification which God himself has appointed. So
   that if a man had naturally no disposition to trust in his own
   righteousness, yet if he embraced this scheme, and acted consistently,
   it would lead him to it. But that trusting in our own righteousness, is
   a thing fatal to the soul, is what the Scripture plainly teaches us. It
   tells us, that it will cause that Christ shall profit us nothing, and
   be of no effect to us, Gal. v. 2-4. For though the apostle speaks there
   particularly of circumcision, yet it is not merely being circumcised,
   but trusting in circumcision as a righteousness, that the apostle has
   respect to. He could not mean, that merely being circumcised would
   render Christ of no profit or effect to a person; for we read that he
   himself, for certain reasons, took Timothy and circumcised him, Acts
   xvi. 3. And the same is evident by the context, and by the rest of the
   epistle. And the apostle speaks of trusting in their own righteousness
   as fatal to the Jews, Rom. ix. 31, 32. "But Israel, which followed
   after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of
   righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as
   it were by the works of the law; for they stumbled at the
   stumbling-stone." Together with chap. x. verse 3. "For they being
   ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
   righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
   God." And this is spoken of as fatal to the Pharisees, in the parable
   of the Pharisee and the publican, which Christ spake to them in order
   lo reprove them for trusting in themselves that they were righteous.
   The design of the parable is to show them, that the very publicans
   shall be justified, rather than they; as appears by the reflection
   Christ makes upon it, Luke xviii. 14. "I tell you, this man went down
   to his house justified rather than the other;" that is, this and not
   the other. The fatal tendency of it might also be proved from its
   inconsistence with the nature of justifying faith, and with the nature
   of that humiliation that the Scripture often speaks of as absolutely
   necessary to salvation; but these scriptures are so express, that it is
   needless to bring any further arguments.

   How far a wonderful and mysterious agency of God's Spirit may so
   influence some men's hearts, that their practice in this regard may be
   contrary to their own principles, so that they shall not trust in their
   own righteousness, though they profess that men are justified by their
   own righteousness--or how far they may believe the doctrine of
   justification by men's own righteousness in general, and yet not
   believe it in a particular application of it to themselves--or how far
   that error which they may have been led into by education, or cunning
   sophistry of others, may yet be indeed contrary to the prevailing
   disposition of their hearts, and contrary to their practice--or how far
   some may seem to maintain a doctrine contrary to this gospel-doctrine
   of justification, that really do not, but only express themselves
   differently from others; or seem to oppose it through their
   misunderstanding of our expressions, or we of theirs, when indeed our
   real sentiments are the same in the main--or may seem to differ more
   than they do, by using terms that are without a precisely fixed and
   determinate meaning--or to be wide in their sentiments from this
   doctrine, for want of a distinct understanding of it; whose hearts, at
   the same time, entirely agree with it, and if once it was clearly
   explained to their understandings, would immediately close with it, and
   embrace it:--how far these things may be, I will not determine; but am
   fully persuaded that great allowances are to be made on these and such
   like accounts, in innumerable instances; though it is manifest, from
   what has been said, that the teaching and propagating contrary
   doctrines and schemes, is of a pernicious and fatal tendency.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [665] "Our Saviour compares his mystical body, that is his church, to a
   vine, which his Father, whom he compares to a husbandman, hath planted;
   John xv. 1 I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. To
   represent to us the union that is betwixt Christ and all true
   Christians, and the influence of grace and spiritual life, which all
   that are united to him do derive and receive from him, he sets it forth
   to us by the resemblance of a vine and branches. As there is a natural
   vital union between the vine and the branches, so there is a spiritual
   union between Christ and true Christians: and this union is the cause
   of our fruitfulness in the works of obedience and a good life. There
   are some indeed that seem to be grafted into Christ by an outward
   profession of Christianity, who yet derive no influence from him, so as
   to bring forth fruit, because they are not vitally united to him"--Dr.
   Tillotson in his 3rd vol. of Serm., p. 307 By this it appears that the
   vital union between Christ and true Christians, which is much more of a
   mystery than the relative union, and necessarily implies it, was not
   thought an unreasonable doctrine by one of the greatest divines on the
   other side of the question in hand.

   [666] The word "union," in this connexion, is both more intelligible
   and more appropriate, than the word relation; since in this connexion
   the latter is the consequence of the former. As the doctrine of a vital
   union to Christ is fundamentally important in Christianity, and
   inseparable from the doctrine of justification; and as our author
   passes it over with so much brevity, a few observations upon it in this
   place may appear the more needful. 1. The Scriptures are not only full
   of the fact, but they abound with illustrations of it. The first part
   of John xv. is full and explicit to this purpose. 2. What the
   Scriptures assert, and illustrate, is abundantly corroborated by the
   reasonableness of the thing. To suppose the reality of vital religion
   without a corresponding vital union, is to suppose an important effect
   without as adequate cause, as shall be further shown 3. The question
   then is, What is the immediate cause of this vital union? Now as the
   union subsisting is between the Spirit of Christ, and man, the
   immediate cause must be in the one or the other of these, or in both at
   the same instant, or in neither. If the immediate cause be in man, he
   makes his approach to Christ either as a carnal or spiritual man, for
   these is no conceivable medium. But the idea of a carnal man uniting
   himself to Christ in order to form a vital union, is both unscriptural
   and unreasonable. It is unscriptural; for the scripture asserts that
   "The carnal mind is enmity against God;" how then can it be the cause
   of a vital union? "Of him are ye in Christ Jesus; "--" and you hath he
   quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; "--it is not therefore
   the carnal man that unites himself to Christ, or quickens himself in
   order to effect it. It is also unreasonable; for it supposes a glorious
   effect without an adequate cause. The effect is spiritual, while the
   cause is carnal, which are not only different but even directly
   opposite. What ideas can be more contradictory, or sentiment more
   unreasonable? 4. The supposition of two simultaneous causes, the one
   being the Spirit of Christ, and the other the carnal man, involves the
   same inconsistency. For how can the mere circumstance of time,
   irrespective of causal influence, make any difference? If the carnal
   mind be adequate to unite itself to Christ at one time, why not at
   another time as well, except some causal influence makes the
   difference? For surely no one can suppose that some individual moment
   of time, as distinguished from others preceding, constitutes the cause
   of difference. powerful, the quickening, and uniting presence, the
   vital and 5 To suppose a spiritual man whether by the exercise of his
   faith or by any other mental act, in the cause of a vital union, is no
   less inconsistent than the former supposition. For how can he be a
   spiritual man, without a spiritual casual influence? But if such
   influence be admitted as a predisposing cause of his vital acts, it is
   incumbent on the objector to show that such casual influence may take
   place without vital union. This I am persuaded no one can do. It is
   contrary to all analogy, and to every sound principle of true
   philosophy. It is contrary to christian experience and revealed
   statements. What effect in physical nature can be produced, which does
   not imply a casual union? Does not the divine energy pervade all second
   causes in the way of union with them, in order to the production of
   their effects? and what miraculous effects have ever been produced
   without a present uniting causal influence to produce the change? For
   instance, when Lazarus came forth from death to life, was there not a
   uniting causual interest to produce the change? and if we appeal to an
   experienced intelligent Christian, will he not own, will he not
   maintain, according to his views of revealed truth, that the
   transforming energy of the Spirit of God or of Christ in him, was the
   cause of his own vitality? Nay, would he not be shocked to hear any one
   maintain the contrary? 6. Perhaps it may be thought, that--though in
   the great laboratory of physical nature, in the bowels of the earth and
   in the surrounding atmosphere, a causal union be necessary to produce
   chemical effects; and that though in all works of mechanism a causal
   union is requisite to the existence of mechanical effects; and that,
   moreover, though the sun by his light and heat produces an effect upon
   objects by a causal union with them; yet, what shall we say of one body
   affecting a change of situation in another, at an immense distance?
   Does not the sun powerfully attract all the planets that surround him,
   however distant? and how can this be by causal union? This objection
   admits of two answers. 7. First, it has never been proved, that there
   is no causal union between these bodies adequate to the effect; while
   on the contrary several philosophers have at least attempted to show
   its existence. The solar system, for ought we know, may be perfectly
   mechanical, though we should never be able to perceive the intermediate
   parts. 8. Secondly, as to the universe in general depends on the causal
   presence of the first cause, so must every part of it; Scripture and
   reason assure us that in god we live, and move, and have our being.
   Therefore, whether there be any intermediate cause of gravitation or
   not, between the effect and the first cause, a causal union is still
   necessary to the effect. What difference there is, lies against the
   objector. For if there be no intermediate cause of gravitation, the
   presence, the energy, the causal union of the first cause is
   proportionally the more immediate. 9. Having shown that neither the
   carnal man nor the spiritual man is the immediate cause of the union
   subsisting between Christ and the Christian, it remains to be
   ascertained, what else is the cause? If it be not man it must be the
   divine spirit, either as the Spirit of the Father or of Christ. In one
   view this difference is not very material, but in another it is of
   considerable importance. Allow it to be from the Holy Spirit, in either
   sense, it secures the great point of salvation by grace, in opposition
   to our own merit. But, as it respects the nature of Christ's mediation,
   and particularly his federal headship and suretiship, it is of moment
   to ascertain, whether he or the Father, economically, be the immediate
   cause of the vital union. 10. The Scripture fully declares that the
   influence of the Spirit on the minds of men is from Christ. The Lord
   from heaven is a quickening Spirit--he quickeneth whom he will--he
   sends the Holy Ghost--he gives repentance, or the spirit of
   repentance--in him was life (without whom nothing was created,) and
   this life is the true light of men--he shines into the heart--his grace
   and strength constitute our sufficiency - &c. These and other passages
   innumerable show, that quickening influence proceeds from his fullness
   of life and grace. 11. That other passages ascribe spiritual effects to
   the Holy Spirit, or the Spirit of God, is of no force, except with such
   as deny the divine nature of Christ, who are confuted on other grounds.
   But supposing his divine nature in union with humanity, the Spirit of
   God is the Spirit of Christ, and vice versa. And in the divine economy
   of grace, Christ is the head or source of influence to the church. It
   is he who gives gifts to the rebellious, who endows with the spirit of
   life, and who bestows the living water to which divine influence is
   compared. 12. And how beautifully consistent must this appear when we
   consider, that as a covenant head he is the surety of his chosen
   people! The office of a surety engages to perform what is requisite in
   behalf of a person or persons as required by another. Thus Jesus not
   only brought in an everlasting righteousness in behalf of his people as
   their federal perfection, in lieu of those who could never attain to it
   by any obedience of their own; but it also belonged to his office to
   secure for them a voluntary, penitential, believing obedience to the
   equitable requisitions of the divine Governor. This can be effected
   only by divine influence, and that influence must needs proceed from
   him as the immediate cause; otherwise we make the creditor and surety
   to be the very same. God, as governor, demands obedience from all the
   subjects of his government; and Christ, as the surety of those who were
   given him, enables them to comply with those demands, that is, to
   submit, to repent, to believe with the heart, to love God, and to walk
   with him. 13. From the premises it follows plainly, that the immediate
   cause of vital union is the spirit of christ, which he bestows in the
   exercise of his office as the federal head of influence, and in virtue
   of his suretiship for his church and people. He as the true vine
   communicates life to the branches, and as the head of his church brings
   dead souls to be his living members. Faith is a fruit of the Spirit,
   and not the cause of a spiritual existence. Yet, 14. We maintain that
   faith forms a consequent union. Man being a subject of moral
   government, and therefore a free agent, at liberty to choose his end
   and means of happiness for which he is accountable; and God in infinite
   mercy proposing Jesus as the way, the truth, and the life; the
   all-sufficient and only Saviour of sinners--in whom we are required to
   believe and to trust with confidence, and whom we are encouraged to
   receive into our hearts, that he may dwell there by faith--the
   regenerate soul, by believing, unites itself to this object. 15. The
   former union is the immediate effect of sovereign favour; the latter
   union is the immediate effect of exercised grace; in the performance of
   an incumbent duty, or the discharge of moral obligation. Now since men
   are exhorted, warned, directed, reasoned, and expostulated with, on the
   ground of what they ought to do or abstain from doing, the Scripture
   abounds with such addresses. But lest any false inferences should be
   drawn, derogatory from the honours of sovereign grace, we are assured
   that every good and perfect gift cometh from the Father of lights. When
   we have done all we are unprofitable servants. Work out your own
   salvation, says Paul, with fear and trembling; for it is God who
   worketh in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. No one
   can come unto me except the Father who hath sent me draw him, that is,
   without divine influence; and whosoever cometh unto me, I will in no
   wise cast out. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Ye are
   saved by grace, through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the
   gift of God. Among many other parts of Scripture where grace and
   obligation are strikingly intermixed, and illustrative of the preceding
   remarks, the reader is particularly referred to the sixth and fifteenth
   chapters of St. John's Gospel. 16. Coroll. The old mode, adopted by
   many orthodox divines, of distinguishing the vital union between Christ
   and his people, first, on his part, and secondly, on their part, is
   founded on Scripture and the reason of the thing; and the former is the
   cause of the latter. And therefore, as the cause must ever precede the
   effect, the first union not only may be prior to the second, as in the
   case of happy infants, but also must be so in the case of adults.-W

   [667] John i. 12.

   [668] John v. 40.

   [669] The term here used, "moral congruity," is not happily chosen.
   Indeed our author, in the next sentence, professes himself to be at a
   loss what terms to use which may clearly convey the necessary
   distinction. By "moral" congruity or fitness he seems to mean personal
   perfection, or a perfection of state personally considered, without
   relation to a surety, or the righteousness which God has provided. But
   this is an acceptation of the term "moral" so unusual as to throw great
   perplexity into the argument. Beside, when contrasted with believing,
   it leaves the reader to suppose that to believe is not a moral act. But
   the supposition that "believing with the heart unto righteousness" is
   not a moral act, as contradistinguished from a natural one, leads to an
   endless confusion of ideas. Surely, to believe God's testimony
   concerning the Son and his righteousness is, if any thing be, a moral
   act of obedience to divine authority. How then can it be called a
   natural fitness only, as contrasted with what is moral? Nor is the
   distinction at all necessary in order to avoid the apprehended
   consequence of assigning to faith any merit of congruity. A few
   observations on this intricate subject may probably assist the reader
   in seeking scriptural and consistent notions. 1. Justification implies
   a charge, a plea, and a virtual declaration of approval. 2. The charge
   against Adam and all his posterity is twofold, including a breach of
   covenant, or a failure in federal perfection; and also disobedience in
   transgressing a divine rule. These considerations are perfectly
   distinct in their nature. A rule may be momentarily transgressed for a
   long series of years, as it was by Adam, and constantly is by his
   rebellious descendants, but a federal failure was, from the nature of
   perfect righteousness, the very first act of delinquency. 3. No plea
   can be valid against a federal delinquency, as was the case in Adam,
   but a participation of a federal perfection. Nothing less can answer
   the charge, and nothing more is requisite. This averts condemnation,
   and entitles to a virtual approval in reference to that part of the
   charge. 4. No plea can be valid against disobedience to divine
   authority, or the rule of moral government, but a personal, voluntary,
   actual compliance with that authoritative rule of government; which we
   find by divine revelation to be, in reference to fallen man, submission
   to the righteousness of God; or, as differently expressed, believing on
   the Son of God, receiving him as the Lord our righteousness, &c. 5. No
   man has possessed a federal perfection, except by imputation, beside
   the first Adam while he obeyed without failure, and the second Adam
   when he completed his work of humiliation. For no eminence of grace in
   a mere descendant of Adam could possibly attain to federal perfection,
   from the very nature of such perfection. Nor indeed can the perfect
   obedience of glorified saints rise higher than a conformity to the
   divine law as a rule; their federal perfection is still derived from
   their union to Christ, and a consequent imputation, which implies a
   virtual approval. Hence, 6. The federal perfection of Messiah is the
   proper and sole ground of an actual interest in reconciliation and
   justification. In other words, the righteousness of Christ, his perfect
   obedience unto death as our substitute, is that alone on account of
   which we can stand before God with acceptance, in reference to the
   charge of a federal failure in Adam. 7. An actual interest in this
   federal perfection is obtained only by a vital or an effectual union to
   the Lord our righteousness. This is plain from Scripture, and is
   perfectly rational. It is compared to the union of a vine and its
   branches, the head and members of the human body, &c. That a
   participation of nature between Christ and us, or an effectual union,
   is requisite for a ground of imputation is evident, not only from
   scriptural comparisons, and the rational consistence of such an idea,
   but also from the fact of the Saviour's incarnation. Without this union
   to us, our sin could not have been imputed to him; and without a vital
   union, his righteousness could not be imputed to us. This is fairly and
   fully implied in many parts of Scripture, as might be shown if
   necessary.--From whence it is plain, that union is the indispensable
   ground of imputation. 8. Whoever is the subject of a vital union to
   Christ, is in a justified state, as partaker of a federal perfection,
   prior to the performance of any moral duty whatever. But in order to
   explain and prove this it is requisite to attend to the following
   particulars. 9. Union to Christ is of two kinds, on his part by his
   spirit; and on our part by faith, as explained in a preceding note. In
   the former, we are passive; and in the latter, we are active. In the
   one he acts as a sovereign dispenser of benefits; in the other we act
   as accountable creatures. 10. By the order both of nature and of time,
   the union begins with him who is a quickening Spirit; and that of faith
   is consequent upon the other, and is the proper effect of it. 11. By
   his uniting act, which may be termed effectual calling, the enmity of
   sin is destroyed in the soul, and the Spirit of Christ is imparted,
   which as occasion offers, will manifest itself as the Spirit of faith,
   or love, &c. Hence, 12. To the soul thus in Christ, whether infant or
   adult, there is no condemnation arising from federal delinquency; for
   this charge is answered by the union on his part; and righteousness is
   imputed. 13. From the premises it follows, that the generally received
   theological maxim is perfectly just and plain, viz. that justification
   and regeneration are simultaneous.--Union is the immediate cause of
   both; and because the one is a relative and the other a vital effect,
   there is no interference as to the order of time. Thus an union of a
   tree and a branch by ingrafture, is attended with two simultaneous
   effects, the one relative and the other vital; it is related to the
   tree as a branch, and at the same time partakes of the vital sap. The
   union, however, must precede both, as to nature and time. 14. But where
   two effects are both real, as distinguished from relative, the one must
   precede the other, both as to nature and time. Thus union precedes
   vitality, and this of necessity must precede vital acts; and
   regeneration, as the act of the Spirit of Christ, must necessarily
   precede believing, which is one mode by which a vital principle
   operates. For to suppose that the operation produces, or is prior to
   the principle, either in nature or in time, is a direct contradiction.
   15. If the preceding steps of these remarks be thoroughly weighed, it
   will be found, that justification, according to Scripture, and just
   reasoning upon it, has for its foundation the federal perfection of
   Messiah, and takes place as the immediate result of union to him. 16.
   But since this union is twofold, the one as the effect of the other,
   that is, union by faith is the effect of union by the Spirit of Christ,
   and these, cause and effect, cannot possibly be simultaneous, there
   must necessarily be a twofold justification as the result of the
   corresponding unions. Though in that union which is first in the order
   of nature and of time, the person, whether infant or adult, is passive;
   the result however is the imputation of righteousness, which is
   Messiah's federal perfection, and which entitles to life eternal. And
   by that union which is the effect of the other, and consequently
   posterior in it in the order both of nature and of time, (and of which
   infants cannot be partakers,) this is, by the union effected by
   believing, the result is the imputation of the same righteousness in
   circumstances totally different. 17. These two different circumstances,
   clearly perceived, will developed the seeming difficulty. In the first,
   the person, whether infant or adult, is the passive possessor of
   decreed benefits, union righteousness, and life; in the second
   circumstance, the adult person, as a free and accountable agent, is
   required to determine for himself on what to found his plea of
   acceptance with God. If he found his plea on his own obedience past or
   intended, whether moral, ceremonial, or both; he shows at once both
   ignorance and rebellion. Ignorance, that he supposes it even possible
   for him, by his own obedience, to attain to that federal perfection
   which is justly required by the righteous Governor; and also in that he
   does not perceive the love and wisdom, the super abounding grace and
   wonderful mercy, of God as a sovereign Benefactor in providing the
   needful remedy. Rebellion, in that he rejects the counsel of God, and
   resists, by obstinate unbelief, the divine authority requiring
   submission to this righteousness as the way to favour and life. Hence,
   18. As all reasonings, expostulations, threats, promises and
   encouragements; all testimonies, declarations, appeals, inducements,
   and sanctions, are addressed to men as moral agents, with whom, in the
   business of accountability, it rests, what mode they will adopt for
   obtaining acceptance with God--whether by doing the work themselves, or
   by believing his testimony and receiving his gift--it fully accounts
   for justification by faith being the great point argued in the
   apostolic writings. 19. And it further appears, that justification by
   faith alone should be strenuously urged by all gospel ministers, while
   they have to do continually with persons whose inquiry is, "What shall
   we do to be saved?" To such as thus inquire after the way of salvation,
   who seek acceptance with God, who are about to choose for themselves
   "the way they will take," what answer can be given, in effect, but what
   is contained in the apostle's words? Romans 4:5 "To him that worketh
   not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
   counted for righteousness." The above statement not only agrees with
   these words, but also, as I humbly conceive, explains their import; and
   the embarrassment respecting the office and influence of faith in
   justification is removed, without expunging faith, or the act of
   believing, from the class of moral duties. 20. It may be objected, if
   there by any justification before believing, then an unbeliever may be
   justified; whereas the Scripture saith, "He that believeth not is
   condemned already." This objecting arises from a mistaken notion of the
   true meaning of such passages of Scripture. Condemnation, in the real
   import of Scripture, is leveled against the rejecters of Christ, or of
   the divine testimony, and these only, considered as free agents in
   seeking acceptance with God and final happiness. These, not believing
   in Christ, while prevailingly devoted to Moses or Mahomet, moral
   obedience or ceremonies, or indeed any other object whatever, reject in
   fact the testimony of God and his righteousness, and expose themselves
   to a double condemnation. They are condemned as being destitute of a
   perfect righteousness, and also for their actual disobedience to the
   divine authority. The sentence of the law is against them both as a
   covenant and as a rule; and the gospel which they reject will be a
   witness to prove the wickedness of their heart. But this can never take
   place in one who is vitally united to Christ. All allow that infants
   not believing are not to be ranked with unbelievers. To them no
   testimony is proposed, and therefore no testimony is rejected by them.
   Nor does any adult united to Christ reject the divine testimony, even
   before he believes. Let but the object of faith be presented to him,
   and his vital union secures the exercise of the living principle
   towards the proposed object in proportion as the terms are understood.
   A testimony not presented, or one presented in an unknown tongue,
   cannot be believed, notwithstanding the principle of faith. The
   existence of a principle does not necessarily imply its exercise,
   whether it be sense, reason, or faith. Men are not necessarily
   conversant with the objects of sense, because they possess the senses
   requisite for these purposes; nor are they always exercising the powers
   of the mind, however essential these powers are to human nature. In
   like manner, not exercising faith is a very different thing from not
   possessing the principle. A vital union and the spirit of faith are
   inseparably and essentially connected; but a vital union and believing
   are connected secundum quid, in certain circumstances. Without the
   circumstances of adult age, or a capacity of understanding, believing
   is impracticable. But how absurd would it be to say, that a sinner
   cannot be justified because he has not arrived at a certain advanced
   portion of understanding, or has not learned some language; as if a
   title to heaven depended on age, or knowing a language! And equally
   absurd is it to suppose that Christ cannot effect a vital union because
   the sinner's voluntary consent to it is wanting; as if God's high
   sovereignty were bound by the human will! That God requires the
   sinner's consent, as a matter of obligation, is a solemn fact; but God
   has not laid himself under any obligation that he will never unite a
   soul to Christ for justification of life but by the sinner's previous
   consent. He has declared, however, that the continued unbeliever, who
   is properly a willful rejecter of Christ and his righteousness, shall
   be condemned. Hence it is evident, that to make believing essential to
   a vital union, on the part of Christ; and to make the exercise of faith
   on a divine testimony essential to its existence, are erroneous
   conclusions, derogatory to gospel grace, and founded on wrong notions
   of moral government. 21. To make this, if possible, still more plain,
   the gospel finds men, as apostatized with Adam, in a state of
   condemnation; infants and adults alike are under the condemnatory
   sentence which is the result of a breach of covenant. This evil can be
   removed, and a restoration to favour be effected, only by an act of
   sovereign grace, whereby Christ becomes vitally united to the soul.
   Without this vital union there is, there can be, no faith. This being
   the case, a vital union is formed before faith can have any ground of
   existence; and consequently a justification which is a necessary result
   of this union takes place. For to him who is thus in Christ Jesus there
   is no condemnation; but he is passed from death unto life, as an object
   of mere grace and mercy. In this respect, an adult and in infant are
   perfectly on a par, while justified and regenerated for the kingdom of
   God. But God, in the character of a moral governor, has a further claim
   on every free agent; he exhibits to the view, and solicits, yea
   demands, a voluntary compliance with the plan of mercy through the
   blessed Redeemer, who was delivered for our offences, and was raised
   again for our justification. The regenerate person that is capable of
   acting for him self, as the subject of commands and invitations,
   complies; he becomes an active recipient of the appointed
   righteousness, which he now pleads in opposition to all charges
   presented against him. By faith, or believing God's testimony, he makes
   his appeal, and by faith alone he is justified. An investigation of the
   rationale of christian doctrines is not necessary for popular use, but
   may be peculiarly useful as a guard against inconsistencies, and a
   means of strengthening our attachment to those doctrines.--W.

   [670] This order, however, is a law to us, and compliance with it
   necessarily imports moral obedience; though the object received is the
   obedience of another. No one has room to expect success in his
   endeavors, but by complying with the divine requisition; and that
   requisition is, that we submit to the perfection of Messiah. And an act
   of submission to the righteousness of faith may well be an act of moral
   excellence, though that excellence has nothing meritorious on account
   of which a perfect righteousness should be imputed. A thing may have
   moral goodness without moral perfection. But in order to deny to faith
   the latter, it is not necessary to deprive it of the former. If we
   consistently maintain, that the moral excellence of faith constitutes
   no part of our justifying righteousness, it is all that the argument
   requires, in order to establish the conclusion intended.--W

   [671] That perfect obedience, is what is called righteousness in the
   New Testament, and that this righteousness, or perfect obedience, is by
   God's fixed unalterable rule the condition of justification, is, from
   the plain evidence of truth, confessed by a certain great man, whom
   nobody will think to be blinded by prejudice in favour of the doctrine
   we are maintaining, and one who did not receive this doctrine. M.
   Locke, in his Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the
   Scriptures, vol. 2 of his works, p. 474, writes thus: "To one that thus
   unbiased reads the Scripture, what Adam fell from, is visible, was the
   state of perfect obedience, which is called justice in the New
   Testament, though the word, which in the original signifies justice, be
   translated righteousness." Ibid. p. 476, 477. "For righteousness, or an
   exact obedience to the law, seems by the Scripture to have a claim of
   right to eternal life; Rom. iv. 4. To him that worketh, i.e., does the
   works of the law, is the reward not reckoned of grace but of debt. - On
   the other side, it seems the unalterable purpose of divine justice,
   that no unrighteous person, no one that is guilty of any breach of the
   law, should be in paradise; but that the wages of sin should be to
   every man, as it was to Adam, an exclusion of him out of that happy
   state of immortality, and bring death upon him. And this is so
   conformable to the eternal and established law of right and wrong, that
   it is spoke of too as it could not be otherwise. - Here then we have
   the standing and fixed measures of life and death; immortality and
   bliss belong to the righteous. Those who have lived in an exact
   conformity to the law of God are out of the reach of death; but an
   exclusion from paradise and loss of immortality, is the portion of
   sinners, of all those who have any way broke that law, and failed of a
   complete obedience to it, by the guilt of any one transgression. And
   thus mankind, by the law, are put upon the issues of life or death, as
   they are righteous or unrighteous, just or unjust, i.e. exact
   performers or transgressors of the law." Again, in p. 477. "The way of
   works then in short is, that law which requires perfect obedience,
   without any remission or abatement; so that by that law a man cannot be
   just or justified, without an exact performance of every tittle. Such a
   perfect obedience in the New Testament, is termed ??????????, which we
   translate righteousness." In which last passage it is also to be noted,
   that Mr. Locke, by the law of works, does not understand the ceremonial
   law, but the covenant of works; as he more fully expresses himself in
   the next paragraph but one. "Where this law of works was to be found,
   the New Testament tells us, viz. in the law delivered by Moses; John
   i.17.The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
   Christ. Chap. vii. 19. Did not Moses give you the law, says our
   Saviour, and yet none of you keep the law? And this is the law which he
   speaks of- verse 28. This do, and thou shalt live. This is that which
   St. Paul so often styles the law, without any other distinction; Rom.
   ii. 13.. Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers
   of the law are justified. It is needless to quote any more places, his
   epistles are all full of it, especially this to the Romans."

   [672] Thus Mr. Locke in his Reasonableness of Christianity, as
   delivered in the Scriptures, vol. 2d of his works, p. 478. "Nay,
   whatever God requires anywhere to be done, without making any allowance
   for faith, that is a part of the law of works. So that forbidding Adam
   to eat of the tree of knowledge, was part of the law of works. Only we
   must take notice here, that some of God's positive commands being for
   peculiar ends, and suited to particular circumstances of times, places,
   and persons, have a limited and only temporary obligation, by virtue of
   God's positive injunction: such was that part of Moses's law which
   concerned the outward worship of political constitution of the Jews,
   and is called the ceremonial and judaical law. Again, p. 479. "Thus
   then, as in the law in short, the civil and ritual part of the law
   delivered by Moses obliges not Christians, though to the Jews it were a
   part of the law of works; it being a part of the law of nature, that
   men ought to obey every positive law of God, whenever he shall please
   to make any such addition to the law of his nature."

   [673] Agreeable to this is what Mr. Locke says in his second
   Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, &c. vol. ii. of his
   works. p. 630, 631. "The believing him therefore to be the Messiah is
   very often, with great reason, put both for faith and repentance too,
   which are sometimes set down singly, where on is put for both, as
   implying the other."

   [674] If repentance justifies, or be that by which we obtain pardon of
   sin any other way than this, it must be either as a virtue or
   righteousness, or something amiable in us; or else it must be, that our
   sorrow and condemning what is past, is accepted as some atonement for
   it; both which are equally contrary to the gospel-doctrine of
   justification by Christ.

   [675] This distinction is just and scriptural as far as it goes, but it
   does not reach the bottom of the difficulty, since believing in order
   to justification is itself a part of obedience, and is expressly called
   "the obedience of faith." Hence justification by faith, in comparison
   of what precedes it, is only manifestative. The tree must be good, that
   is, the person must be vitally united to Christ, as the adequate cause
   of believing, otherwise he would be still carnal. The faith of a man
   spiritually dead or carnal, must needs be a dead faith; but to suppose
   that such faith unites to Christ, has neither Scripture nor any
   plausible reason to support it. To him that is in Christ Jesus by a
   vital union, there is no condemnation; and as there is no medium
   between condemnation and justification, he who is in Christ is
   justified, or "accepted in the beloved" Saviour. That union which
   Christ effects by his quickening Spirit, makes the tree good, and
   believing with the heart, in order to receive the promised
   righteousness, is the fruit of a good tree. Therefore the justification
   which is received as the consequence of believing is only manifestative
   of union; even as justification by works, as asserted by St. James, is
   manifestative of a living faith. As without works there is no
   sufficient evidence of union to Christ on our part, so without faith in
   Christ as our complete righteousness, there is no sufficient evidence
   of union with him on his part. The true Christian's works, are "works
   of faith and labours of love," performed in obedience to God's
   authority, directed to his glory, and inspired by gratitude for the
   blessings of his grace, and this is the first of all such works, called
   "the work of God," even to believe on Jesus Christ in whom alone is
   righteousness and life. By believing we receive the divine testimony
   respecting a gratuitous righteousness, and renounce all hope of
   obtaining justification by any other way. The justifying righteousness
   is only one, but the appointed ways of becoming interested in it are
   divers. One way is by the will of God our Saviour, the other by the
   will of man the accountable agent, each in its own order. The will of
   God gives the fundamental interest, and the will of man the consequent
   and manifestative interest. In the first way, we are interested in
   Christ's righteousness by one act continued, commencing with, and
   permanent as, the primary vital union; in the other way, it is by
   repeated acts, commencing with the first act of faith in Christ, and
   repeated with every succeeding reception of him. Among persons who have
   made any, even the smallest, progress in christian knowledge, there can
   be no dispute respecting the fundamental cause of justification. All
   such acknowledge, that the righteousness, or federal perfection of
   Jesus Christ, is that for the sake of which any of the fallen race of
   Adam can be justified. The difference of sentiment arises from the
   appointed method of obtaining an interest in this meritorious cause.
   For want of consideration, we too hastily infer, that if the Scripture
   states one appointed method, that it must be an exclusive
   appointment.--Hence one pleads from Scripture, and especially St.
   James's epistle, that this appointed method is by works, that is,
   evangelical obedience, of which faith is a leading part. Another pleads
   from Scripture, that it is by faith, not as an act of moral obedience,
   but as a suitable bond of union, to the exclusion of all works. And a
   third, from the same Scripture, pleads, that we are justified by an
   eternal immanent act of God, and that faith only brings us to enjoy a
   privilege which belongs to the elect from eternity. Now each of these
   schemes overlooks the important truth, that the immediate ground of
   justification is the vital union between Christ and the soul.
   Justification from eternity precedes vital union; justification by
   works denies the fact of a vital union being an adequate ground of a
   justifying sentence; and justification by faith alone, or believing in
   Christ, to the exclusion of a prior vital union on the part of the
   Spirit, confounds the work of man and the work of God. This last being
   the most difficult part of the subject, I beg leave to make a few
   observations upon it. 1. The claims of God, in reference to
   justification, are twofold. In the first instance, he claims from a man
   a federal perfection; and in the second instance, he claims compliance
   with his method of bestowing an interest in it. The former claim may be
   answered by the surety, and in fact is answered by his act of a vital
   union on his part. For by this he gives an interest in himself to the
   soul he savingly adopts. Thus there is no condemnation to you that are
   in Christ Jesus. But the latter claim can be answered only by the
   believer himself, when he actually receives Christ as his
   righteousness, and so answers the divine requisition. Thus, he that
   believeth in Christ is justified from all things. In the first
   instance, Christ pleads his own righteousness in behalf of the adopted
   sinner; in the last instance, the believer pleads the same
   righteousness in his own behalf. 2. The obligations of man, in
   reference to justification, are also of two kinds. In the first place,
   he stands obliged to be conformed to the law as a covenant, which
   demands a sinless perfection; and, in the second place, he is obliged
   to conform to the law as a rule. Now whatever God enjoins as a duty, is
   a part of this rule; whether it be to hate sin, to love God, to believe
   in Christ, or to observe whatever Christ hath commanded. Our obligation
   to be conformed to the law as a covenant, is discharged by Christ only
   as our surety; and our ability to discharge our obligation of being
   conformed to the law as a rule is from him. We are obliged to believe
   on him as our justifying righteousness, under pain of God's
   displeasure, but man will ever continue in unbelief until Christ slays
   his enmity, and enables him to believe. But to slay a sinner's enmity,
   to change his nature, or to give him ability to believe, is the effect
   of a vital union; for as there is no such ability without gracious
   influence, so there is no gracious influence without union to the
   source of spiritual life. When thus enabled, man exercises repentance
   towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Receiving him by faith
   alone, as our righteousness and life, the law is obeyed as the voice of
   God, requiring the obedience of faith. 3. The method of mercy, in
   reference to justification, includes the substitution of the Saviour,
   and our acceptance in him, without any works of righteousness on our
   part. In this respect, not by works of righteousness which we have
   done, whether faith, repentance, or any kind of obedience, but
   according to his mercy he saveth us--provides a Saviour and gives us a
   saving interest in him. Grace provides, and grace applies the remedy.
   Mercy imputes to Jesus our sins, and imputes to us his righteousness.
   He who knew no sin was by sovereign mercy made a sin-offering for us,
   that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Mercy laid the
   foundation, and placed us on it, that we might become living stones on
   him; and in consequence find him to be precious. 4. The rule of moral
   government, in reference to justification, is, that we believe on the
   Lord Jesus Christ as the end of the law for righteousness. For this end
   is the gospel proclaimed to all nations, even for "the obedience of
   faith." This is the language of divine government, "He that believeth
   shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be condemned." The
   unbeliever is condemned already, because he rejects the counsel of God,
   and neglects so great salvation. Mercy hath provided an adequate and
   all-sufficient remedy, and government requires our closing with it as
   the only ground of hope left us. An endeavour to set up our own
   obedience instead of the righteousness of Christ, is rebellion against
   the authority of God, and undervaluing his wisdom and grace. None
   deserve condemnation more than those who reject the only remedy. And
   even they who believe have no ground of boasting. For we are saved by
   grace, and justified by faith, and that is not of ourselves, but is the
   gift of God.--The influence of works in justification our author has
   well explained.--W
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE II

   pressing into the kingdom of god.

   luke xvi. 16.

   The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom
   of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.

   In these words two things may be observed: First, Wherein the work and
   office of John the Baptist consisted, viz. in preaching the kingdom of
   God, to prepare the way for its introduction to succeed the law and the
   prophets. By the law and the prophets, in the text, seems to be
   intended the ancient dispensation under the Old Testament, which was
   received from Moses and the prophets. These are said to be until John;
   not that the revelations given by them are out of use since that time,
   but that the state of the church, founded and regulated under God by
   them, the dispensation of which they were the ministers, and wherein
   the church depended mainly on light received from them, fully continued
   till John. He first began to introduce the New-Testament dispensation,
   or gospel-state of the church; which, with its glorious, spiritual, and
   eternal privileges and blessings, is often called the kingdom of
   heaven, or kingdom of God. John the Baptist preached, that the kingdom
   of God was at hand. "Repent," says he, "for the kingdom of heaven is at
   hand:" --"Since that time," says Christ, "the kingdom of God is
   preached." John the Baptist first began to preach it; and then after
   him, Christ and his disciples preached the same. Thus Christ preached,
   Matt. iv. 17. "From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say,
   Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." So the disciples were
   directed to preach, Matt. x. 7. "And, as ye go, preach, saying, the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand." It was not John the Baptist, but Christ,
   that fully brought in, and actually established, this kingdom of God;
   but he, as Christ's forerunner to prepare his way before him, did the
   first thing that was done towards introducing it. The old dispensation
   was abolished, and the new brought in by degrees; as the night
   gradually ceases, and gives place to the increasing day which succeeds
   in its room. First the day-star arises; next follows the light of the
   sun itself, but dimly reflected, in the dawning of the day; but this
   light increases, and shines more and more, and the stars that served
   for light during the foregoing night, gradually go out, and their light
   ceases, as being now needless, till at length the sun rises, and
   enlightens the world by his own direct light, which increases as he
   ascends higher above the horizon, till the day-star itself gradually
   disappears; agreeable to what John says of himself, John iii. 30. "He
   must increase, but I must decrease." John was the forerunner of Christ,
   and harbinger of the gospel-day; much as the morning-star is the
   forerunner of the sun. He had the most honourable office of any of the
   prophets; the other prophets foretold Christ to come, he revealed him
   as already come, and had the honour to be that servant who should come
   immediately before him, and actually introduce him, and even to be the
   instrument concerned in his solemn inauguration, as he was in baptizing
   him. He was the greatest of the prophets that came before Christ, as
   the morning-star is the brightest of all the stars, Matt. xi. 11. He
   came to prepare men's hearts to receive that kingdom of God which
   Christ was about more fully to reveal and erect. Luke i. 17. "To make
   ready a people prepared for the Lord."

   Secondly, We may observe wherein his success appeared, viz. in that
   since he began his ministry, every man pressed into that kingdom of God
   which he preached. The greatness of his success appeared in two things:

   1. In the generalness of it, with regard to the subject, or the persons
   in whom the success appeared; every man. Here is a term of
   universality; but it is not to be taken as universal with regard to
   individuals, but kinds; as such universal terms are often used in
   Scripture. When John reached, there was an extraordinary pouring out of
   the Spirit of God that attended his preaching. An uncommon awakening,
   and concern for salvation, appeared on the minds of all sorts of
   persons; and even in the most unlikely persons, and those from whom
   such a thing might least be expected; as the Pharisees, who were
   exceeding proud, and self-sufficient, and conceited of their own wisdom
   and righteousness, and looked on themselves fit to he teachers of
   others, and used to scorn to be taught; and the Sadducees, who were a
   kind of infidels, that denied any resurrection, angel, or spirit, or
   any future stale. So that John himself seems to be surprised to see
   them come to him, under such concern for their salvation; as in Matt.
   iii. 7. " But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to
   his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned
   you to flee from the wrath to come?" And besides these, the publicans,
   who were some of the most infamous sort of men, came to him, inquiring
   what they should do to be saved. And the soldiers, who were doubtless a
   very profane, loose, and profligate sort of persons, made the same
   inquiry, Luke iii. 12, and 14. "Then came also publicans to be
   baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? And the soldiers
   likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?"

   2. His success appeared in the manner in which his hearers sought the
   kingdom of God; they pressed into it. It is elsewhere set forth by
   their being violent for the kingdom of heaven, and taking it by force.
   Matt. xi. 12. "From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom
   of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force."

   The doctrine that I observe from the words is this.--"It concerns every
   one that would obtain the kingdom of God, to be pressing into it."--In
   discoursing on this subject, I would,

   First, Show what is that way of seeking salvation that seems to be
   pointed forth in the expression of pressing into the kingdom of God.

   Secondly, Give the reasons why it concerns every one that would obtain
   the kingdom of God, to seek it in this way.--And then make application.

   I. I would show what manner of seeking salvation seems to be denoted by
   "pressing into the kingdom of God."

   1. This expression denotes strength of desire. Men in general who live
   under the light of the gospel, and are not atheists, desire the kingdom
   of God; that is, they desire to go to heaven rather than to hell. Most
   of them indeed are not much concerned about it; but on the contrary,
   live a secure and careless life. And some who are many degrees above
   these, being under some degrees of the awakenings of God's Spirit, yet
   are not pressing into the kingdom of God. But they that may be said to
   be truly so, have strong desires to get out of a natural condition, and
   to get an interest in Christ. They have such a conviction of the misery
   of their present state, and of the extreme necessity of obtaining a
   better, that their minds are as it were possessed with and wrapped up
   in concern about it. To obtain salvation is desired by them above all
   things in the world. This concern is so great that it very much shuts
   out other concerns. They used before to have the stream of their
   desires after other things, or, it may be, had their concern divided
   between this and them; but when they come to answer the expression in
   the text, of pressing into the kingdom of God, this concern prevails
   above all others; it lays other things low, and does in a manner
   engross the care of the mind. This seeking eternal life should not only
   be one concern that our souls are taken up about with other things; but
   salvation should be sought as the one thing needful, Luke x. 42. And as
   the one thing that is desired, Psalm xxvii. 4.

   2. Pressing into the kingdom of heaven denotes earnestness and firmness
   of resolution. There should be strength of resolution, accompanying
   strength of desire, as it was in the psalmist, in the place just now
   referred to; "one thing have I desired, and that will I seek after." In
   order to a thorough engagedness of the mind in this affair, both these
   must meet together. Besides desires after salvation, there should be an
   earnest resolution in persons to pursue this good as much as lies in
   their power; to do all that in the use of their utmost strength they
   are able to do, in an attendance on every duty, and resisting and
   militating against all manner of sin, and to continue in such a
   pursuit.

   There are two things needful in a person, in order to these strong
   resolutions; there must be a sense of the great importance and
   necessity of the mercy sought, and there must also be a sense of
   opportunity to obtain it, or the encouragement there is to seek it. The
   strength of resolution depends on the sense which God gives to the
   heart of these things. Persons without such a sense, may seem to
   themselves to take up resolutions; they may, as it were, force a
   promise to themselves, and say within themselves, "I will seek as long
   as I live, I will not give up till I obtain," when they do but deceive
   themselves. Their hearts are not in it; neither do they indeed take up
   any such resolution as they seem to themselves to do. It is the
   resolution of the mouth more than of the heart; their hearts are not
   strongly bent to fulfil what their mouth says. The firmness of
   resolution lies in the fulness of the disposition of the heart to do
   what is resolved to be done. Those who are pressing into the kingdom of
   God, have a disposition of heart to do every thing that is required,
   and that lies in their power to do, and to continue in it. They have
   not only earnestness, but steadiness of resolution: they do not seek
   with a wavering unsteady heart, by turns or fits, being off and on; but
   it is the constant bent of the soul, if possible, to obtain the kingdom
   of God.

   3. By pressing into the kingdom of God is signified greatness of
   endeavour. It is expressed in Eccles. ix. 10. by doing what our hand
   finds to do with our might. And this is the natural and necessary
   consequence of the two forementioned things. Where there is strength of
   desire, and firmness of resolution, there will be answerable
   endeavours. Persons thus engaged in their hearts will "strive to enter
   in at the strait gate," and will be violent for heaven; their practice
   will be agreeable to the counsel of the wise man, in Prov. ii. at the
   beginning, "My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my
   commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and
   apply thine heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after
   knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seekest
   her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt
   thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God."
   Here the earnestness of desire and strength of resolution is signified
   by inclining the ear to wisdom, and applying the heart to
   understanding; and the greatness of endeavour is denoted by crying
   after knowledge, and lifting up the voice for understanding; seeking
   her as silver, and searching for her as for hid treasures: such desires
   and resolutions, and such endeavours, go together.

   4. Pressing into the kingdom of God denotes an engagedness and
   earnestness, that is directly about that business of getting into the
   kingdom of God. Persons may be in very great exercise and distress of
   mind, and that about the condition of their souls; their thoughts and
   cares may be greatly engaged and taken up about things of a spiritual
   nature, and yet not be pressing into the kingdom of God, nor towards
   it. The exercise of their minds is not directly about the work of
   seeking salvation, in a diligent attendance on the means that God hath
   appointed in order to it, but something else that is beside their
   business; it may be about God's decrees and secret purposes, prying
   into them, searching for signs whereby they may determine, or at least
   conjecture, what they are before God makes them known by their
   accomplishment. They distress their minds with fears that they be not
   elected, or that they have committed the unpardonable sin, or that
   their day is past, and that God has given them up to judicial and final
   hardness, and never intends to show them mercy; and therefore, that it
   is in vain for them to seek salvation. Or they entangle themselves
   about the doctrine of original sin, and other mysterious doctrines of
   religion that are above their comprehension. Many persons that seem to
   be in great distress about a future eternal state, get much into a way
   of perplexing themselves with such things as these. When it is so, let
   them be never so much concerned and engaged in their minds, they cannot
   be said to be pressing towards the kingdom of God; because their
   exercise is not in their work, but rather that which tends to hinder
   them in their work. If they are violent, they are only working
   violently to entangle themselves, and lay blocks in their own way;
   their pressure is not forwards. Instead of getting along, they do but
   lose their time, and worse than merely lose it; instead of fighting
   with the giants that stand in the way to keep them out of Canaan, they
   spend away their time and strength in conflicting with shadows that
   appear by the way-side.

   Hence we are not to judge of the hopefulness of the way that persons
   are in, or of the probability of their success in seeking salvation,
   only by the greatness of the concern and distress that they are in; for
   many persons have needless distresses that they had much better be
   without. It is thus very often with persons overrun with the distemper
   of melancholy; whence the adversary of souls is wont to take great
   advantage. But then are persons in the most likely way to obtain the
   kingdom of heaven, when the intent of their minds, and the engagedness
   of their spirits, is about their proper work and business, and all the
   bent of their souls is to attend on God's means, and to do what he
   commands and directs them to. The apostle tells us, 1 Cor. ix. 26.
   "that he did not fight as those that beat the air." Our time is short
   enough; we had not need to spend it in that which is nothing to the
   purpose. There are real difficulties and enemies enough for persons to
   encounter, to employ all their strength; they had not need to waste it
   in fighting with phantoms.

   5. By pressing into the kingdom of God is denoted a breaking through
   opposition and difficulties. There is in the expression a plain
   intimation of difficulty. If there were no opposition, but the way was
   all clear and open, there would be no need of pressing to get along.
   They therefore that are pressing into the kingdom of God, go on with
   such engagedness, that they break through the difficulties that are in
   their way. They are so set for salvation, that those things by which
   others are discouraged, and stopped, and turned back, do not stop them,
   but they press through them. Persons ought to be so resolved for
   heaven, that if by any means they can obtain, they will obtain. Whether
   those means be difficult or easy, cross or agreeable, if they are
   requisite means of salvation, they should be complied with. When any
   thing is presented to be done, the question should not be, Is it easy
   or hard? is it agreeable to my carnal inclinations or interest, or
   against them? But is it a required means of my obtaining an interest in
   Jesus Christ, and eternal salvation? Thus the apostle, Philip. iii. 11.
   "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead." He
   tells us there in the context what difficulties he broke through, that
   he suffered the loss of all things, and was willingly made conformable
   even to Christ's death, though that was attended with such extreme
   torment and ignominy.

   He that is pressing into the kingdom of God, commonly finds many things
   in the way that are against the grain; but he is not stopped by the
   cross that lies before him, but takes it up, and carries it. Suppose
   there be something incumbent on him to do, that is cross to his natural
   temper, and irksome to him on that account; suppose something that he
   cannot do without suffering in his estate, or that he apprehends will
   look odd and strange in the eyes of others, and expose him to ridicule
   and reproach, or any thing that will offend a neighbour, and get his
   ill-will, or something that will be very cross to his own carnal
   appetite-- he will press through such difficulties. Every thing that is
   found to be a weight that hinders him in running this race he casts
   from him, though it be a weight of gold or pearls; yea, if it be a
   right hand or foot that offends him, he will cut them off, and will not
   stick at plucking out a right eye with his own hands. These things are
   insuperable difficulties to those who are not thoroughly engaged in
   seeking their salvation; they are stumbling-blocks that they never get
   over. But it is not so with him that presses into the kingdom of God.
   Those things (before he was thoroughly roused from his security) about
   which he was wont to have long parleyings and disputings with his own
   conscience--employing carnal reason to invent arguments and pleas of
   excuse--he now sticks at no longer; he has done with this endless
   disputing and reasoning, and presses violently through all
   difficulties. Let what will be in the way, heaven is what he must and
   will obtain, not if he can without difficulty, but if it be possible.
   He meets with temptation: the devil is often whispering in his ear,
   setting allurements before him, magnifying the difficulties of the work
   he is engaged in, telling him that they are insuperable, and that he
   can never conquer them, and trying all ways in the world to discourage
   him; but still he presses forward. God has given and maintains such an
   earnest spirit for heaven, that the devil cannot stop him in his
   course; he is not at leisure to lend an ear to what he has to say.--I
   come now,

   II. To show why the kingdom of heaven should be sought in this
   manner.--It should be thus sought,

   1. On account of the extreme necessity we are in of getting into the
   kingdom of heaven. We are in a perishing necessity of it; without it we
   are utterly and eternally lost. Out of the kingdom of God is no safety;
   there is no other hiding-place; this is the only city of refuge, in
   which we can be secure from the avenger that pursues all the ungodly.
   The vengeance of God will pursue, overtake, and eternally destroy, them
   that are not in this kingdom. All that are without this enclosure will
   be swallowed up in an overflowing fiery deluge of wrath. They may stand
   at the door and knock, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, in vain; they
   will be thrust back; and God will have no mercy on them; they shall be
   eternally left of him. His fearful vengeance will seize them; the
   devils will lay hold of them; and all evil will come upon them; and
   there will be none to pity or help; their case will be utterly
   desperate, and infinitely doleful. It will be a gone case with them;
   all offers of mercy and expressions of divine goodness will be finally
   withdrawn, and all hope will be lost. God will have no kind of regard
   to their well-being; will take no care of them to save them from any
   enemy, or any evil; but himself will be their dreadful enemy, and will
   execute wrath with fury, and will take vengeance in an inexpressibly
   dreadful manner. Such as shall be in this case will be lost and undone
   indeed! They will be sunk down into perdition, infinitely below all
   that we can think. For who knows the power of God's anger? And who
   knows the misery of that poor worm, on whom that anger is executed
   without mercy?

   2. On account of the shortness and uncertainty of the opportunity for
   getting into this kingdom. When a few days are past, all our
   opportunity for it will be gone. Our day is limited. God has set our
   bounds, and we know not where. While persons are out of this kingdom,
   they are in danger every hour of being overtaken with wrath. We know
   not how soon we shall get past that line, beyond which there is no
   work, device, knowledge, nor wisdom; and therefore we should do what we
   have to do with our might, Eccles. ix. 10.

   3. On account of the difficulty of setting into the kingdom of God.
   There are innumerable difficulties in the way; such as few conquer:
   most of them that try have not resolution, courage, earnestness, and
   constancy enough; but they fail, give up, and perish. The difficulties
   are too many and too great for them that do not violently press
   forward. They never get along, but stick by the way; are turned aside,
   or turned back, and ruined. Matt. vii. 14. "Strait is the gate, and
   narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find
   it." Luke xiii. 24. "Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I
   say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able."

   4. The possibility of obtaining. Though it be attended with so much
   difficulty, yet it is not a thing impossible. Acts viii. 22. "If
   perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee." 2 Tim. ii.
   25. "If peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging
   of the truth." However sinful a person is, and whatever his
   circumstances are, there is, notwithstanding, a possibility of his
   salvation. He himself is capable of it, and God is able to accomplish
   it, and has mercy sufficient for it; and there is sufficient provision
   made through Christ, that God may do it consistent with the honour of
   his majesty, justice, and truth. So that there is no want either of
   sufficiency in God, or capacity in the sinner, in order to this. The
   greatest and vilest, most blind, dead, hard-hearted sinner living, is a
   subject capable of saving light and grace. Seeing therefore there is
   such necessity of obtaining the kingdom of God, and so short a time,
   and such difficulty, and yet such a possibility, it may well induce us
   to press into it. Jonah iii. 8, 9.

   5. It is meet that the kingdom of heaven should be thus sought, because
   of the great excellency of it. We are willing to seek earthly things,
   of trifling value, with great diligence, and through much difficulty;
   it therefore certainly becomes us to seek that with great earnestness
   which is of infinitely greater worth and excellence. And how well may
   God expect and require it of us, that we should seek it in such a
   manner, in order to our obtaining it!

   6. Such a manner of seeking is needful to prepare persons for the
   kingdom of God. Such earnestness and thoroughness of endeavours, is the
   ordinary means that God makes use of to bring persons to an
   acquaintance with themselves, to a sight of their own hearts, to a
   sense of their own helplessness, and to a despair in their own strength
   and righteousness. And such engagedness and constancy in seeking the
   kingdom of heaven, prepare the soul to receive it the more joyfully and
   thankfully, and the more highly to prize and value it when obtained. So
   that it is in mercy to us, as well as for the glory of his own name,
   that God has appointed such earnest seeking, to be the way in which he
   will bestow the kingdom of heaven.

      APPLICATION.

   The use I would make of this doctrine, is of exhortation to all
   Christless persons to press into the kingdom of God. Some of you are
   inquiring what you shall do? You seem to desire to know what is the way
   wherein salvation is to be sought, and how you may be likely to obtain
   it. You have now heard the way that the holy word of God directs to.
   Some are seeking, but it cannot be said of them that they are pressing
   into the kingdom of heaven. There are many that in time past have
   sought salvation, but not in this manner, and so they never obtained,
   but are now gone to hell. Some of them sought it year after year, but
   failed of it, and perished at last. They were overtaken with divine
   wrath, and are now suffering the fearful misery of damnation, and have
   no rest day nor night, having no more opportunity to seek, but must
   suffer and be miserable throughout the never-ending ages of eternity.
   Be exhorted, therefore, not to seek salvation as they did, but let the
   kingdom of heaven suffer violence from you.

   Here I would first answer an objection or two, and then proceed to give
   some directions how to press into the kingdom of God.

   Object. 1. Some may be ready to say, We cannot do this of ourselves;
   that strength of desire, and firmness of resolution, that have been
   spoken of, are out of our reach. If I endeavour to resolve and to seek
   with engagedness of spirit, I find I fail; my thoughts are presently
   off from the business, and I feel myself dull, and my engagedness
   relaxed, in spite of all I can do.

   Ant. 1. Though earnestness of mind be not immediately in your power,
   yet the consideration of what has been now said of the need of it, may
   be a means of stirring you up to it. It is true, persons never will be
   thoroughly engaged in this business, unless it be by God's influence;
   but God influences persons by means. Persons are not stirred up to a
   thorough earnestness without some considerations that move them to it.
   And if persons can but be made sensible of the necessity of salvation,
   and also duly consider the exceeding difficulty of it, and the
   greatness of the opposition, and how short and uncertain the time is,
   but yet are sensible that they have an opportunity, and that there is a
   possibility of their obtaining, they will need no more in order to
   their being thoroughly engaged and resolved in this matter. If we see
   persons slack and unresolved, and unsteady, it is because they do not
   enough consider these things.

   2. Though strong desires and resolutions of mind be not in your power,
   yet painfulness of endeavours is in your power. It is in your power to
   take pains in the use of means, yea very great pains. You can be very
   painful and diligent in watching your own heart, and striving against
   sin. Though there is all manner of corruption in the heart continually
   ready to work, yet you can very laboriously watch and strive against
   these corruptions; and it is in your power, with great diligence to
   attend the matter of your duty towards God and towards your neighbour.
   It is in your power to attend all ordinances, and all public and
   private duties of religion, and to do it with your might. It would be a
   contradiction to suppose that a man cannot do these things with all the
   might he has, though he cannot do them with more might than he has. The
   dulness and deadness of the heart, and slothfulness of disposition, do
   not hinder men being able to take pains, though it hinders their being
   willing. That is one thing wherein your laboriousness may appear, even
   striving against your own dulness. That men have a dead and sluggish
   heart, does not argue that they be not able to take pains; it is so far
   from that, that it gives occasion for pains. It is one of the
   difficulties in the way of duty, that persons have to strive with, and
   that gives occasion for struggling and labour. If there were no
   difficulties attended seeking salvation, there would be no occasion for
   striving; a man would have nothing to strive about. There is indeed a
   great deal of difficulty attending all duties required of those that
   would obtain heaven. It is an exceeding difficult thing for them to
   keep their thoughts; it is a difficult thing seriously, or to any good
   purpose, to consider matters of the greatest importance; it is a
   difficult thing to hear, or read, or pray attentively. But it does not
   argue that a man cannot strive in these things because they are
   difficult; nay, he could not strive therein if there were not
   difficulty in them. For what is there excepting difficulties that any
   can have to strive or struggle with in any affair or business?
   Earnestness of mind, and diligence of endeavour, tend to promote each
   other. He that has a heart earnestly engaged, will take pains; and he
   that is diligent and painful in all duty, probably will not be so long
   before he finds the sensibleness of his heart and earnestness of his
   spirit greatly increased.

   Object. 2. Some may object, that if they are earnest, and take a great
   deal of pains, they shall be in danger of trusting to what they do;
   they are afraid of doing their duty for fear of making a righteousness
   of it.

   Ans. There is ordinarily no kind of seekers that trust so much to what
   they do, as slack and dull seekers. Though all seeking salvation, that
   have never been the subjects of a thorough humiliation, do trust in
   their own righteousness; yet some do it much more fully than others.
   Some though they trust in their own righteousness, yet are not quiet in
   it. And those who are most disturbed in their self-confidence, (and
   therefore in the likeliest way to be wholly brought off from it,) are
   not such as go on in a remiss way of seeking, but such as are most
   earnest and thoroughly engaged; partly because in such a way conscience
   is kept more sensible. A more awakened conscience will not rest so
   quietly in moral and religious duties, as one that is less awakened. A
   dull seeker's conscience will be in a great measure satisfied and
   quieted with his own works and performances; but one that is thoroughly
   awakened cannot be stilled or pacified with such things as these. In
   this way persons gain much more knowledge of themselves, and
   acquaintance with their own hearts, than in a negligent, slight way of
   seeking; for they have a great deal more experience of themselves. It
   is experience of ourselves, and finding what we are, that God commonly
   makes use of as the means of bringing us off from all dependence on
   ourselves. But men never get acquaintance with themselves so fast, as
   in the most earnest way of seeking. They that are in this way have more
   to engage them to think of their sins, and strictly to observe
   themselves, and have much more to do with their own hearts, than
   others. Such a one has much more experience of his own weakness, than
   another that does not put forth and try his strength; and will
   therefore sooner see himself dead in sin. Such a one, though he hath a
   disposition continually to be flying to his own righteousness, yet
   finds rest in nothing; he wanders about from one thing to another,
   seeking something to ease his disquieted conscience; he is driven from
   one refuge to another, goes from mountain to hill, seeking rest and
   finding none; and therefore will the sooner prove that there is no rest
   to be found, nor trust to be put, in any creature whatsoever.

   It is therefore quite a wrong notion that some entertain, that the more
   they do, the more they shall depend on it. Whereas the reverse is true;
   the more they do, or the more thorough they are in seeking, the less
   will they be likely to rest in their doings, and the sooner will they
   see the vanity of all that they do. So that persons will exceedingly
   miss it, if ever they neglect to do any duty either to God or man,
   whether it be any duty of religion, justice, or charity, under a notion
   of its exposing them to trust in their own righteousness. It is very
   true, that it is a common thing for persons, when they earnestly seek
   salvation, to trust in the pains that they take: but yet commonly those
   that go on in a more slight way, trust a great deal more securely to
   their dull services, than he that is pressing into the kingdom of God
   does to his earnestness. Men's slackness in religion, and their trust
   in their own righteousness, strengthen and establish one another. Their
   trust in what they have done, and what they now do, settles them in a
   slothful rest and ease, and hinders their being sensible of their need
   of rousing up themselves and pressing forward. And on the other hand,
   their negligence genre tends so to benumb them, and keep them in such
   ignorance of themselves, that the most miserable refuges are stupidly
   rested in as sufficient. Therefore we see, that when persons have been
   going on for a long time in such a way, and God afterwards comes more
   thoroughly to awaken them, and to stir them up to be in good earnest,
   he shakes all their old foundations, and rouses them out of their old
   resting-places; so that they cannot quiet themselves with those things
   that formerly kept them secure.

   I would now proceed to give some directions how you should press into
   the kingdom of God.

   1. Be directed to sacrifice every thing to your soul's eternal
   interest. Let seeking this be so much your bent, and what you are so
   resolved in, that you will make every thing give place to it. Let
   nothing stand before your resolution of seeking the kingdom of God.
   Whatever it be that you used to look upon as a convenience, or comfort,
   or ease, or thing desirable on any account, if it stands in the way of
   this great concern, let it be dismissed without hesitation; and if it
   be of that nature that it is likely always to be a hinderance, then
   wholly have done with it, and never entertain any expectation from it
   more. If in time past you have, for the sake of worldly gain, involved
   yourself in more care and business than you find to be consistent with
   your being so thorough in the business of religion as you ought to be,
   then get into some other way, though you suffer in your worldly
   interest by it. Or if you have heretofore been conversant with company
   that you have reason to think have been and will be a snare to you, and
   a hinderance to this great design in any wise, break off from their
   society, however it may expose you to reproach from your old
   companions, or let what will be the effect of it. Whatever it be that
   stands in the way of your most advantageously seeking
   salvation--whether it be some dear sinful pleasure, or strong carnal
   appetite, or credit and honour, or the good-will of some persons whose
   friendship you desire, and whose esteem and liking you have highly
   valued--and though there be danger, if you do as you ought, that you
   shall be looked upon by them as odd and ridiculous, and become
   contemptible in their eyes--or if it be your ease and indolence, and
   aversion to continual labour; or your outward convenience in any
   respect, whereby you might avoid difficulties of one kind or other--let
   all go; offer up all such things together, as it were, in one
   sacrifice, to the interest of your soul. Let nothing stand in
   competition with this, but make every thing to fall before it. If the
   flesh must be crossed, then cross it, spare it not, crucify it, and do
   not be afraid of being too cruel to it. Gal. v. 24. "They that are
   Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts."
   Have no dependence on any worldly enjoyment whatsoever. Let salvation
   be the one thing with you. This is what is certainly required of you:
   and this is what many stick at; this giving up other things for
   salvation, is a stumbling-block that few get over. While others pressed
   into the kingdom of God at the preaching of John the Baptist, Herod was
   pretty much stirred up by his preaching. It is said, he heard him, and
   observed him, and did many things; but when he came to tell him that he
   must part with his beloved Herodias, here he stuck; this he never would
   yield to, Mark vii. 18-20. The rich young man was considerably
   concerned for salvation; and accordingly was a very strict liver in
   many things: but when Christ came to direct him to go and sell all that
   he had, and give to the poor, and come and follow him, he could not
   find in his heart to comply with it, but went away sorrowful. He had
   great possessions, and set his heart much on his estate, and could not
   bear to part with it. It may be, if Christ had directed him only to
   give away a considerable part of his estate, he would have done it;
   yea, perhaps, if he had bid him part with half of it, he would have
   complied with it: but when he directed him to throw up all, he could
   not grapple with such a proposal. Herein the straitness of the gate
   very much consists; and it is on this account that so many seek to
   enter in, and are not able. There are many that have a great mind to
   salvation, and spend great part of their time in wishing that they had
   it, but they will not comply with the necessary means.

   2. Be directed to forget the things that are behind; that is, not to
   keep thinking and making much of what you have done, but let your mind
   be wholly intent on what you have to do. In some sense you ought to
   look back; you should look back on your sins. Jer. ii. 23. "See thy way
   in the valley, know what thou hast done." You should look back on the
   wretchedness of your religious performances, and consider how you have
   fallen short in them; how exceedingly polluted all your duties have
   been, and how justly God might reject and loathe them, and you for
   them. But you ought not to spend your time in looking back, as many
   persons do, thinking how much they have done for their salvation; what
   great pains they have taken, how that they have done what they can, and
   do not see how they can do more; how long a time they have been
   seeking, and how much more they have done than others, and even than
   such and such who have obtained mercy. They think with themselves how
   hardly God deals with them, that he does not extend mercy to them, but
   turns a deaf ear to their cries; and hence discourage themselves, and
   complain of God. Do not thus spend your time in looking on what is
   past, but look forward, and consider what is before you; consider what
   it is that you can do, and what it is necessary that you should do, and
   what God calls you still to do, in order to your own salvation. The
   apostle, in the 3d chapter to the Philippians, tells us what things he
   did while a Jew, how much he had to boast of, if any could boast; but
   he tells us, that he forgot those things, and all others that were
   behind, and reached forth towards the things that were before, pressing
   forwards towards the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
   Christ Jesus.

   3. Labour to get your heart thoroughly disposed to go on and hold out
   to the end. Many that seem to be earnest have not a heart thus
   disposed. It is a common thing for persons to appear greatly affected
   for a little while; but all is soon past away, and there is no more to
   be seen of it. Labour therefore to obtain a thorough willingness and
   preparation of spirit, to continue seeking, in the use of your utmost
   endeavours, without limitation; and do not think your whole life too
   long. And in order to this, be advised to two things.

   (1.) Remember that if ever God bestows mercy upon you, he will use his
   sovereign pleasure about the time when. He will bestow it on some in a
   little time, and on others not till they have sought it long. If other
   persons are soon enlightened and comforted, while you remain long in
   darkness, there is no other way but for you to wait. God will act
   arbitrarily in this matter, and you cannot help it. You must even be
   content to wait, in a way of laborious and earnest striving, till his
   time comes. If you refuse, you will but undo yourself; and when you
   shall hereafter find yourself undone, and see that your case is past
   remedy, how will you condemn yourself for foregoing a great probability
   of salvation, only because you had not patience to hold out, and was
   not willing to be at the trouble of a persevering labour! And what will
   it avail before God or your own conscience to say, that yon could not
   bear to be obliged to seek salvation so long, when God bestowed it on
   others that sought it but for a very short time? Though God may have
   bestowed the testimonies of his favour on others in a few days or hours
   after they have begun earnestly to seek it, how does that alter the
   case as to you, if there proves to be a necessity of your laboriously
   seeking many years before you obtain them? Is salvation less worth
   taking a great deal of pains for, because, through the sovereign
   pleasure of God, others have obtained it with comparatively little
   pains? If there are two persons, the one of which has obtained
   converting grace with comparative ease, and another that has obtained
   it after continuing for many years in the greatest and most earnest
   labours after it, how little difference does it make at last, when once
   salvation is obtained! Put all the labour and pains, the long-continued
   difficulties and strugglings, of the one in the scale against
   salvation, and how little does it subtract; and put the ease with which
   the other has obtained in the scale with salvation, and how little does
   it add! What is either added or substituted is lighter than vanity, and
   a thing worthy of no consideration, when compared with that infinite
   benefit that is obtained. Indeed if you were ten thousand years, and
   all that time should strive and press forward with as great earnestness
   as ever a person did for one day, all this would hear no proportion to
   the importance of the benefit; and it will doubtless appear little to
   you, when once you come to he in actual possession of eternal glory,
   and to see what that eternal misery is which you have escaped. You must
   not think much of your pains, and of the length of time; you must press
   towards the kingdom of God, and do your utmost, and hold out to the
   end, and learn to make no account of it when you have done. You must
   undertake the business of seeking salvation upon these terms, and with
   no other expectations than this, that if ever God bestows mercy it will
   be in his own time; and not only so, but also that when you have done
   all, God will not hold himself obliged to show you mercy at last.

   (2.) Endeavour now thoroughly to weigh in your mind the difficulty, and
   to count the cost of perseverance in seeking salvation. You that are
   now setting out in this business, (as there are many here who have very
   lately set about it;--Praised be the name of God that he has stirred
   you up to it!) be exhorted to attend this direction. Do not undertake
   in this affair with any other thought but of giving yourself wholly to
   it for the remaining part of your life, and going through many and
   great difficulties in it. Take heed that you do not engage secretly
   upon this condition, that you shall obtain in a little time, promising
   yourself that it shall be within this present season of the pouring out
   of God's Spirit, or with any other limitation of time whatsoever. Many,
   when they begin, (seeming to set out very earnestly,) do not expect
   that they shall need to seek very long, and so do not prepare
   themselves for it. And therefore, when they come to find it otherwise,
   and meet with unexpected difficulty, they are found unguarded, and
   easily overthrown. But let me advise you all who are now seeking
   salvation, not to entertain any self-flattering thoughts; but weigh the
   utmost difficulties of perseverance, and be provided for them, having
   your mind fixed in it to go through them, let them be what they will.
   Consider now beforehand, how tedious it would be, with utmost
   earnestness and labour, to strive after salvation for many years, in
   the mean time receiving no joyful or comfortable evidence of your
   having obtained. Consider what a great temptation to discouragement
   there probably would be in it; how apt you would be to yield the case;
   how ready to think that it is in vain for you to seek any longer, and
   that God never intends to show you mercy, in that he has not yet done
   it; how apt you would be to think with yourself, "What an uncomfortable
   life do I live! how much more unpleasantly do I spend my time than
   others that do not perplex their minds about the things of another
   world, but are at ease, and take the comfort of their worldly
   enjoyments!" Consider what a temptation there would probably be in it,
   if you saw others brought in that began to seek the kingdom of heaven
   long after you, rejoicing in a hope and sense of God's favour, after
   but little pains and a short time of awakening; while you, from day to
   day, and from year to year, seemed to labour in vain. Prepare for such
   temptations now. Lay in beforehand for such trials and difficulties,
   that you may not think any strange thing has happened when they come.

   I hope that those who have given attention to what has been said, have
   by this time conceived, in some measure, what is signified by the
   expression in the text, and after what manner they ought to press into
   the kingdom of God. Here is this to induce you to a compliance with
   what you have been directed to; if you sit still, you die; if you go
   backward, behold you shall surely die; if you go forward, you may live.
   And though God has not bound himself to any thing that a person does
   while destitute of faith, and out of Christ, yet there is great
   probability, that in a way of hearkening to this counsel you will live;
   and that by pressing onward, and persevering, you will at last, as it
   were by violence, take the kingdom of heaven. Those of you who have not
   only heard the directions given, but shall through God's merciful
   assistance, practise according to them, are those that probably will
   overcome. These we may well hope at last to see standing with the Lamb
   on mount Sion, clothed in white robes, with palms in their hands; when
   all your labour and toil will be abundantly compensated, and you will
   not repent that you have taken so much pains, and denied yourself so
   much, and waited so long. This self-denial, this waiting, will then
   look little, and vanish into nothing in your eyes, being all swallowed
   up in the first minute's enjoyment of that glory that you will then
   possess, and will uninterruptedly possess and enjoy to all eternity.

   4th direction. Improve the present season of the pouring out of the
   Spirit of God on this town. Prudence in any affair whatsoever consists
   very much in minding and improving our opportunities. If you would have
   spiritual prosperity, you must exercise prudence in the concerns of
   your souls, as well as in outward concerns when you seek outward
   prosperity. The prudent husbandman will observe his opportunities; he
   will improve seed-time and harvest; he will make his advantage of the
   showers and shines of heaven. The prudent merchant will discern his
   opportunities; he will not be idle on a market-day; he is careful not
   to let slip his seasons for enriching himself: So will those who
   prudently seek the fruits of righteousness, and the merchandise of
   wisdom, improve their opportunities for their eternal wealth and
   happiness.

   God is pleased at this time, in a very remarkable manner, to pour out
   his Spirit amongst us; (glory be to his name!) You that have a mind to
   obtain converting grace, and to go to heaven when you die, now is your
   season! Now, if you have any sort of prudence for your own salvation,
   and have not a mind to go to hell, improve this season! Now is the
   accepted time! Now is the day of salvation! You that in time past have
   been called upon, and have turned a deaf ear to God's voice, and long
   stood out and resisted his commands and counsels, hear God's voice
   to-day, while it is called to-day! Do not harden your hearts at such a
   day as this! Now you have a special and remarkable price put into your
   hands to get wisdom, if you have but a heart to improve it.

   God hath his certain days or appointed seasons of exercising both mercy
   and judgment. There are some remarkable times of wrath, laid out by God
   for his awful visitation, and the executions of his anger; which times
   are called days of vengeance, Prov. vi. 34. Wherein God will visit for
   sin, Exod. xxxii. 34. And so, on the contrary, God has laid out in his
   sovereign counsels seasons of remarkable mercy, wherein he will
   manifest himself in the exercises of his grace and loving-kindness,
   more than at other times. Such times in Scripture are called by way of
   eminency, accepted times, and days of salvation, and also days of God's
   visitation; because they are days wherein God will visit in a way of
   mercy; as Luke xix. 44. "And shall lay thee even with the ground, and
   thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone
   upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation." It
   is such a time now in this town; it is with us a day of God's gracious
   visitation. It is indeed a day of grace with us as long as we live in
   this world, in the enjoyment of the means of grace; but such a time as
   this is especially, and in a distinguishing manner, a day of grace.
   There is a door of mercy always standing open for sinners; but at such
   a day as this, God opens an extraordinary door.

   We are directed to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call
   upon him while he is near, Isa. lv. 6. If you that are hitherto
   Christless, be not strangely besotted and infatuated, you will by all
   means improve such an opportunity as this to get heaven, when heaven is
   brought so near, when the fountain is opened in the midst of us in so
   extraordinary a manner. Now is the time to obtain a supply of the
   necessities of your poor perishing souls! This is the day for sinners
   that have a mind to be converted before they die, when God is dealing
   forth so liberally and bountifully amongst us; when conversion and
   salvation work is going on amongst us from sabbath to sabbath, and many
   are pressing into the kingdom of God! Now do not stay behind, but press
   in amongst the rest! Others have been stirred up to be in good earnest,
   and have taken heaven by violence; be entreated to follow their
   example, if you would have a part of the inheritance with them, and
   would not be left at the great day, when they are taken!

   How should it move you to consider that you have this opportunity now
   in your hands! You are in the actual possession of it! If it were past,
   it would not be in your power to recover it, or in the power of any
   creature to bring it back for you; but it is not past; it is now, at
   this day. Now is the accepted time, even while it is called to-day!
   Will you sit still at such a time? Will you sleep in such a harvest?
   Will you deal with a slack hand, and stay behind out of mere sloth, or
   love to some lust, or lothness to grapple with some small difficulty,
   or to put yourself a little out of your way, when so many are flowing
   to the goodness of the Lord? You are behind still; and so you will be
   in danger of being left behind, when the whole number is completed that
   are to enter in, if you do not earnestly bestir yourself! To be left
   behind at the close of such a season as this, will be awful--next to
   being left behind on that day when God's saints shall mount up as with
   wings to meet the Lord in the air--and will be what will appear very
   threatening of it.

   God is now calling you in an extraordinary manner: and it is agreeable
   to the will and word of Christ, that I should now, in his name, call
   you, as one set over you, and sent to you to that end; so it is his
   will that you should hearken to what I say, as his voice. I therefore
   beseech you in Christ's stead now to press into the kingdom of God!
   Whoever you are, whether young or old, small or great; if you are a
   great sinner, if you have been a backslider, if you have quenched the
   Spirit, be who you will, do not stand making objections, but arise,
   apply yourself to your work! Do what you have to do with your might.
   Christ is calling you before, and holding forth his grace, and
   everlasting benefits, and wrath is pursuing you behind; wherefore fly
   for your life, and look not behind you!

   But here I would particularly direct myself to several sorts of
   persons.

   I. To those sinners who are in a measure awakened, and are concerned
   for their salvation. You have reason to be glad that you have such an
   opportunity, and to prize it above gold. To induce you to prize and
   improve it, consider several things.

   1. God has doubtless a design now to deal forth saving blessings to a
   number. God has done it to some already, and it is not probable that he
   has yet finished his work amongst us: we may well hope still to see
   others brought out of darkness into marvellous light. And therefore,

   2. God comes this day, and knocks at many persons' doors, and at your
   door among the rest. God seems to be come in a very unusual manner
   amongst us, upon a gracious and merciful design; a design of saving a
   number of poor miserable souls out of a lost and perishing condition,
   and of bringing them into a happy state and eternal glory! This is
   offered to you, not only as it has always been in the word and
   ordinances, but by the particular influences of the Spirit of Christ
   awakening you! This special offer is made to many amongst us; and you
   are not passed over. Christ has not forgot you; but has come to your
   door; and there as it were stands waiting for you to open to him. If
   you have wisdom and discretion to discern your own advantage, you will
   know that now is your opportunity.

   3. How much more easily converting grace is obtained at such a time,
   than at other times! The work is equally easy with God at all times;
   but there is far less difficulty in the way as to men at such a time,
   than at other times. It is, as I said before, a day of God's gracious
   visitation; a day that he has as it were set apart for the more
   liberally and bountifully dispensing of his grace; a day wherein God's
   hand is opened wide. Experience shows it. God seems to be more ready to
   help, to give proper convictions, to help against temptations, and let
   in divine light. He seems to carry on his work with a more glorious
   discovery of his power, and Satan is more chained up than at other
   times. Those difficulties and temptations that persons before stuck at,
   from year to year, they are soon helped over. The work of God is
   carried on with greater speed and swiftness, and there are often
   instances of sudden conversion at such a time. So it was in the
   apostles' days, when there was a time of the most extraordinary pouring
   out of the Spirit that ever was. How quick and sudden were conversions
   in those days! Such instances as that of the jailer abounded then, in
   fulfilment, of that prophecy, Isa. lxvi. 7, 8. "Before she travailed,
   she brought forth: before her pain came, she was delivered of a
   man-child. Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? For
   as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children." So it is in
   some degree, whenever there is an extraordinary pouring out of the
   Spirit of God; more or less so, in proportion to the greatness of that
   effusion. There is seldom such quick work made of it at other times.
   Persons are not so soon delivered from their various temptations and
   entanglements; but are much longer wandering in a wilderness, and
   groping in darkness. And yet,

   4. There are probably some here present that are now concerned about
   their salvation, that never will obtain. It is not to be supposed that
   all that are now moved and awakened, will ever be savingly converted.
   Doubtless there are many now seeking that will not be able to enter.
   When has it been so in times past, when there has been times of great
   outpourings of God's Spirit, but that many who for a while have
   inquired with others, what they should do to be saved, have failed, and
   afterwards grown hard and secure? All of you that are now awakened,
   have a mind to obtain salvation, and probably hope to get a title to
   heaven, in the time of this present moving of God's Spirit: but yet,
   (though it be awful to be spoken, and awful to be thought,) we have no
   reason to think any other, than that some of you will burn in hell to
   all eternity. You all are afraid of hell, and seem at present disposed
   to take pains to be delivered from it; and yet it would be unreasonable
   to think any other, than that some of you will have your portion in the
   lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Though there are so many that
   seem to obtain so easily, having been but a little while under
   convictions, yet, for all that, some never will obtain. Some will soon
   lose the sense of things they now have; though their awakenings seem to
   be very considerable for the present, they will not hold; they have not
   hearts disposed to hold on through very many difficulties. Some that
   have set out for heaven, and hope as much as others to obtain, are
   indeed but slighty and slack, even now, in the midst of such a time as
   this. And others, who for the present seem to be more in earnest, will
   probably, before long, decline and fail, and gradually return to be as
   they were before. The convictions of some seem to be great, while that
   which is the occasion of their convictions is new; which, when that
   begins to grow old, will gradually decay and wear off. Thus, it may be,
   the occasion of your awakening has been the hearing of the conversion
   of some person, or seeing so extraordinary a dispensation of Providence
   as this in which God now appears amongst us; but by and by the newness
   and freshness of these things will be gone, and so will not affect your
   mind as now they do; and it may be your convictions will go away with
   it.

   Though this be a time wherein God doth more liberally bestow his grace,
   and so a time of greater advantage for obtaining it; yet there seems to
   be, upon some accounts, greater danger of backsliding, than when
   persons are awakened at other times. For commonly such extraordinary
   times do not last long; and then when they cease, there are multitudes
   that lose their convictions as it were together.

   We speak of it as a happy thing, that God is pleased to cause such a
   time amongst us, and so it is indeed: but there are some to whom it
   will be no benefit; it will be an occasion of their greater misery;
   they will wish they had never seen this time; it will be more tolerable
   for those that never saw it, or any thing like it, in the day of
   judgment, than for them. It is an awful consideration, that there are
   probably those here, whom the great Judge will hereafter call to a
   strict account about this very thing, why they no better improved this
   opportunity, when he set open the fountain of his grace, and so loudly
   called upon them, and came and strove with them in particular, by the
   awakening influences of his Spirit; and they will have no good account
   to give to the Judge, but their mouths will be stopped, and they will
   stand speechless before him.

   You had need therefore to be earnest, and very resolved in this affair,
   that you may not be one of those who shall thus fail, that you may so
   fight, as not uncertainly, and so run, as that you may win the prize.

   5. Consider in what sad circumstances times of extraordinary effusion
   of God's Spirit commonly leave persons, when they leave them
   unconverted. They find them in a doleful, because in a natural,
   condition; but commonly leave them in a much more doleful condition.
   They are left dreadfully hardened, and with a great increase of guilt,
   and their souls under a more strong dominion and possession of Satan.
   And frequently seasons of extraordinary advantage for salvation, when
   they pass over persons, and they do not improve them, nor receive any
   good in them, seal their damnation. As such seasons leave them, God for
   ever leaves them, and gives them up to judicial hardness. Luke xix. 41,
   42. "And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
   saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, the things which belong unto
   thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes."

   6. Consider, that it is very uncertain whether you will ever see such
   another time as this. If there should be such another time, it is very
   uncertain whether you will live to see it. Many that are now concerned
   for their salvation amongst us, will probably be in their graves, and
   it may be in hell, before that time; and if you should miss this
   opportunity, it may be so with you. And what good will that do you, to
   have the Spirit of God poured out upon earth, in the place where you
   once lived, while you are tormented in hell? What will it avail you,
   that others are crying, What shall I do to be saved? while you are shut
   up for ever in the bottomless pit, and are wailing and gnashing your
   teeth in everlasting burnings?

   Wherefore improve this opportunity, while God is pouring out his
   Spirit, and you are on earth, and while you dwell in that place where
   the Spirit of God is thus poured out, and you yourself have the
   awakening influences of it, that you may never wail and gnash your
   teeth in hell, but may sing in heaven for ever, with others that are
   redeemed from amongst men, and redeemed amongst us.

   7. If you should see another such time, it will be under far greater
   disadvantages than now. You will probably then be much older, and will
   have more hardened your heart; and so will be under less probability of
   receiving good. Some persons are so hardened in sin, and so left of
   God, that they can live through such a time as this, and not be much
   awakened or affected by it; they can stand their ground, and be but
   little moved. And so it may be with you, by another such time, if there
   should be another amongst us, and you should live to see it. The case
   in all probability will be greatly altered with you by that time. If
   you should continue Christless and graceless till then, you will be
   much further from the kingdom of God, and much deeper involved in
   snares and misery; and the devil will probably have a vastly greater
   advantage against you, to tempt and confound you.

   8. We do not know but that God is now gathering in his elect, before
   some great and sore judgment. It has been God's manner before he casts
   off a visible people, or brings some great and destroying judgments
   upon them, first to gather in his elect, that they may be secure. So it
   was before the casting off the Jews from being God's people. There was
   first a very remarkable pouring out of the Spirit, and gathering in of
   the elect, by the preaching of the apostles and evangelists, as we read
   in the beginning of the Acts: but after this harvest and its gleanings
   were over, the rest were blinded, and hardened; the gospel had little
   success amongst them, and the nation was given up, and cast off from
   being God's people, and their city and land was destroyed by the Romans
   in a terrible manner; and they have been cast off by God now for a
   great many ages, and still remain a hardened and rejected people. So we
   read in the beginning of the 7th chapter of the Revelations, that God,
   when about to bring destroying judgments on the earth, first sealed his
   servants in the forehead. He set his seal upon the hearts of the elect,
   gave them the saving influences and indwelling of his Spirit, by which
   they were sealed to the day of redemption. Rev. vii. 1-3. "And after
   these things, I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the
   earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not
   blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. And I saw another
   angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and
   he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to
   hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the
   sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in
   their foreheads."

   And this may be the case now, that God is about, in a great measure, to
   forsake this land, and give up this people, and to bring most awful and
   overwhelming judgments upon it, and that he is now gathering in his
   elect, to secure them from the calamity. The state of the nation, and
   of this land, never looked so threatening of such a thing as at this
   day. The present aspect of things exceedingly threatens vital religion,
   and even those truths that are especially the foundation of it, out of
   this land. If it should be so, how awful will the case be with those
   that shall be left, and not brought in, while God continues the
   influences of his Spirit, to gather in those that are to be redeemed
   from amongst us!

   9. If you neglect the present opportunity, and be finally unbelieving,
   those that are converted in this time of the pouring out of God's
   Spirit will rise up in judgment against you. Your neighbours, your
   relations, acquaintance, or companions that are converted, will that
   day appear against you. They will not only be taken while you are left,
   mounting up with joy to meet the Lord in the air--at his right hand
   with glorious saints and angels, while you are at the left with
   devils--but how they will rise up in judgment against you. However
   friendly you have been together, and have taken pleasure in one
   another's company, and have often familiarly conversed together, they
   will then surely appear against you. They will rise up as witnesses and
   will declare what a precious opportunity you had, and did not improve;
   how you continued unbelieving, and rejected the offers of a Saviour,
   when those offers were made in so extraordinary a manner, and when so
   many others were prevailed upon to accept of Christ; how you was
   negligent and slack, and did not know the things that belonged to your
   peace, in that your day. And not only so, but they shall be your
   judges, as assessors with the great Judge; and as such will appear
   against you; they will be with the Judge in passing sentence upon you.
   1 Cor. vi. 2. "Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?"
   Christ will admit them to the honour of judging the world with him:
   "They shall sit with him in his throne," Rev. iii. 21. They shall sit
   with Christ in his throne of government, and they shall sit with him in
   his throne of judgment, and shall be judges with him when you are
   judged, and as such shall condemn you.

   10. And lastly, You do not know that you shall live through the present
   time of the pouring out of God's Spirit. You may be taken away in the
   midst of it, or you may be taken away in the beginning of it; as God in
   his providence is putting you in mind, by the late instance of death in
   a young person in the town. [676] God has of late been very awful in
   his dealings with us, in the repeated deaths of young persons amongst
   us. This should stir every one up to be in the more haste to press into
   the kingdom of God, that so you may be safe whenever death comes. This
   is a blessed season and opportunity; but you do not know how little of
   it you may have. You may have much less of it than others; may by death
   be suddenly snatched away from all advantages that are here enjoyed for
   the good of souls. Therefore make haste, and escape for thy life. One
   moment's delay is dangerous; for wrath is pursuing, and divine
   vengeance hanging over every uncovered person.

   Let these considerations move every one to be improving this
   opportunity, that while others receive saving good, and are made heirs
   of eternal glory, you may not be left behind, in the same miserable
   doleful circumstances in which you came into the world, a poor captive
   to sin and Satan, a lost sheep, a perishing, undone creature, sinking
   down into everlasting perdition; that you may not be one of them spoken
   of, Jer. xvii. 6. "That shall be like the heath in the desert, and
   shall not see when good comes." If you do not improve this opportunity,
   remember I have told you, you will hereafter lament it; and if you do
   not lament it in this world, then I will leave it with you to remember
   it throughout a miserable eternity.

   II. I would address myself to such as yet remain unawakened. It is an
   awful thing that there should be any one person remaining secure
   amongst us at such a time as this; but yet it is to be feared that
   there are some of this sort. I would here a little expostulate with
   such persons.

   1. When do you expect that it will be more likely that you should be
   awakened and wrought upon than now? You are in a Christless condition;
   and yet without doubt intend to go to heaven; and therefore intend to
   be converted some time before you die; but this is not to be expected
   till you are first awakened, and deeply concerned about the welfare of
   your soul, and brought earnestly to seek God's converting grace. And
   when do you intend that this shall be? How do you lay things out in
   your own mind, or what projection have you about this matter? Is it
   ever so likely that a person will be awakened, as at such a time as
   this? How do we see many, who before were secure, now roused out of
   their sleep, and crying, What shall I do to be saved? But you are yet
   secure! Do you flatter yourself that it will be more likely you should
   be awakened when it is a dull and dead time? Do you lay matters out
   thus in your own mind, that though you are senseless when others are
   generally awakened, that yet you shall be awakened when others are
   generally senseless? Or do you hope to see another such time of the
   pouring out of God's Spirit hereafter? And do you think it will be more
   likely that you should be wrought upon then, than now? And why do you
   think so? Is it because then you shall be so much older than you are
   now, and so that your heart will be grown softer and more tender with
   age? or because you will then have stood out so much longer against the
   calls of the gospel, and all means of grace? Do you think it more
   likely that God will give you the needed influences of his Spirit then,
   than now, because then you will have provoked him so much more, and
   your sin and guilt will be so much greater? And do you think it will be
   any benefit to you, to stand it out through the present season of
   grace, as proof against the extraordinary means of awakening there are?
   Do you think that this will be a good preparation for a saving work of
   the Spirit hereafter?

   2. What means do you expect to be awakened by? As to the awakening
   awful things of the word of God, you have had those set before you
   times without number, in the most moving manner that the dispensers of
   the word have been capable of. As to particular solemn warnings,
   directed to those that are in your circumstances, you have had them
   frequently, and have them now from time to time. Do you expect to be
   awakened by awful providences? Those also you have lately had, of the
   most awakening nature, one after another. Do you expect to be moved by
   the deaths of others? We have lately had repeated instances of these.
   There have been deaths of old and young: the year has been remarkable
   for the deaths of young persons in the bloom of life; and some of them
   very sudden deaths. Will the conversion of others move you? There is
   indeed scarce any thing that is found to have so great a tendency to
   stir persons up as this: and this you have been tried with of late in
   frequent instances; but are hitherto proof against it. Will a general
   pouring out of the Spirit, and seeing a concern about salvation amongst
   all sorts of people, do it? This means you now have, but without
   effect. Yea, you have all these things together; you have the solemn
   warnings of God's word, and awful instances of death, and the
   conversion of others, and see a general concern about salvation: but
   all together do not move you to any great concern about your own
   precious, immortal, and miserable soul. Therefore consider by what
   means it is that you expect ever to be awakened.

   You have heard that it is probable some who are now awakened, will
   never obtain salvation; how dark then does it look upon you that remain
   stupidly unawakened! Those who are not moved at such a time as this,
   come to adult age, have reason to fear whether they are not given up to
   judicial hardness. I do not say they have reason to conclude it, but
   they have reason to fear it. How dark doth it look upon you, that God
   comes and knocks at so many persons' doors, and misses yours! that God
   is giving the strivings of his Spirit so generally amongst us, while
   you are left senseless!

   3. Do you expect to obtain salvation without ever seeking it? If you
   are sensible that there is a necessity of your seeking in order to
   obtaining, and ever intend to seek, one would think you could not avoid
   it at such a time as this. Inquire therefore, whether you intend to go
   to heaven, living all your days a secure, negligent, careless
   life.--Or,

   4. Do you think you can bear the damnation of hell? Do you imagine that
   you can tolerably endure the devouring fire, and everlasting burnings?
   Do you hope that you shall be able to grapple with the vengeance of God
   Almighty, when he girds himself with strength, and clothes himself with
   wrath? Do you think to strengthen yourself against God, and to be able
   to make your part good with him? 1 Cor. x. 22. "Do we provoke the Lord
   to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" Do you flatter yourself that you
   shall find out ways for your ease and support, and to make it out
   tolerably well, to bear up your spirit in those everlasting burnings
   that are prepared for the devil and his angels? Ezek. xxii. 14. "Can
   thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I
   shall deal with thee?"--It is a difficult thing to conceive what such
   Christless persons think, that are unconcerned at such a time.

   III. I would direct myself to them who are grown considerably into
   years, and are yet in a natural condition. I would now take occasion
   earnestly to exhort you to improve this extraordinary opportunity, and
   press into the kingdom of God. You have lost many advantages that once
   you had, and now have not the same advantages that others have. The
   case is very different with you from what it is with many of your
   neighbours. You, above all, had need to improve such an opportunity.
   Now is the time for you to bestir yourself, and take the kingdom of
   heaven!--Consider,

   1. Now there seems to be a door opened for old sinners. Now God is
   dealing forth freely to all sorts: his hand is opened wide, and he does
   not pass by old ones so much as he used to do. You are not under such
   advantages as others who are younger; but yet, so wonderfully has God
   ordered it, that now you are not destitute of great advantage. Though
   old in sin, God has put a new and extraordinary advantage into your
   hands. O! improve this price you have to get wisdom! You that have been
   long seeking to enter in at the strait gate and yet remain without, now
   take your opportunity and press in! You that have been long in the
   wilderness, fighting with various temptations, labouring under
   discouragements, ready to give up the case, and have been often tempted
   to despair, now, behold the door that God opens for you! Do not give
   way to discouragements now; this is not a time for it. Do not spend
   time in thinking, that you have done what you can already, and that you
   are not elected, and in giving way to other perplexing, weakening,
   disheartening temptations. Do not waste away this precious opportunity
   in such a manner. You have no time to spare for such things as these;
   God calls you now to something else. Improve this time in seeking and
   striving for salvation, and not in that which tends to hinder it.-- It
   is no time now for you to stand talking with the devil; but hearken to
   God, and apply yourself to that which he does now so loudly call you
   to.

   Some of you have often lamented the loss of past opportunities,
   particularly, the loss of the time of youth, and have been wishing that
   you had so good an opportunity again; and have been ready to say, "O!
   if I was young again, how would I improve such an advantage!" That
   opportunity which you have had in time past is irrecoverable; you can
   never have it again: but God can give you other advantages of another
   sort, that are very great, and he is so doing at this day. He is now
   putting a new opportunity into your hands; though not of the same kind
   with that which you once had, and have lost, yet in some respects as
   great of another kind. If you lament your folly in neglecting and
   losing past opportunities, then do not be guilty of the folly of
   neglecting the opportunity which God now gives you. This opportunity
   you could not have purchased, if you would have given all that you had
   in the world for it. But God is putting it into your hands himself, of
   his own free and sovereign mercy, without your purchasing it. Therefore
   when you have it, do not neglect it.

   2. It is a great deal more likely with respect to such persons than
   others, that this is their last time. There will be a last time of
   special offer of salvation to impenitent sinners--"God's Spirit shall
   not always strive with man," Gen. vi. 3. God sometimes continues long
   knocking at the doors of wicked men's hearts; but there are the last
   knocks, and the last calls that ever they shall have. And sometimes
   God's last calls are the loudest; and then if sinners do not hearken,
   he finally leaves them. How long has God been knocking at many of your
   doors that are old in sin! It is a great deal more likely that these
   are his last knocks. You have resisted God's Spirit in times past, and
   have hardened your heart once and again; but God will not be thus dealt
   with always. There is danger, that if now, after so long a time, you
   will not hearken, he will utterly desert you, and leave you to walk in
   your own counsels.

   It seems by God's providence, as though God had yet an elect number
   amongst old sinners in this place, that perhaps he is now about to
   bring in. It looks as though there were some that long lived under Mr.
   Stoddard's ministry, that God has not utterly cast off, though they
   stood it out under such great means as they then enjoyed. It is to be
   hoped that God will now bring in a remnant from among them. But it is
   the more likely that God is now about finishing with them, one way or
   other, for their having been so long the subjects of such extraordinary
   means. You have seen former times of the pouring out of God's Spirit
   upon the town, when others were taken and you left, others were called
   out of darkness into marvellous light, and were brought into a glorious
   and happy state, and you saw not good when good came. How dark will
   your circumstances appear, if you shall also stand it out through this
   opportunity, and still be left behind! Take heed that you be not of
   those spoken of, Heb. vi. 7, 8. that are like the "earth that has rain
   coming oft upon it, and only bears briers and thorns." As we see there
   are some pieces of ground, the more showers of rain fall upon them, the
   more fruitful seasons there are, the more do the briers, and other
   useless and hurtful plants, that are rooted in them, grow and flourish.
   Of such ground the apostle says, "it is rejected, and is nigh unto
   cursing, whose end is to be burned." The way that the husbandman takes
   with such ground, is, to set fire to it, to burn up the growth of
   it.--If you miss this opportunity, there is danger that you will be
   utterly rejected, and that your end will be to be burned. And if this
   is to be, it is to be feared, that you are not far from, but nigh unto,
   cursing.

   Those of you that are already grown old in sin, and are now under
   awakenings, when you feel your convictions begin to go off, if ever
   that should be, then remember what you have now been told; it may well
   then strike you to the heart!

   IV. I would direct the advice to those that are young, and now under
   their first special convictions. I would earnestly urge such to improve
   this opportunity, and press into the kingdom of God.--Consider two
   things,

   1. You have all manner of advantages now centering upon you. It is a
   time of great advantage for all; but your advantages are above others.
   There is no other sort of persons that have now so great and happy an
   opportunity as you have--You have the great advantage that is common to
   all who live in this place, viz. That now it is a time of the
   extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit of God. And have you not that
   great advantage, the awakening influences of the Spirit of God on you
   in particular? and besides, you have this peculiar advantage, that you
   are now in your youth. And added to this, you have another unspeakable
   advantage, that you now are under your first convictions. Happy is he
   that never has hardened his heart, and blocked up his own way to heaven
   by backsliding, and has now the awakening influences of God's Spirit,
   if God does but enable him thoroughly to improve them! Such above all
   in the world bid fair for the kingdom of God. God is wont on such,
   above any kind of persons, as it were easily and readily to bestow the
   saving grace and comforts of his Spirit. Instances of speedy and sudden
   conversion are most commonly found among such. Happy are they that have
   the Spirit of God with them, and never have quenched it, if they did
   but know the price they have in their hands!

   If you have a sense of your necessity of salvation, and the great worth
   and value of it, you will be willing to take the surest way to it, or
   that which has the greatest probability of success: and that certainly
   is, thoroughly to improve your first convictions. If you do so, it is
   not likely that you will fail; there is the greatest probability that
   you will succeed.--What is it not worth, to have such an advantage in
   one's hands for obtaining eternal life? The present season of the
   pouring out of God's Spirit, is the first that many of you who are now
   under awakenings have ever seen, since you came to years of
   understanding. On which account, it is the greatest opportunity that
   ever you have had, and probably by far the greatest that ever you will
   have. There are many here present who wish they had such an
   opportunity, but they never can obtain it; they cannot buy it for
   money; but you have it in your possession, and can improve it if you
   will. But yet,

   2. There is on some accounts greater danger that such as are in your
   circumstances will fail of thoroughly improving their convictions, with
   respect to stedfastness and perseverance, than others. Those that are
   young are more unstable than elder persons. They who never had
   convictions before, have less experience of the difficulty of the work
   they have engaged in; they are more ready to think that they shall
   obtain salvation easily, and are more easily discouraged by
   disappointments; and young persons have less reason and consideration
   to fortify them against temptations to backsliding. You should
   therefore labour now the more to guard against such temptations. By all
   means make but one work of seeking salvation! Make thorough work of it
   the first time! There are vast disadvantages that they bring themselves
   under, who have several turns of seeking with great intermissions. By
   such a course, persons exceedingly wound their own souls, and entangle
   themselves in many snares. Who are those that commonly meet with so
   many difficulties, and are so long labouring in darkness and
   perplexity, but those who have had several turns at seeking salvation;
   who have one while had convictions, and then have quenched them, and
   then have set about the work again, and have backslidden again, and
   have gone on after that manner? The children of Israel would not have
   been forty years in the wilderness, if they had held their courage, and
   had gone on as they set out; but they were of an unstable mind, and
   were for going back again into Egypt.--Otherwise, if they had gone
   right forward without discouragement, as God would have led them, they
   would have soon entered and taken possession of Canaan. They had got to
   the very borders of it when they turned back, but were thirty-eight
   years after that, before they got through the wilderness. Therefore, as
   you regard the interest of your soul, do not run yourself into a like
   difficulty, by unsteadiness, intermission, and backsliding; but press
   right forward, from henceforth, and make but one work of seeking,
   converting, and pardoning grace, however great, and difficult, and long
   a work that may be.+
     __________________________________________________________________

   [676] Joseph Clark's wife, a young woman lately married, that died
   suddenly the week before this was delivered.
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE III.

   ruth's resolution

   Ruth i. 16.

   And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
   following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go: and where thou
   lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my
   God.

   The historical things in this book of Ruth, seem to be inserted in the
   canon of the Scripture, especially on two accounts:

   First, Because Christ was of Ruth's posterity. The Holy Ghost thought
   fit to take particular notice of that marriage of Boaz with Ruth,
   whence sprang the Saviour of the world. We may often observe it, that
   the Holy Spirit who indited the Scriptures, often takes notice of
   little things, or minute occurrences, that do but remotely relate to
   Jesus Christ.

   Secondly, Because this history seems to be typical of the calling of
   the Gentile church, and indeed of the conversion of every believer.
   Ruth was not originally of Israel, but was a Moabitess, an alien from
   the commonwealth of Israel: but she forsook her own people, and the
   idols of the Gentiles, to worship the God of Israel, and to join
   herself to that people. Herein she seems to be a type of the Gentile
   church, and also of every sincere convert. Ruth was the remote mother
   of Christ; he came of her posterity: so the church is Christ's mother,
   as she is represented, at the beginning. And so also is every true
   Christian his mother. Matt. xii. 50. "Whosoever shall do the will of my
   Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and
   mother." Christ is what the soul is in travail with, at the new birth.
   Ruth forsook all her natural relations, and her own country, the land
   of her nativity, and all her former possessions there, for the sake of
   the God of Israel; as every true Christian forsakes all for Christ.
   Psalm xlv. 10. "Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine
   ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father's house."

   Naomi was now returning out of the land of Moab, into the land of
   Israel, with her two daughters-in-law, Orpah and Ruth; who will
   represent to us two sorts of professors of religion: Orpah, those who
   indeed make a fair profession, and seem to set out well, but continue
   only for a while, and then turn back; Ruth, those who are sound and
   sincere, and therefore are stedfast and persevering in their way.
   Naomi, in the preceding verses, represents to her daughters the
   difficulties of their leaving their own country to go with her. And in
   this verse may be observed,

   1. The remarkable conduct and behaviour of Ruth on this occasion; with
   what inflexible resolution she cleaves to Naomi, and follows her. When
   Naomi first arose to return from the country of Moab into the land of
   Israel, Orpah and Ruth both set out with her; and Naomi exhorts them
   both to return. And both wept, and seemed as if they could not bear the
   thoughts of leaving her, and appeared as if they were resolved to go
   with her. Verse 10. "And they said unto her, Surely we will return with
   thee unto thy people." Then Naomi says to them again, "Turn again, my
   daughters, go your way," &c. And then they were greatly affected again,
   and Orpah returned and went back. Now Ruth's stedfastness in her
   purpose had a greater trial, but yet is not overcome: Ruth i. 14."She
   clave unto her," verse 14. Then Naomi speaks to her again, verse 15.
   "Behold, thy sister-in-law is gone back unto her people, and unto her
   gods; return thou after thy sister-in-law." And then she shows her
   immovable resolution in the text and following verse.

   2. I would particularly observe that wherein the virtuousness of this
   her resolution consists, viz. that it was for the sake of the God of
   Israel, and that she might be one of his people, that she was thus
   resolved to cleave to Naomi: Ruth i. 16. "Thy people shall be my
   people, and thy God my God." It was for God's sake that she did thus;
   and therefore her so doing is afterwards spoken of as a virtuous
   behaviour in her, chap. ii. 11, 12. "And Boaz answered and said unto
   her, It hath fully been showed me, all that thou hast done unto thy
   mother-in-law since the death of thine husband; and how thou hast left
   thy father, and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come
   unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore. The Lord recompense
   thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel,
   under whose wings thou art come to trust." She left her father and
   mother, and the land of her nativity, to come and trust under the
   shadow of God's wings; and she had indeed a full reward given her, as
   Boaz wished; for besides immediate spiritual blessings to her own soul,
   and eternal rewards in another world, she was rewarded with plentiful
   and prosperous outward circumstances in the family of Boaz. And God
   raised up David and Solomon of her seed, and established the crown of
   Israel (the people that she chose before her own people) in her
   posterity; and, which is much more, of her seed he raised up Jesus
   Christ, in whom all the families of the earth are blessed.

   From the words thus opened, I observe this for the subject of my
   present discourse:--"When those that we have formerly been conversant
   with, are turning to God, and joining themselves to his people, it
   ought to be our firm resolution, that we will not leave them; but that
   their people shall be our people, and their God our God."

   It sometimes happens, that of those who have been conversant one with
   another--who have dwelt together as neighbours, and have been often
   together as companions, or united in their relation, and have been
   together in darkness, bondage, and misery, in the service of
   Satan--some are enlightened, and have their minds changed, are made to
   see the great evil of sin, and have their hearts turned to God. They
   are influenced by the Holy Spirit of God, to leave their company that
   are on Satan's side, and to join themselves with that blessed company
   that are with Jesus Christ. They are made willing to forsake the tents
   of wickedness, to dwell in the land of uprightness with the people of
   God.

   And sometimes this proves a final parting or separation between them
   and those with whom they have been formerly conversant. Though it may
   be no parting in outward respects, they may still dwell, and converse
   one with another; yet in other respects, it sets them at a great
   distance. One is a child of God, and the other his enemy; one is in a
   miserable, and the other in a happy, condition; one is a citizen of the
   heavenly Zion, the other is under condemnation to hell. They are no
   longer together in those respects wherein they used to be together.
   They used to be of one mind to serve sin, and do Satan's work; now they
   are of contrary minds. They used to be together in worldliness and
   sinful vanity; now they are of exceeding different dispositions. They
   are separated as they are in different kingdoms; the one remains in the
   kingdom of darkness, the other is translated into the kingdom of God's
   dear Son. And sometimes they are finally separated in these respects:
   while one dwells in the land of Israel, and in the house of God; the
   other, like Orpah, lives and dies in the land of Moab.

   Now it is lamentable, it is awful being parted so. It is doleful, when
   of those who have formerly been together in sin, some turn to God, and
   join themselves with his people, that it should prove a parting between
   them and their former companions and acquaintance. It should be our
   firm and inflexible resolution in such a case, that it shall be no
   parting, but that we will follow them, that their people shall be our
   people, and their God our God; and that for the following reasons:

   I. Because their God is a glorious God. There is none like him, who is
   infinite in glory and excellency. He is the most high God, glorious in
   holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. His name is excellent in
   all the earth, and his glory is above the heavens. Among the gods there
   is none like unto him; there is none in heaven to be compared to him,
   nor are there any among the sons of the mighty that can be likened unto
   him. Their God is the fountain of all good, and an inexhaustible
   fountain; he is an all-sufficient God, able to protect and defend them,
   and do all things for them. He is the King of glory, the Lord strong
   and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle: a strong rock, and a high tower.
   There is none like the God of Jeshurun, who rideth on the heaven in
   their help, and in his excellency on the sky: the eternal God is their
   refuge, and underneath are everlasting arms. He is a God who hath all
   things in his hands, and does whatsoever he pleases: he killeth and
   maketh alive; he bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up; he maketh
   poor and maketh rich: the pillars of the earth are the Lord's. Their
   God is an infinitely holy God; there is none holy as the Lord. And he
   is infinitely good and merciful. Many that others worship and serve as
   gods, are cruel beings, spirits that seek the ruin of souls; but this
   is a God that delighteth in mercy; his grace is infinite, and endures
   for ever. He is love itself, an infinite fountain and ocean of it.

   Such a God is their God! Such is the excellency of Jacob! Such is the
   God of them who have forsaken their sins and are converted! They have
   made a wise choice who have chosen this for their God. They have made a
   happy exchange indeed, that have exchanged sin, and the world, for such
   a God!

   They have an excellent and glorious Saviour, who is the only-begotten
   Son of God; the brightness of his Father's glory; one in whom God from
   eternity had infinite delight; a Saviour of infinite love; one that has
   shed his own blood, and made his soul an offering for their sins, and
   one that is able to save them to the uttermost.

   II. Their people are an excellent and happy people. God has renewed
   them, and stamped his own image upon them, and made them partakers of
   his holiness. They are more excellent than their neighbours, Prov. xii.
   26. Yea, they are the excellent of the earth, Psalm xvi. 3. They are
   lovely in the sight of the angels; and they have their souls adorned
   with those graces that in the sight of God himself are of great price.

   The people of God are the most excellent and happy society in the
   world. That God whom they have chosen for their God, is their Father;
   he has pardoned all their sins, and they are at peace with him; and he
   has admitted them to all the privileges of his children. As they have
   devoted themselves to God, so he has given himself to them. He is
   become their salvation, and their portion: his power and mercy, and all
   his attributes, are theirs. They are in a safe state, free from all
   possibility of perishing: Satan has no power to destroy them. God
   carries them on eagle's wings, far above Satan's reach, and above the
   reach of all the enemies of their souls. God is with them in this
   world; they have his gracious presence. God is for them; who then can
   be against them? As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so Jehovah
   is round about them. God is their shield, and their exceeding great
   reward; and their fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
   Christ: and they have the divine promise and oath, that in the world to
   come they shall dwell for ever in the glorious presence of God.

   It may well be sufficient to induce us to resolve to cleave to those
   that forsake their sins and idols to join themselves with this people,
   that God is with them, Zech. viii. 23. "Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
   in those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out
   of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of
   him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have heard that
   God is with you." So should persons, as it were, take hold of the skirt
   of their neighbours and companions that have turned to God, and resolve
   that they will go with them, because God is with them.

   III. Happiness is no where else to be had, but in their God, and with
   their people. There are that are called gods many, and lords many. Some
   make gods of their pleasures; some choose Mammon for their god; some
   make gods of their own supposed excellences, or the outward advantages
   they have above their neighbours: some choose one thing for their god,
   and others another. But men can be happy in no other but the God of
   Israel: he is the only fountain of happiness. Other gods cannot help in
   calamity; nor can any of them afford what the poor empty soul stands in
   need of. Let men adore those other gods never so much, and call upon
   them never so earnestly, and serve them never so diligently, they will
   nevertheless remain poor, wretched, unsatisfied, undone creatures. All
   other people are miserable, but that people whose God is the Lord.--The
   world is divided into two societies: the people of God, the little
   flock of Jesus Christ, that company that we read of, Rev. xiv. 4.
   "These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are
   virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth:
   these were redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God,
   and to the Lamb:" and, those that belong to the kingdom of darkness,
   that are without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
   strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God
   in the world. All that are of this latter company are wretched and
   undone; they are the enemies of God, and under his wrath and
   condemnation. They are the devil's slaves, that serve him blindfold,
   and are befooled and ensnared by him, and hurried along in the broad
   way to eternal perdition.

   IV. When those that we have formerly been conversant with are turning
   to God and to his people, their example ought to influence us. Their
   example should be looked upon as the call of God to us, to do as they
   have done. God, when he changes the heart of one, calls upon another;
   especially does he loudly call on those that have been their friends
   and acquaintance. We have been influenced by their examples in evil;
   and shall we cease to follow them, when they make the wisest choice
   that ever they made, and do the best thing that ever they did? If we
   have been companions with them in worldliness, in vanity, in
   unprofitable and sinful conversation, it will be a hard case, if there
   must be a parting now, because we are not willing to be companions with
   them in holiness and true happiness. Men are greatly influenced by
   seeing one another's prosperity in other things. If those whom they
   have been much conversant with, grow rich, and obtain any great earthly
   advantages, it awakens their ambition, and eager desire after the like
   prosperity: how much more should they be influenced, and stirred up to
   follow them, and be like them, when they obtain that spiritual and
   eternal happiness, that is of infinitely more worth, than all the
   prosperity and glory of this world!

   V. Our resolutions to cleave to and follow those that are turning to
   God, and joining themselves to his people, ought to be fixed and
   strong, because of the great difficulty of it. If we will cleave to
   them, and have their God for our God, and their people for our people,
   we must mortify and deny all our lusts, and cross every evil appetite
   and inclination, and for ever part with all sin. But our lusts are many
   and violent. Sin is naturally exceeding dear to us; to part with it is
   compared to plucking out our right eyes. Men may refrain from wonted
   ways of sin for a little while, and may deny their lusts in a partial
   degree, with less difficulty; but it is heart-rending work, finally to
   part with all sin, and to give our dearest lusts a bill of divorce,
   utterly to send them away. But this we must do, if we would follow
   those that are truly turning to God: yea, we must not only forsake sin,
   but must, in a sense, forsake all the world, Luke xiv. 33. "Whosoever
   he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my
   disciple." That is, he must forsake all in his heart, and must come to
   a thorough disposition and readiness actually to quit all for God, and
   the glorious spiritual privileges of his people, whenever the case may
   require it; and that without any prospect of any thing of the like
   nature, or any worldly thing whatsoever, to make amends for it; and all
   to go into a strange country, a land that has hitherto been unseen;
   like Abraham, who being called of God, Gen. xii. 1. "went out of his
   own country, and from his kindred, and from his father's house, for a
   land that God should show him, not knowing whither he went."

   Thus, it was a hard thing for Ruth to forsake her native country, her
   father and mother, her kindred and acquaintance, and all the pleasant
   things she had in the land of Moab, to dwell in the land of Israel,
   where she never had been. Naomi told her of the difficulties once and
   again. They were too hard for her sister Orpah; the consideration of
   them turned her back after she was set out. Her resolution was not firm
   enough to overcome them. But so firmly resolved was Ruth, that she
   brake through all; she was stedfast in it, that, let the difficulty be
   what it would, she would not leave her mother-in-law. So persons had
   need to be very firm in their resolution to conquer the difficulties
   that are in the way of cleaving to them who are indeed turning from sin
   to God.

   Our cleaving to them, and having their God for our God, and their
   people for our people, depends on our resolution and choice; and that
   in two respects.

   1. The firmness of resolution in using means in order to it, is the way
   to have means effectual. There are means appointed in order to our
   becoming some of the true Israel, and having their God for our God; and
   the thorough use of these means is the way to have success; but not a
   slack or slighty use of them. And that we may be thorough, there is
   need of strength of resolution, a firm and inflexible disposition and
   bent of mind to be universal in the use of means, and to do what we do
   with our might, and to persevere in it. Matt. xi. 12. "The kingdom of
   heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force."

   2. A choosing of their God, and their people, with a full
   determination, and with the whole soul, is the condition of an union
   with them. God gives every man his choice in this matter: as Orpah and
   Ruth had their choice, whether they would go with Naomi into the land
   of Israel, or stay in the land of Moab. A natural man may choose
   deliverance from hell; but no man doth ever heartily choose God and
   Christ, and the spiritual benefits that Christ has purchased, and the
   happiness of God's people, till he is converted. On the contrary, he is
   averse to them; he has no relish of them; and is wholly ignorant of
   their inestimable worth and value.

   Many carnal men seem to choose these things, but do it not really; as
   Orpah seemed at first to choose to forsake Moab to go into the land of
   Israel: but when Naomi came to set before her the difficulty of it, she
   went back; and thereby showed that she was not fully determined in her
   choice, and that her whole soul was not in it as Ruth's was.

      APPLICATION.

   The use that I shall make of what has been said, is to move sinners to
   this resolution, with respect to those amongst us that have lately
   turned to God, and joined themselves to the flock of Christ. Through
   the abundant mercy and grace of God to us in this place, it may be said
   of many of you that are in a Christless condition, that you have lately
   been left by those that were formerly with you in such a state. Some of
   those with whom you have formerly been conversant, have lately forsaken
   a life of sin and the service of Satan, and have turned to God, and
   fled to Christ, and joined themselves to that blessed company that are
   with him. They formerly were with you in sin and in misery; but now
   they are with you no more in that state or manner of life. They are
   changed, and have fled from the wrath to come; they have chosen a life
   of holiness here, and the enjoyment of God hereafter. They were
   formerly your associates in bondage, and were with you in Satan's
   business; but now you have their company no longer in these things.
   Many of you have seen those you live with, under the same roof, turning
   from being any longer with you in sin, to be with the people of Jesus
   Christ. Some of you that are husbands, have had your wives; and some of
   you that are wives, have had your husbands; some of you that are
   children, have had your parents; and parents have had your children;
   many of you have had your brothers and sisters; and many your near
   neighbours, and acquaintance, and special friends; many of you that are
   young have had your companions: I say, many of you have had those that
   you have been thus concerned with, leaving you, forsaking that doleful
   life and wretched state in which you still continue. God, of his good
   pleasure and wonderful grace, hath lately caused in this place
   multitudes to forsake their old abodes in the land of Moab, and under
   the gods of Moab, and go into the land of Israel, to put their trust
   under the wings of the Lord God of Israel. Though you and they have
   been nearly related, and have dwelt together, or have been often
   together and intimately acquainted, they have been taken, and you
   hitherto left! O let it not be the foundation of a final parting! But
   earnestly follow them; be firm in your resolution in this matter. Do
   not as Orpah did, who, though at first she made as though she would
   follow Naomi, yet when she had the difficulty set before her, went
   back: but say as Ruth, Ruth i. 16. "I will not leave thee; but where
   thou goest, I will go: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my
   God." Say as she said, and do as she did. Consider the excellency of
   their God, and their Saviour, and the happiness of their people, the
   blessed state that they are in, and the doleful state you are in.

   You are old sinners, who have lived long in the service of Satan, have
   lately seen some that have travelled with you in the paths of sin these
   many years, turning to God. They with you enjoyed great means and
   advantages, had calls and warnings with you, and with you passed
   through remarkable times of the pouring out of God's Spirit in this
   place, and hardened their hearts and stood it out with you, and with
   you have grown old in sin; yet you have seen some of them turning to
   God, i. e. you have seen those evidences of it in them, whence you may
   rationally judge that it is so. O! let it not be a final parting! You
   have been thus long together in sin, and under condemnation; let it be
   your firm resolution, that, if possible, you will be with them still,
   now they are in a holy and happy state, and that you will follow them
   into the holy and pleasant land.--You that tell of your having been
   seeking salvation for many years, (though, without doubt, in a poor
   dull way, in comparison of what you ought to have done,) have seen some
   old sinners and old seekers, as you are, obtaining mercy. God has
   lately roused them from their dulness, and caused them to alter their
   hand, and put them on more thorough endeavours; and they have now,
   after so long a time, heard God's voice, and have fled for refuge to
   the rock of ages. Let this awaken earnestness and resolution in you.
   Resolve that you will not leave them.

   You who are in your youth, how many have you seen of your age and
   standing, that have of late hopefully chosen God for their God, and
   Christ for their Saviour! You have followed them in sin, and have
   perhaps followed them into vain company; and will you not now follow
   them to Christ?--And you who are children, know that there have lately
   been some of your sort who have repented of their sins, loved the Lord
   Jesus Christ, and trusted in him, and are become God's children, as we
   have reason to hope: let it stir you up to resolve to your utmost to
   seek and cry to God, that you may have the like change made in your
   hearts, that their people may be your people, and their God your God.

   You who are great sinners, who have made yourselves distinguishingly
   guilty by the wicked practices you have lived in, know that there are
   some of your sort who have lately (as we have reason to hope) had their
   hearts broken for sin, and have forsaken it, and trusted in the blood
   of Christ for the pardon of it. They have chosen a holy life, and have
   betaken themselves to the ways of wisdom: let it excite and encourage
   you resolutely to cleave to them, and earnestly to follow them.

   Let the following things be considered:

   1. That your soul is as precious as theirs. It is immortal as theirs
   is; and stands in as much need of happiness, and can as ill bear
   eternal misery. You was born in the same miserable condition that they
   were, having the same wrath of God abiding on you. You must stand
   before the same Judge; who will be as strict in judgment with you as
   with them; and your own righteousness will stand you in no more stead
   before him than theirs; and therefore you stand in as absolute
   necessity of a Saviour as they. Carnal confidences can no more answer
   your end than theirs; nor can this world or its enjoyments serve to
   make you happy without God and Christ, more than them. When the
   bridegroom comes, the foolish virgins stand in as much need of oil as
   the wise, Matt. xxv. at the beginning.

   2. Unless you follow them in their turning to God, their conversion
   will be a foundation of an eternal separation between you and them. You
   will be in different interests, and in exceeding different states, as
   long as you live; they the children of God, and you the children of
   Satan; and you will be parted in another world; when you come to die,
   there will be a vast separation made between you. Luke xvi. 26. "And
   besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so
   that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they
   pass to us, that would come from thence." And you will be parted at the
   day of judgment. You will be parted at Christ's first appearance in the
   clouds of heaven. While they are caught up in the clouds to meet the
   Lord in the air, to be ever with the Lord, you will remain below,
   confined to this cursed ground, that is kept in store, reserved unto
   fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. You
   will appear separated from them, while you stand before the great
   judgment-seat, they being at the right hand, while you are set at the
   left. Matt. xxv. 32, 33. "And before him shall be gathered all nations;
   and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his
   sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but
   the goats on the left." And you shall then appear in exceeding
   different circumstances: while you stand with devils, in the image and
   deformity of devils, and in ineffable horror and amazement, they shall
   appear in glory, sitting on thrones, as assessors with Christ, and as
   such passing judgment upon you, 1 Cor. vi. 2. And what shame and
   confusion will then cover you, when so many of your contemporaries,
   your equals, your neighbours, relations, and companions, shall be
   honoured, and openly acknowledged, and confessed by the glorious Judge
   of the universe, and Redeemer of saints, and shall be seen by you
   sitting with him in such glory. You shall appear to have neglected your
   salvation, and not to have improved your opportunities, and rejected
   the Lord Jesus Christ, the same person that will then appear as your
   great Judge, and you shall be the subjects of wrath, and, as it were,
   trodden down in eternal contempt and disgrace. Dan. xii. 2. "Some shall
   rise to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt."
   And what a wide separation will the sentence then passed and executed
   make between you and them! When you shall be sent away out of the
   presence of the Judge with indignation and abhorrence, as cursed and
   loathsome creatures they shall be sweetly accosted and invited into his
   glory as his dear friends, and the blessed of his Father! When you,
   with all that vast throng of wicked and accursed men and devils, shall
   descend with loud lamentings, and horrid shrieks, into that dreadful
   gulf of fire and brimstone, and shall be swallowed up in that great and
   everlasting furnace; they shall joyfully, and with sweet songs of glory
   and praise, ascend with Christ, and all that beauteous and blessed
   company of saints and angels, into eternal felicity, in the glorious
   presence of God, and the sweet embraces of his love. You and they shall
   spend eternity in such a separation, and immensely different
   circumstances! You have been intimately acquainted and nearly related,
   closely united and mutually conversant in this world; and you have
   taken delight in each other's company! And shall it be--after you have
   been together a great while, each of you in undoing yourselves,
   enhancing your guilt, and heaping up wrath--that their so wisely
   changing their minds and their course, and choosing such happiness for
   themselves, should now at length be the beginning of such an exceeding
   and everlasting separation between you and them? How awful will it be
   to be parted so!

   3. Consider the great encouragement that God gives you, earnestly to
   strive for the same blessing that others have obtained. There is great
   encouragement in the word of God to sinners to seek salvation, in the
   revelation we have of the abundant provision made for the salvation
   even of the chief of sinners, and in the appointment of so many means
   to be used with and by sinners, in order to their salvation; and by the
   blessing which God in his word connects with the means of his
   appointment. There is hence great encouragement for all, at all times,
   that will be thorough in using of these means. But now God gives
   extraordinary encouragement in his providence, by pouring out his
   Spirit so remarkably amongst us, and bringing savingly home to himself
   all sorts, young and old, rich and poor, wise and unwise, sober and
   vicious, old self-righteous seekers, and profligate livers: no sort are
   exempt. There is at this day amongst us the loudest call, and the
   greatest encouragement, and the widest door opened to sinners, to
   escape out of a state of sin and condemnation, that perhaps God ever
   granted in New England. Who is there that has an immortal soul, so
   sottish as not to improve such an opportunity, and that will not bestir
   himself with all his might? How unreasonable is negligence, and how
   exceeding unreasonable is discouragement, at such a day as this! Will
   you be so stupid as to neglect your soul now? Will any mortal amongst
   us be so unreasonable as to lag behind, or look back in discouragement,
   when God opens such a door? Let every person be thoroughly awake! Let
   every one encourage himself now to press forward, and fly for his life!

   4. Consider how earnestly desirous they that have obtained are that you
   should follow them, and that their people should be your people, and
   their God your God. They desire that you should partake of that great
   good which God has given them, and that unspeakable and eternal
   blessedness which he has promised them. They wish and long it. If you
   do not go with them, and are not still of their company, it will not be
   for want of their willingness, but your own. That of Moses to Hobab is
   the language of every true saint of your acquaintance to you. Numb. x.
   29. "We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said, I will
   give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the Lord
   hath spoken good concerning Israel." As Moses, when on his journey
   through the wilderness, following the pillar of cloud and fire, invited
   Hobab--with whom he had been acquainted in the land of Midian, where
   Moses had formerly dwelt with him--to go with him and his people to
   Canaan, to partake with them in the good that God had promised them; so
   do those of your friends and acquaintance invite you, out of a land of
   darkness and wickedness, where they have formerly been with you, to go
   with them to the heavenly Canaan. The company of saints, the true
   church of Christ, invite you. The lovely bride calls you to the
   marriage supper. She hath authority to invite guests to her own
   wedding; and you ought to look on her invitation and desire, as the
   call of Christ the bridegroom; for it is the voice of his Spirit in
   her, Rev. xxii. 17. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come." Where seems
   to be a reference to what has been said, chap. xix. 7-9. "The marriage
   of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. And to her
   was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white;
   for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. And he saith unto
   me, Write, blessed are they which are called to the marriage-supper of
   the Lamb." It is with respect to this her marriage-supper that she,
   from the motion of the Spirit of the Lamb in her, says, Come. So that
   you are invited on all hands; all conspire to call you. God the Father
   invites you: this is the King who has made a marriage for his Son; and
   he sends forth his servants, the ministers of the gospel, to invite the
   guests. And the Son himself invites you: it is he that speaks, Rev.
   xxii. 17. "And let him that heareth say, Come; and let him that is
   athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him come." He tells us who he is
   in the foregoing verse, Rev. xxii. 16. "I Jesus, the root and offspring
   of David, the bright and morning star." And God's ministers invite you,
   and all the church invites you; and there will be joy in the presence
   of the angels of God that hour that you accept the invitation.

   5. Consider what a doleful company will be left after this
   extraordinary time of mercy is over. We have reason to think that there
   will be a number left. We read that when Ezekiel's healing waters
   increased so abundantly, and the healing effect of them was so very
   general; yet there were certain places, where the waters came, that
   never were healed. Ezek. xlvii. 9-11. "And it shall come to pass, that
   every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall
   come, shall live. And there shall be a very great multitude of fish,
   because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed, and
   every thing shall live whither the river cometh. And it shall come to
   pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it, from En-gedi even unto
   En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets: there fish shall
   be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding
   many. But the miry places thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not
   be healed, they shall be given to salt." And even in the apostles'
   times, when there was such wonderful success of the gospel wherever
   they came, there were some that did not believe. Acts xiii. 48. "And
   when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of
   the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed." And
   chap, xxviii. 24. "And some believed, and some believed not." So we
   have no reason to expect but there will be some left amongst us. It is
   to be hoped it will be but a small company: but what a doleful company
   will it be! How darkly and awfully will it look upon them! If you shall
   be of that company, how well may your friends and relations lament over
   you, and bemoan your dark and dangerous circumstances! If you would not
   be one of them, make haste, delay not, and look not behind you. Shall
   all sorts obtain, shall every one press into the kingdom of God, while
   you stay loitering behind in a doleful undone condition? Shall every
   one take heaven, while you remain with no other portion but this world?
   Now take up that resolution, that if it be possible you will cleave to
   them that have fled for refuge to lay hold of the hope set before them.
   Count the cost of a thorough, violent, and perpetual pursuit of
   salvation, and forsake all, as Ruth forsook her own country, and all
   her pleasant enjoyments in it. Do not do as Orpah did; who set out, and
   then was discouraged, and went back: but hold out with Ruth through all
   discouragement and opposition. When you consider others that have
   chosen the better part, let that resolution be ever firm with you:
   "Where thou goest, I will go; where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy
   people shall be my people, and thy God my God."
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE IV.

   the justice of god in the damnation of sinners.

   Rom. iii. 19.

   --That every mouth may be stopped.--

   The main subject of the doctrinal part of this epistle, is the free
   grace of God in the salvation of men by Jesus Christ; especially as it
   appears in the doctrine of justification by faith alone. And the more
   clearly to evince this doctrine, and show the reason of it, the
   apostle, in the first place, establishes that point, that no flesh
   living can be justified by the deeds of the law. And to prove it, he is
   very large and particular in showing, that all mankind, not only the
   Gentiles, but Jews, are under sin, and so under the condemnation of the
   law; which is what he insists upon from the beginning of the epistle to
   this place. He first begins with the Gentiles; and in the first chapter
   shows that they are under sin, by setting forth the exceeding
   corruptions and horrid wickedness that overspread the Gentile world:
   and then through the second chapter, and the former part of this third
   chapter, to the text and following verse, he shows the same of the
   Jews, that they also are in the same circumstances with the Gentiles in
   this regard. They had a high thought of themselves, because they were
   God's covenant people, and circumcised, and the children of Abraham.
   They despised the Gentiles as polluted, condemned, and accursed; but
   looked on themselves, on account of their external privileges, and
   ceremonial and moral righteousness, as a pure and holy people, and the
   children of God; as the apostle observes in the second chapter. It was
   therefore strange doctrine to them, that they also were unclean and
   guilty in God's sight, and under the condemnation and curse of the law.
   The apostle therefore, on account of their strong prejudices against
   such doctrine, the more particularly insists upon it, and shows that
   they are no better than the Gentiles; as in the 9th verse of this
   chapter, "What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise; for we
   have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
   sin." And, to convince them of it, he produces certain passages out of
   their own law, or the Old Testament, (to whose authority they pretended
   a great regard,) from the 9th verse to our text. And it may be
   observed, that the apostle, first, cites certain passages to prove that
   all mankind are corrupt, (ver. 10-12.) "As it is written, There is none
   righteous, no not one: There is none that understandeth, there is none
   that seeketh after God: They are all gone out of the way, they are
   together become unprofitable, there is none that doeth good, no not
   one." Secondly, The passages he cites next, are to prove, that not only
   are all corrupt, but each one wholly corrupt, as it were all over
   unclean, from the crown of the head to the soles of his feet; and
   therefore several particular parts of the body are mentioned, the
   throat, the tongue, the lips, the mouth, the feet, (ver. 13-15. "Their
   throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit;
   the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing
   and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood." And, Thirdly, He
   quotes other passages to show, that each one is not only all over
   corrupt, but corrupt to a desperate degree, (ver. 16-18.) by affirming
   the most pernicious tendency of their wickedness; "Destruction and
   misery are in their ways." And then by denying all goodness or
   godliness in them; "And the way of peace have they not known: There is
   no fear of God before their eyes." And then, lest the Jews should think
   these passages of their law do not concern them, and that only the
   Gentiles are intended in them, the apostle shows in the text, not only
   that they are not exempt, but that they especially must be understood:
   (Rom. iii. 19."Now we know that whatsoever things the law saith, it
   saith to them who are under the law." By those that are under the law
   are meant the Jews; and the Gentiles by those that are without law; as
   appears by the 12th verse of the preceding chapter. There is special
   reason to understand the law, as speaking to and of them, to whom it
   was immediately given. And therefore the Jews would be unreasonable in
   exempting themselves. And if we examine the places of the Old Testament
   whence these passages are taken, we shall see plainly that special
   respect is had to the wickedness of the people of that nation, in every
   one of them. So that the law shuts all up in universal and desperate
   wickedness, that every mouth, may be stopped; the mouths of the Jews,
   as well as of the Gentiles, notwithstanding all those privileges by
   which they were distinguished from the Gentiles.

   The things that the law says, are sufficient to stop the mouths of all
   mankind, in two respects.

   1. To stop them from boasting of their righteousness, as the Jews were
   wont to do; as the apostle observes in the (23d verse of the preceding
   chapter.--That the apostle has respect to stopping their mouths in this
   respect, appears by the ( 27th verse of the context, "Where is boasting
   then? It is excluded." The law stops our mouths from making: any plea
   for life, or the favour of God, or any positive good, from our own
   righteousness.

   2. To stop them from making any excuse for ourselves, or objection
   against the execution of the sentence of the law, or the infliction of
   the punishment that it threatens. That this is intended, appears by the
   words immediately following, Rom. ii. 19. "That all the world may
   become guilty before God." That is, that they may appear to he guilty,
   and stand convicted before God, and justly liable to the condemnation
   of his law, as guilty of death, according to the Jewish way of
   speaking.

   And thus the apostle proves, that no flesh can be justified in God's
   sight by the deeds of the law; as he draws the conclusion in the
   following verse; and so prepares the way for establishing the great
   doctrine of justification by faith alone, which he proceeds to do in
   the following part of the chapter, and of the epistle.

      DOCTRINE.

   "It is just with God eternally to cast off and destroy sinners."--For
   this is the punishment which the law condemns to--The truth of this
   doctrine may appear by the joint consideration of two things, viz.
   Man's sinfulness, and God's sovereignty.

   I. It appears from the consideration of man's sinfulness. And that
   whether we consider the infinitely evil nature of all sin, or how much
   sin men are guilty of.

   1. If we consider the infinite evil and heinousness of sin in general,
   it is not unjust in God to inflict what punishment is deserved; because
   the very notion of deserving any punishment is, that it may be justly
   inflicted. A deserved punishment and a just punishment are the same
   thing. To say that one deserves such a punishment, and yet to say that
   he does not justly deserve it, is a contradiction; and if he justly
   deserves it, then it may be justly inflicted.

   Every crime or fault deserves a greater or less punishment, in
   proportion as the crime itself is greater or less. If any fault
   deserves punishment, then so much the greater the fault, so much the
   greater is the punishment deserved. The faulty nature of any thing is
   the formal ground and reason of its desert of punishment; and therefore
   the more any thing hath of this nature, the more punishment it
   deserves. And therefore the terribleness of the degree of punishment,
   let it be never so terrible, is no argument against the justice of it,
   if the proportion does but hold between the heinousness of the crime
   and the dreadfulness of the punishment; so that if there be any such
   thing as a fault infinitely heinous, it will follow that it is just to
   inflict a punishment for it that is infinitely dreadful.

   A crime is more or less heinous, according as we are under greater or
   less obligations to the contrary. This is self-evident; because it is
   herein that the criminalness or faultiness of any thing consists, that
   it is contrary to what we are obliged or bound to, or what ought to be
   in us. So the faultiness of one being hating another, is in proportion
   to his obligation to love him. The crime of one being despising and
   casting contempt on another, is proportionably more or less heinous, as
   he was under greater or less obligations to honour him. The fault of
   disobeying another, is greater or less, as any one is under greater or
   less obligations to obey him. And therefore if there be any being that
   we are under infinite obligations to love, and honour, and obey, the
   contrary towards him must be infinitely faulty.

   Our obligation to love, honour, and obey any being, is in proportion to
   his loveliness, honourableness, and authority; for that is the very
   meaning of the words. When we say any one is very lovely, it is the
   same as to say, that he is one very much to be loved. Or if we say such
   a one is more honourable than another, the meaning of the words is,
   that he is one that we are more obliged to honour. If we say any one
   has great authority over us, it is the same as to say, that he has
   great right to our subjection and obedience.

   But God is a being infinitely lovely, because he hath infinite
   excellency and beauty. To have infinite excellency and beauty, is the
   same thing as to have infinite loveliness. He is a being of infinite
   greatness, majesty, and glory; and therefore he is infinitely
   honourable. He is infinitely exalted above the greatest potentates of
   the earth, and highest angels in heaven; and therefore he is infinitely
   more honourable than they. His authority over us is infinite; and the
   ground of his right to our obedience is infinitely strong; for he is
   infinitely worthy to be obeyed himself, and we have an absolute,
   universal, and infinite dependence upon him.

   So that sin against God, being a violation of infinite obligations,
   must be a crime infinitely heinous, and so deserving infinite
   punishment.--Nothing is more agreeable to the common sense of mankind,
   than that sins committed against any one, must be proportionably
   heinous to the dignity of the being offended and abused; as it is also
   agreeable to the word of God, 1 Sam. ii. 25. "If one man sin against
   another, the Judge shall judge him;" (i. e. shall judge him, and
   inflict a finite punishment, such as finite judges can inflict;) "but
   if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?" This was the
   aggravation of sin that made Joseph afraid of it, Gen. xxxix. 9. "How
   shall I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God?" This was
   the aggravation of David's sin, in comparison of which he esteemed all
   others as nothing, because they were infinitely exceeded by it. Psalm
   li. 4. "Against thee, thee only have I sinned."--The eternity of the
   punishment of ungodly men renders it infinite; and it renders it no
   more than infinite; and therefore renders no more than proportionable
   to the heinousness of what they are guilty of.

   If there be any evil or faultiness in sin against God, there is
   certainly infinite evil: for if it be any fault at all, it has an
   infinite aggravation, viz. that it is against an infinite object. If it
   be ever so small upon other accounts, yet if it be any thing, it has
   one infinite dimension; and so is an infinite evil. Which may be
   illustrated by this: if we suppose a thing to have infinite length, but
   no breadth and thickness, (a mere mathematical line,) it is nothing:
   but if it have any breadth and thickness, though never so small, and
   infinite length, the quantity of it is infinite; it exceeds the
   quantity of any thing, however broad, thick, and long, wherein these
   dimensions are all finite.

   So that the objections made against the infinite punishment of sin,
   from the necessity, or rather previous certainty, of the futurition of
   sin, arising from the unavoidable original corruption of nature, if
   they argue any thing, argue against any faultiness at all: for if this
   necessity or certainty leaves any evil at all in sin, that fault must
   be infinites by reason of the infinite object.

   But every such objector as would argue from hence, that there is no
   fault at all in sin, confutes himself, and shows his own insincerity in
   his objection. For at the same time that he objects, that men's acts
   are necessary, and that this kind of necessity is inconsistent with
   faultiness in the act, his own practice shows that he does not believe
   what he objects to be true: otherwise why does he at all blame men? Or
   why are such persons at all displeased with men, for abusive,
   injurious, and ungrateful acts towards them? Whatever they pretend, by
   this they show that indeed they do believe that there is no necessity
   in men's acts that is inconsistent with blame. And if their objection
   be this, that this previous certainty is by God's own ordering, and
   that where God orders an antecedent certainty of acts, he transfers all
   the fault from the actor on himself; their practice shows, that at the
   same time they do not believe this, but fully believe the contrary: for
   when they are abused by men, they are displeased with men, and not with
   God only.

   The light of nature teaches all mankind, that when an injury is
   voluntary, it is faulty, without any consideration of what there might
   be previously to determine the futurition of that evil act of the will.
   And it really teaches this as much to those that object and cavil most
   as to others; as their universal practice shows. By which it appears,
   that such objections are insincere and perverse. Men will mention
   others' corrupt nature when they are injured, as a thing that
   aggravates their crime, and that wherein their faultiness partly
   consists. How common is it for persons, when they look on themselves
   greatly injured by another, to inveigh against him, and aggravate his
   baseness, by saying, "He is a man of a most perverse spirit: he is
   naturally of a selfish, niggardly, or proud and haughty temper: he is
   one of a base and vile disposition." And yet men's natural and corrupt
   dispositions are mentioned as an excuse for them, with respect to their
   sins against God, as if they rendered them blameless.

   2. That it is just with God eternally to cast off wicked men, may more
   abundantly appear, if we consider how much sin they are guilty of. From
   what has been already said, it appears, that if men were guilty of sin
   but in one particular, that is sufficient ground of their eternal
   rejection and condemnation. If they are sinners, that is enough. Merely
   this, might be sufficient to keep them from ever lifting up their
   heads, and cause them to smite on their breasts, with the publican that
   cried," God be merciful to me a sinner." But sinful men are full of
   sin; principles and acts of sin: their guilt is like great mountains,
   heaped one upon another, till the pile is grown up to heaven. They are
   totally corrupt, in every part, in all their faculties; in all the
   principles of their nature, their understandings, and wills; and in all
   their dispositions and affections. Their heads, their hearts, are
   totally depraved; all the members of their bodies are only instruments
   of sin; and all their senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, &c. are only
   inlets and outlets of sin, channels of corruption. There is nothing but
   sin, no good at all. Rom. vii. 18. "In me, that is, in my flesh, dwells
   no good thing." There is all manner of wickedness. There are the seeds
   of the greatest and blackest crimes. There are principles of all sorts
   of wickedness against men; and there is all wickedness against God.
   There is pride; there is enmity; there is contempt; there is
   quarrelling; there is atheism; there is blasphemy. There are these
   things in exceeding strength; the heart is under the power of them, is
   sold under sin, and is a perfect slave to it. There is hard-hearted
   ness, hardness greater than that of a rock, or an adamant-stone. There
   is obstinacy and perverseness, incorrigibleness and inflexibleness in
   sin, that will not be overcome by threatenings or promises, by
   awakenings or encouragements, by judgments or mercies, neither by that
   which is terrifying nor that which is winning. The very blood of God
   our Saviour will not win the heart of a wicked man.

   And there are actual wickednesses without number or measure. There are
   breaches of every command, in thought, word, and deed: a life full of
   sin; days and nights filled up with sin; mercies abused and frowns
   despised; mercy and justice, and all the divine perfections, trampled
   on; and the honour of each person in the Trinity trod in the dirt. Now
   if one sinful word or thought has so much evil in it, as to deserve
   eternal destruction, how do they deserve to be eternally cast off and
   destroyed, that are guilty of so much sin!

   II. If with man's sinfulness, we consider God's sovereignty, it may
   serve further to clear God's justice in the eternal rejection and
   condemnation of sinners, from men's cavils and objections. I shall not
   now pretend to determine precisely, what things are, and what things
   are not, proper acts and exercises of God's holy sovereignty; but only,
   that God's sovereignty extends to the following things.

   1. That such is God's sovereign power and right, that he is originally
   under no obligation to keep men from sinning; but may in his providence
   permit and leave them to sin. He was not obliged to keep either angels
   or men from falling. It is unreasonable to suppose, that God should be
   obliged, if he makes a reasonable creature capable of knowing his will,
   and receiving a law from him, and being subject to his moral government
   at the same time to make it impossible for him to sin, or break his
   law. For if God be obliged to this, it destroys all use of any
   commands, laws, promises, or threatenings, and the very notion of any
   moral government of God over those reasonable creatures. For to what
   purpose would it be, for God to give such and such laws, and declare
   his holy will to a creature, and annex promises and threatenings to
   move him to his duty, and make him careful to perform it, if the
   creature at the same time has this to think of, that God is obliged to
   make it impossible for him to break his laws? How can God's
   threatenings move to care or watchfulness, when, at the same time, God
   is obliged to render it impossible that he should be exposed to the
   threatenings? Or, to what purpose is it for God to give a law at all?
   For according to this supposition, it is God, and not the creature,
   that is under law. It is the lawgiver's care, and not the subject's, to
   see that his law is obeyed; and this care is what the lawgiver is
   absolutely obliged to! If God be obliged never to permit a creature to
   fall, there is an end of all divine laws, or government, or authority
   of God over the creature; there can be no manner of use of these
   things.

   God may permit sin, though the being of sin will certainly ensue on
   that permission: and so, by permission, he may dispose and order the
   event. If there were any such thing as chance, or mere contingence, and
   the very notion of it did not carry a gross absurdity, (as might easily
   be shown that it does,) it would have been very unfit that God should
   have left it to mere chance, whether man should fall or no. For chance,
   if there should be any such thing, is undesigning and blind. And
   certainly it is more fit that an event of so great importance, and
   which is attended with such an infinite train of great consequences,
   should be disposed and ordered by infinite wisdom, than that it should
   be left to blind chance.

   If it be said, that God need not have interposed to render it
   impossible for man to sin, and yet not leave it to mere contingence or
   blind chance neither; but might have left it with man's free will, to
   determine whether to sin or no: I answer, if God did leave it to man's
   free will, without any sort of disposal, or ordering [or rather,
   adequate cause] in the case, whence it should be previously certain how
   that free will should determine, then still that first determination of
   the will must be merely contingent or by chance. It could not have any
   antecedent act of the will to determine it; for I speak now of the very
   first act or motion of the will, respecting the affair that may be
   looked upon as the prime ground and highest source of the event. To
   suppose this to be determined by a foregoing act is a contradiction.
   God's disposing this determination of the will by his permission, does
   not at all infringe the liberty of the creature. It is in no respect
   any more inconsistent with liberty, than mere chance or contingence.
   For if the determination of the will be from blind, undesigning chance,
   it is no more from the agent himself, or from the will itself, than if
   we suppose, in the case, a wise, divine disposal by permission.

   2. It was fit that it should be at the ordering of the divine wisdom
   and good pleasure, whether every particular man should stand for
   himself, or whether the first father of mankind should be appointed as
   the moral and federal head and representative of the rest. If God has
   not liberty in this matter to determine either of these two as he
   pleases, it must be because determining that the first father of men
   should represent the rest, and not that every one should stand for
   himself, is injurious to mankind. For if it be not injurious, how is it
   unjust? But it is not injurious to mankind; for there is nothing in the
   nature of the case itself, that makes it better that each man should
   stand for himself, than that all should be represented by their common
   father; as the least reflection or consideration will convince any one.
   And if there be nothing in the nature of the thing that makes the
   former better for mankind than the latter, then it will follow, that
   they are not hurt in God's choosing and appointing the latter, rather
   than the former; or, which is the same thing, that it is not injurious
   to mankind.

   3. When men are fallen, and become sinful, God by his sovereignty has a
   right to determine about their redemption as he pleases. He has a right
   to determine whether he will redeem any or not. He might, if he had
   pleased, have left all to perish, or might have redeemed all. Or, he
   may redeem some, and leave others; and if he doth so, he may take whom
   he pleases, and leave whom he pleases. To suppose that all have
   forfeited his favour, and deserved to perish, and to suppose that he
   may not leave any one individual of them to perish, implies a
   contradiction; because it supposes that such a one has a claim to God's
   favour, and is not justly liable to perish; which is contrary to the
   supposition.

   It is meet that God should order all these things according to his own
   pleasure. By reason of his greatness and glory, by which he is
   infinitely above all, he is worthy to be sovereign, and that his
   pleasure should in all things take place. He is worthy that he should
   make himself his end, and that he should make nothing but his own
   wisdom his rule in pursuing that end, without asking leave or counsel
   of any, and without giving account of any of his matters. It is fit
   that he who is absolutely perfect, and infinitely wise, and the
   Fountain of all wisdom, should determine every thing [that he effects]
   by his own will, even things of the greatest importance. It is meet
   that he should be thus sovereign, because he is the first being, the
   eternal being, whence all other beings are. He is the Creator of all
   things; and all are absolutely and universally dependent on him; and
   therefore it is meet that he should act as the sovereign possessor of
   heaven and earth.

      APPLICATION.

   In the improvement of this doctrine, I would chiefly direct myself to
   sinners who are afraid of damnation, in a use of conviction. This may
   be matter of conviction to you, that it would be just and righteous
   with God eternally to reject and destroy you. This is what you are in
   danger of. You who are a Christless sinner, are a poor condemned
   creature: God's wrath still abides upon you; and the sentence of
   condemnation lies upon you. You are in God's hands, and it is uncertain
   what he will do with you. You are afraid what will become of you. You
   are afraid that it will be your portion to suffer eternal burnings; and
   your fears are not without grounds; you have reason to tremble every
   moment. But be you never so much afraid of it, let eternal damnation be
   never so dreadful, yet it is just. God may nevertheless do it, and be
   righteous, and holy, and glorious. Though eternal damnation be what you
   cannot bear, and how much soever your heart shrinks at the thoughts of
   it, yet God's justice may be glorious in it. The dreadfulness of the
   thing on your part, and the greatness of your dread of it, do not
   render it the less righteous on God's part. If you think otherwise, it
   is a sign that you do not see yourself, that you are not sensible what
   sin is, nor how much of it you have been guilty of. Therefore for your
   conviction, be directed,

   First, To look over your past life: inquire at the mouth of conscience,
   and hear what that has to testify concerning it. Consider what you are,
   what light you have had, and what means you have lived under: and yet
   how you have behaved yourself! What have those many days and nights you
   have lived been filled up with? How have those years that have rolled
   over your heads, one after another, been spent? What has the sun shone
   upon you for, from day to day, while you have improved his light to
   serve Satan by it? What has God kept your breath in your nostrils for,
   and given you meat and drink, that you have spent your life and
   strength, supported by them, in opposing God, and rebellion against
   him?

   How many sorts of wickedness have you not been guilty of! How manifold
   have been the abominations of your life! What profaneness and contempt
   of God has been exercised by you! How little regard have you had to the
   Scriptures, to the word preached, to sabbaths, and sacraments! How
   profanely have you talked, many of you, about those things that are
   holy! After what manner have many of you kept God's holy day, not
   regarding the holiness of the time, nor caring what you thought of in
   it! Yea, you have not only spent the time in worldly, vain, and
   unprofitable thoughts, but immoral thoughts; pleasing yourself with the
   reflection on past acts of wickedness, and in contriving new acts. Have
   not you spent much holy time ingratifying your lusts in your
   imaginations; yea, not only holy time, but the very time of God's
   public worship, when you have appeared in God's more immediate
   presence? How have you not only not attended to the worship, but have
   in the mean time been feasting your lusts, and wallowing yourself in
   abominable uncleanness! How many sabbaths have you spent, one after
   another, in a most wretched manner! Some of you not only in worldly and
   wicked thoughts, but also a very wicked outward behaviour! When you on
   sabbath-days have got along with your wicked companions, how has holy
   time been treated among you! What kind of conversation has there been!
   Yea, how have some of you, by a very indecent carriage, openly
   dishonoured and cast contempt on the sacred services of God's house,
   and holy day! And what you have done some of you alone, what wicked
   practices there have been in secret, even in holy time, God and your
   own consciences know.

   And how have you behaved yourself in the time of family prayer! And
   what a trade have many of you made of absenting yourselves from the
   worship of the families you belong to, for the sake of vain company!
   And how have you continued in the neglect of secret prayer! therein
   wilfully living in a known sin, going abreast against as plain a
   command as any in the Bible! Have you not been one that has cast off
   fear, and restrained prayer before God?

   What wicked carriage have some of you been guilty of towards your
   parents! How far have you been from paying that honour to them which
   God has required! Have you not even harboured ill-will and malice
   towards them? and when they have displeased you, have wished evil to
   them? yea, and shown your vile spirit in your behaviour? and it is well
   if you have not mocked them behind their backs; and, like the accursed
   Ham and Canaan, as it were, derided your parents' nakedness instead of
   covering it, and hiding your eyes from it. Have not some of you often
   disobeyed your parents, yea, and refused to be subject to them? Is it
   not a wonder of mercy and forbearance, that the proverb has not before
   now been accomplished on you, Prov. xxx. 17. "The eye that mocketh at
   his father, and refuseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley
   shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it?"

   What revenge and malice have you been guilty of towards your
   neighbours! How have you indulged this spirit of the devil, hating
   others, and wishing evil to them, rejoicing when evil befell them, and
   grieving at others' prosperity, and lived in such a way for a long
   time! Have not some of you allowed a passionate furious spirit, and
   behaved yourselves in your anger more like wild beasts than like
   Christians?

   What covetousness has been in many of you! Such has been your
   inordinate love of the world, and care about the things of it, that it
   has taken up your heart; you have allowed no room for God and religion;
   you have minded the world more than your eternal salvation. For the
   vanities of the world you have neglected reading, praying, and
   meditation; for the things of the world you have broken the sabbath;
   for the world you have spent a great deal of your time in quarrelling.
   For the world you have envied and hated your neighbour; for the world
   you have cast God, and Christ, and heaven, behind your back; for the
   world you have sold your own soul. You have as it were drowned your
   soul in worldly cares and desires; you have been a mere earth-worm,
   that is never in its element but when grovelling and buried in the
   earth.

   How much of a spirit of pride, has appeared in you, which is in a
   peculiar manner the spirit and condemnation of the devil! How have some
   of you vaunted yourselves in your apparel! others in their riches!
   others in their knowledge and abilities! How has it galled you to see
   others above you! How much has it gone against the grain for you to
   give others their due honour! And how have you shown your pride by
   setting up your wills in opposing others, and stirring up and promoting
   division, and a party spirit in public affairs.

   How sensual have you been! Are there not some here that have debased
   themselves below the dignity of human nature, by wallowing in sensual
   filthiness, as swine in the mire, or as filthy vermin feeding with
   delight on rotten carrion? What intemperance have some of you been
   guilty of! How much of your precious time have you spent away at the
   tavern, and in drinking companies, when you ought to have been at home
   seeking God and your salvation in your families and closets!

   And what abominable lasciviousness have some of you been guilty of! How
   have you indulged yourself from day to day, and from night to night, in
   all manner of unclean imaginations! Has not your soul been filled with
   them, till it has become a hold of foul spirits, and a cage of every
   unclean and hateful bird? What foul-mouthed persons have some of you
   been, often in lewd and lascivious talk and unclean songs, wherein were
   things not fit to be spoken! And such company, where such conversation
   has been carried on, has been your delight. And with what unclean acts
   and practices have you defiled yourself! God and your own consciences
   know what abominable lasciviousness you have practised in things not
   fit to be named, when you have been alone; when you ought to have been
   reading, or meditating, or on your knees before God in secret prayer.
   And how have you corrupted others, as well as polluted yourselves! What
   vile uncleanness have you practised in company! What abominations have
   you been guilty of in the dark! Such as the apostle doubtless had
   respect to in Eph. v. 12. " For it is a shame even to speak of those
   things that are done of them in secret." Some of you have corrupted
   others, and done what in you lay to undo their souls, (if you have not
   actually done it,) and by your vile practices and example have made
   room for Satan, invited his presence, and established his interest, in
   the town where you have lived.

   What lying have some of you been guilty of, especially in your
   childhood! And have not your heart and lips often disagreed since you
   came to riper years? What fraud, and deceit, and unfaithfulness, have
   many of you practised in your own dealings with your neighbours, of
   which your own heart is conscious, if you have not been noted by
   others.

   And how have some of you behaved yourselves in your family relations!
   How have you neglected your children's souls! And not only so, but have
   corrupted their minds by your bad examples; and instead of training
   them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, have rather brought
   them up in the devil's service!

   How have some of you attended that sacred ordinance of the Lord's
   supper without any manner of serious preparation, and in a careless
   slighty frame of spirits, and chiefly to comply with custom! Have you
   not ventured to put the sacred symbols of the body and blood of Christ
   into your mouth, while at the same time you lived in ways of known
   sins, and intended no other than still to go on in the same wicked
   practices? And, it may be, have sat at the Lord's table with rancour in
   your heart against some of your brethren that you have sat therewith.
   You have come even to that holy feast of love among God's children,
   with the leaven of malice and envy in your heart; and so have eat and
   drank judgment to yourself.

   What stupidity and sottishness has attended your course of wickedness:
   which has appeared in your obstinacy under awakening dispensations of
   God's word and providence. And how have some of you backslidden after
   you have set out in religion, and quenched God's Spirit after he had
   been striving with you! And what unsteadiness, and slothfulness, and
   long misimprovement of God's strivings with you, have you been
   chargeable with!

   Now, can you think when you have thus behaved yourself, that God is
   obliged to show you mercy? Are you not after all this ashamed to talk
   of its being hard with God to cast you off? Does it become one who has
   lived such a life to open his mouth to excuse himself, to object
   against God's justice in his condemnation, or to complain of it as hard
   in God not to give him converting and pardoning grace, and make him his
   child, and bestow on him eternal life? or to talk of his duties and
   great pains in religion, as if such performances were worthy to be
   accepted, and to draw God's heart to such a creature? If this has been
   your manner, does it not show how little you have considered yourself,
   and how little a sense you have had of your own sinfulness?

   Secondly, Be directed to consider, if God should eternally reject and
   destroy you, what an agreeableness and exact mutual answerableness
   there would be between God so dealing with you, and your spirit and
   behaviour. There would not only be an equality, but a similitude. God
   declares, that his dealings with men shall be suitable to their
   disposition and practice. Psalm xviii. 25, 26. "With the merciful man,
   thou wilt show thyself merciful; with an upright man, thou wilt show
   thyself upright: with the pure thou wilt show thyself pure; and with
   the froward, thou wilt show thyself froward." How much soever you dread
   damnation, and are affrighted and concerned at the thoughts of it; yet
   if God should indeed eternally damn you, you would be met with but in
   your own way; you would be dealt with exactly according to your own
   dealing. Surely it is but fair that you should be made to buy in the
   same measure in which you sell.

   Here I would particularly show,--1. That if God should eternally
   destroy you, it would be agreeable to your treatment of God. 2. That it
   would be agreeable to your treatment of Jesus Christ. 3. That it would
   be agreeable to your behaviour towards your neighbours. 4. That it
   would be according to your own foolish behaviour towards yourself.

   I. If God should for ever cast you off, it would be exactly agreeable
   to your treatment of him. That you may be sensible of this, consider,

   1. You never have exercised the least degree of love to God; and
   therefore it would be agreeable to your treatment of him if he should
   never express any love to you. When God converts and saves a sinner, it
   is a wonderful and unspeakable manifestation of divine love. When a
   poor lost soul is brought home to Christ, and has all his sins forgiven
   him, and is made a child of God, it will take up a whole eternity to
   express and declare the greatness of that love. And why should God be
   obliged to express such wonderful love to you, who never exercised the
   least degree of love to him in all your life? You never have loved God,
   who is infinitely glorious and lovely; and why then is God under
   obligation to love you, who are all over deformed and loathsome as a
   filthy worm, or rather a hateful viper? You have no benevolence in your
   heart towards God; you never rejoiced in God's happiness; if he had
   been miserable, and that had been possible, you would have liked it as
   well as if he were happy; you would not have cared how miserable he
   was, nor mourned for it, any more than you now do for the devil's being
   miserable. And why then should God be looked upon as obliged to take so
   much care for your happiness, as to do such great things for it, as he
   doth for those that are saved? Or why should God be called hard, in
   case he should not be careful to save you from misery? You care not
   what becomes of God's glory; you are not distressed how much soever his
   honour seems to suffer in the world: and why should God care any more
   for your welfare? Has it not been so, that if you could but promote
   your private interest, and gratify your own lusts, you cared not how
   much the glory of God suffered? And why may not God advance his own
   glory in the ruin of your welfare, not caring how much your interest
   suffers by it? You never so much as stirred one step, sincerely making
   the glory of God your end, or acting from real respect to him; and why
   then is it hard if God do not do such great things for you, as the
   changing of your nature, raising you from spiritual death to life,
   conquering the powers of darkness for you, translating you out of the
   kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of his dear Son, delivering you
   from eternal misery, and bestowing upon you eternal glory? You were not
   willing to deny yourself for God; you never cared to put yourself out
   of your way for Christ; whenever any thing cross or difficult came in
   your way, that the glory of God was concerned in, it has been your
   manner to shun it, and excuse yourself from it. You did not care to
   hurt yourself for Christ, whom you did not see worthy of it; and why
   then must it be looked upon as a hard and cruel thing, if Christ has
   not been pleased to spill his blood and be tormented to death for such
   a sinner.

   2. You have slighted God; and why then may not God justly slight you?
   When sinners are sensible in some measure of their misery, they are
   ready to think it hard that God will take no more notice of them; that
   he will see them in such a lamentable distressed condition, beholding
   their burdens and tears, and seem to slight it, and manifest no pity to
   them. Their souls they think are precious: it would be a dreadful thing
   if they should perish, and burn in hell for ever. They do not see
   through it, that God should make so light of their salvation. But then,
   ought they not to consider, that as their souls are precious, so is
   God's honour precious? The honour of the infinite God, the great King
   of heaven and earth, is a thing of as great importance, (and surely may
   justly be so esteemed by God,) as the happiness of you, a poor little
   worm. But yet you have slighted that honour of God, and valued it no
   more than the dirt under your feet. You have been told that such and
   such things were contrary to the will of a holy God, and against his
   honour; but you cared not for that. God called upon you, and exhorted
   you to be more tender of his honour; but you went on without regarding
   him. Thus have you slighted God! And yet, is it hard that God should
   slight you? Are you more honourable than God, that he must be obliged
   to make much of you, how light soever you make of him and his glory?

   And you have not only slighted God in time past, but you slight him
   still. You indeed now make a pretence and show of honouring him in your
   prayers, and attendance on other external duties, and by sober
   countenance, and seeming devoutness in your words and behaviour; but it
   is all mere dissembling. That downcast look and seeming reverence, is
   not from any honour you have to God in your heart, though you would
   have God take it so. You who have not believed in Christ, have not the
   least jot of honour to God; that show of it is merely forced, and what
   you are driven to by fear, like those mentioned in Psalm lxvi. 3.
   "Through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit
   themselves to thee." In the original it is, "shall lie unto thee;" that
   is, yield feigned submission, and dissemble respect and honour to thee.
   There is a rod held over you that makes you seem to pay such respect to
   God. This religion and devotion, even the very appearance of it, would
   soon be gone, and all vanish away, if that were removed. Sometimes it
   may be you weep in your prayers, and in your hearing sermons, and hope
   God will take notice of it, and take it for some honour; but he sees it
   to be all hypocrisy. You weep for yourself; you are afraid of hell; and
   do you think that that is worthy of God to take much notice of you,
   because you can cry when you are in danger of being damned; when at the
   same time you indeed care nothing for God's honour.

   Seeing you thus disregard so great a God, is it a heinous thing for God
   to slight you, a little, wretched, despicable creature; a worm, a mere
   nothing, and less than nothing; a vile insect, that has risen up in
   contempt against the Majesty of heaven and earth?

   3. Why should God be looked upon as obliged to bestow salvation upon
   you, when you have been so ungrateful for the mercies he has bestowed
   upon you already? God has tried you with a great deal of kindness, and
   he never has sincerely been thanked by you for any of it. God has
   watched over you, and preserved you, and provided for you, and followed
   you with mercy all your days; and yet you have continued sinning
   against him. He has given you food and raiment, but you have improved
   both in the service of sin. He has preserved you while you slept; but
   when you arose, it was to return to the old; trade of sinning. God,
   notwithstanding this ingratitude, has still continued his mercy; but
   his kindness has never won your heart, or brought you to a more
   grateful behaviour towards him. It may be you have received many
   remarkable mercies, recoveries from sickness, or preservations of your
   life when exposed by accidents, when if you had died, you would have
   gone directly to hell; but you never had any true thankfulness for any
   of these mercies. God has kept you out of hell, and continued your day
   of grace, and the offers of salvation, so long a time; while you did
   not regard your own salvation so much as in secret to ask God for it.
   And now God has greatly added to his mercy to you, by giving you the
   strivings of his Spirit, whereby a most precious opportunity for your
   salvation is in your hands. But what thanks has God received for it?
   What kind of returns have you made for all this kindness? As God has
   multiplied mercies, so have you multiplied provocations.

   And yet now are you ready to quarrel for mercy, and to find fault with
   God, not only that he does not bestow more mercy, but to contend with
   him, because he does not bestow infinite mercy upon you, heaven with
   all it contains, and even himself, for your eternal portion. What ideas
   have you of yourself, that you think God is obliged to do so much for
   you, though you treat him ever so ungratefully for his kindness
   wherewith you have been followed all the days of your life.

   4. You have voluntarily chosen to be with Satan in his enmity and
   opposition to God; how justly therefore might you be with him in his
   punishment! You did not choose to be on God's side, but rather chose to
   side with the devil, and have obstinately continued in it, against
   God's often repeated calls and counsels. You have chosen rather to
   hearken to Satan than to God, and would be with him in his work. You
   have given yourself up to him, to be subject to his power and
   government, in opposition to God; how justly therefore may God also
   give you up to him, and leave you in his power, to accomplish your
   ruin! Seeing you have yielded yourself to his will, to do as he would
   have you, surely God may leave you in his hands to execute his will
   upon you. If men will be with God's enemy, and on his side, why is God
   obliged to redeem them out of his hands, when they have done his work?
   Doubtless you would be glad to serve the devil, and be God's enemy
   while you live, and then to have God your friend, and deliver you from
   the devil, when you come to die. But will God be unjust if he deals
   otherwise by you? No, surely! It will be altogether and perfectly just,
   that you should have your portion with him with whom you have chosen to
   work; and that you should be in his possession to whose dominion you
   have yielded yourself; and if you cry to God for deliverance, he may
   most justly give you that answer, Judges x. 14. "Go to the gods which
   you have chosen."

   5. Consider how often you have refused to hear God's calls to you, and
   how just it would therefore be, if he should refuse to hear you when
   you call upon him. You are ready, it may be, to complain that you have
   often prayed, and earnestly begged of God to show you mercy, and yet
   have no answer of prayer: One says, I have been constant in prayer for
   so many years, and God has not heard me. Another says, I have done what
   I can; I have prayed as earnestly as I am able; I do not see how I can
   do more; and it will seem hard if after all I am denied. But do you
   consider how often God has called, and you have denied him? God has
   called earnestly and for a long time; he has called and called again in
   his word, and in his providence, and you have refused. You was not
   uneasy for fear you should not show regard enough to his calls. You let
   him call as loud and as long as he would; for your part, you had no
   leisure to attend to what he said; you had other business to mind; you
   had these and those lusts to gratify and please, and worldly concerns
   to attend; you could not afford to stand considering of what God had to
   say to you. When the ministers of Christ have stood and pleaded with
   you, in his name, sabbath after sabbath, and have even spent their
   strength in it, how little was you moved! It did not alter you, but you
   went on still as you used to do; when you went away, you returned again
   to your sins, to your lasciviousness, to your vain mirth, to your
   covetousness, to your intemperance, and that has been the language of
   your heart and practice, Exod. v. 2. "Who is the Lord, that I should
   obey his voice?" Was it no crime for you to refuse to hear when God
   called? And yet is it now very hard that God does not hear your earnest
   calls, and that though your calling on God be not from any respect to
   him, but merely from self-love? The devil would beg as earnestly as
   you, if he had any hope to get salvation by it, and a thousand times as
   earnestly, and yet be as much of a devil as he is now. Are your calls
   more worthy to be heard than God's? Or is God more obliged to regard
   what you say to him, than you to regard his commands, counsels, and
   invitations to you? What can be more justice than this, Prov. i. 24,
   &c. " Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my
   hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my counsel,
   and would none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I
   will mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as desolation,
   and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish
   cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
   they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me."

   6. Have you not taken encouragement to sin against God, on that very
   presumption, that God would show you mercy when you sought it? And may
   not God justly refuse you that mercy that you have so presumed upon?
   You have flattered yourself, that though you did so, yet God would show
   you mercy when you cried earnestly to him for it: how righteous
   therefore would it be in God, to disappoint such a wicked presumption!
   It was upon that very hope that you dared to affront the Majesty of
   heaven so dreadfully as you have done; and can you now be so sottish as
   to think that God is obliged not to frustrate that hope?

   When a sinner takes encouragement to neglect secret prayer which God
   has commanded, to gratify his lusts, to live a carnal vain life, to
   thwart God, to run upon him, and contemn him to his face, thinking with
   himself, "If I do so, God would not damn me; he is a merciful God, and
   therefore when I seek his mercy he will bestow it upon me;" must God be
   accounted hard because he will not do according to such a sinner's
   presumption?

   Cannot he be excused from showing such a sinner mercy when he is
   pleased to seek it, without incurring the charge of being unjust; if
   this be the case, God has no liberty to vindicate his own honour and
   majesty; but must lay himself open to all manner of affronts, and yield
   himself up to the abuses of vile men, though they disobey, despise, and
   dishonour him, as much as they will; and when they have done, his mercy
   and pardoning grace must not be in his own power and at his own
   disposal, but he must be obliged to dispense it at their call. He must
   take these bold and vile contemners of his Majesty, when it suits them
   to ask it, and must forgive all their sins, and not only so, but must
   adopt them into his family, and make them his children, and bestow
   eternal glory upon them. What mean, low, and strange thoughts have such
   men of God, who think thus of him! Consider, that you have injured God
   the more, and have been the worse enemy to him, for his being a
   merciful God. So have you treated that attribute of God's mercy! How
   just is it therefore that you never should have any benefit of that
   attribute!

   There is something peculiarly heinous in sinning against the mercy of
   God more than other attributes. There is such base and horrid
   ingratitude, in being the worse to God because he is a being of
   infinite goodness and grace, that it above all things renders
   wickedness vile and detestable. This ought to win us, and engage us to
   serve God better; but instead of that, to sin against him the more, has
   something inexpressibly bad in it, and does in a peculiar manner
   enhance guilt, and incense wrath; as seems to be intimated, Rom. ii. 4,
   5. "Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
   long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
   repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
   unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
   righteous judgment of God."

   The greater the mercy of God is, the more should you be engaged to love
   him, and live to his glory. But it has been contrariwise with you; the
   consideration of the mercies of God being so exceeding great, is the
   thing wherewith you have encouraged yourself in sin. You have heard
   that the mercy of God was without bounds, that it was sufficient to
   pardon the greatest sinner, and you have upon that very account
   ventured to be a very great sinner. Though it was very offensive to
   God, though you heard that God infinitely hated sin, and that such
   practices as you went on in were exceeding contrary to his nature,
   will, and glory, yet that did not make you uneasy; you heard that he
   was a very merciful God, and had grace enough to pardon you, and so
   cared not how offensive your sins were to him. How long have some of
   you gone on in sin, and what great sins have some of you been guilty
   of, on that presumption! Your own conscience can give testimony to it,
   that this has made you refuse God's calls, and has made you regardless
   of his repeated commands. Now, how righteous would it be if God should
   swear in his wrath, that you should never be the better for his being
   infinitely merciful!

   Your ingratitude has been the greater, that you have not only abused
   the attribute of God's mercy, taking encouragement from it to continue
   in sin, but you have also presumed that God would exercise infinite
   mercy to you in particular; which consideration should have especially
   endeared God to you. You have taken encouragement to sin the more, from
   that consideration, that Christ came into the world and died to save
   sinners; such thanks has Christ had from you, for enduring such a
   tormenting death for his enemies! Now, how justly might God refuse that
   you should ever be the better for his Son's laying down his life! It
   was because of these things that you put off seeking salvation. You
   would take the pleasures of sin still longer, hardening yourself
   because mercy was infinite, and it would not be too late, if you sought
   it afterwards; now, how justly may God disappoint you in this, and so
   order it that it shall be too late.

   7. How have some of you risen up against God, and in the frame of your
   minds opposed him in his sovereign dispensations! And how justly upon
   that account might God oppose you, and set himself against you! You
   never yet would submit to God; never willingly comply, that God should
   have dominion over the world, and that he should govern it for his own
   glory, according to his own wisdom. You, a poor worm, a potsherd, a
   broken piece of an earthen vessel, have dared to find fault and quarrel
   with God. Isaiah xlv. 9. "Woe to him that strives with his Maker. Let
   the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say
   to him that fashioned it, What makest thou?" But yet you have ventured
   to do it. Rom. ix. 20. "Who art thou, O man, that repliest against
   God?" But yet you have thought you was big enough; you have taken upon
   you to call God to an account, why he does thus and thus; you have said
   to Jehovah, What dost thou?

   If you have been restrained by fear from openly venting your opposition
   and enmity of heart against God's government, yet it has been in you;
   you have not been quiet in the frame of your mind; you have had the
   heart of a viper within, and have been ready to spit your venom at God.
   It is well if sometimes you have not actually done it, by tolerating
   blasphemous thoughts and malignant risings of heart against him; yea,
   and the frame of your heart in some measure appeared in impatient and
   fretful behaviour.--Now, seeing you have thus opposed God, how just is
   it that God should oppose you! Or is it because you are so much better,
   and so much greater than God, that it is a crime for him to make that
   opposition against you which you make against him? Do you think that
   the liberty of making opposition is your exclusive prerogative, so that
   you may be an enemy to God, but God must by no means be an enemy to
   you, but must be looked upon under obligation nevertheless to help you,
   and save you by his blood, and bestow his best blessings upon you?

   Consider how in the frame of your mind you have thwarted God in those
   very exercises of mercy towards others that you are seeking for
   yourself. God exercising his infinite grace towards your neighbours,
   has put you into an ill frame, and it may be, set you in a tumult of
   mind. How justly therefore may God refuse ever to exercise that mercy
   towards you! Have you not thus opposed God showing mercy to others,
   even at the very time when you pretended to be earnest with God for
   pity and help for yourself? yea, and while you was endeavouring to get
   something wherewith to recommend yourself to God? And will you look to
   God still with a challenge of mercy, and contend with him for it
   notwithstanding? Can you who have such a heart, and have thus behaved
   yourself, come to God for any other than mere sovereign mercy?

   II. If you should for ever be cast off by God, it would be agreeable to
   your treatment of Jesus Christ. It would have been just with God if he
   had cast you off for ever, without ever making you the offer of a
   Saviour. But God hath not done that; he has provided a Saviour for
   sinners, and offered him to you, even his own Son Jesus Christ, who is
   the only Saviour of men. All that are not forever cast off are saved by
   him. God offers men salvation through him, and has promised us, that if
   we come to him, we shall not be cast off. But if you have treated, and
   still treat, this Saviour after such a manner, that if you should be
   eternally cast off by God, it would be most agreeable to your behaviour
   towards him; which appears by this, viz. "That you reject Christ, and
   will not have him for your Saviour."

   If God offers you a Saviour from deserved punishment, and you will not
   receive him, then surely it is just that you should go without a
   Saviour. Or is God obliged, because you do not like this Saviour, to
   provide you another? He has given an infinitely honourable and glorious
   person, even his only-begotten Son, to be a sacrifice for sin, and so
   provided salvation; and this Saviour is offered to you: now if you
   refuse to accept him, is God therefore unjust if he does not save you?
   Is he obliged to save you in a way of your own choosing, because you do
   not like the way of his choosing? Or will you charge Christ with
   injustice because he does not become your Saviour, when at the same
   time you will not have him when he offers himself to you, and beseeches
   you to accept of him as your Saviour?

   I am sensible that by this time many persons are ready to object
   against this. If all should speak what they now think, we should hear a
   murmuring all over the meeting-house, and one and another would say, "I
   cannot see how this can be, that I am not willing that Christ should be
   my Saviour, when I would give all the world that he was my Saviour: how
   is it possible that I should not be willing to have Christ for my
   Saviour, when this is what I am seeking after, and praying for, and
   striving for, as for my life?"

   Here therefore I would endeavour to convince you, that you are under a
   gross mistake in this matter. And, 1st, I would endeavour to show the
   grounds of your mistake. And, 2dly, To demonstrate to you, that you
   have rejected, and do wilfully reject, Jesus Christ.

   1st, That you may see the weak grounds of your mistake, consider,

   1. There is a great deal of difference between a willingness not to be
   damned, and a being willing to receive Christ for your Saviour. You
   have the former; there is no doubt of that: nobody supposes that you
   love misery so as to choose an eternity of it; and so doubtless you are
   willing to be saved from eternal misery. But that is a very different
   thing from being willing to come to Christ: persons very commonly
   mistake the one for the other, but they are quite two things. You may
   love the deliverance, but hate the deliverer. You tell of a
   willingness; but consider what is the object of that willingness. It
   does not respect Christ; the way of salvation by him is not at all the
   object of it; but it is wholly terminated on your escape from misery.
   The inclination of your will goes no further than self, it never
   reaches Christ. You are willing not to be miserable; that is, you love
   yourself, and there your will and choice terminate. And it is but a
   vain pretence and delusion to say or think, that you are willing to
   accept of Christ.

   2. There is certainly a great deal of difference between a forced
   compliance and a free willingness. Force and freedom cannot consist
   together. Now that willingness, whereby you think you are willing to
   have Christ for a Saviour, is merely a forced thing. Your heart does
   not go out after Christ of itself, but you are forced and driven to
   seek an interest in him. Christ has no share at all in your heart;
   there is no manner of closing of the heart with Him. This forced
   compliance is not what Christ seeks of you; he seeks a free and willing
   acceptance, Psalm cx. 3. "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
   power." He seeks not that you should receive him against your will, but
   with a free will. He seeks entertainment in your heart and choice.--And
   if you refuse thus to receive Christ, how just is it that Christ should
   refuse to receive you! How reasonable are Christ's terms, who offers to
   save all those that willingly, or with a good will, accept of him for
   their Saviour! Who can rationally expect that Christ should force
   himself upon any man to be his Saviour? Or what can be looked for more
   reasonable, than that all who would be saved by Christ, should heartily
   and freely entertain him? And surely it would be very dishonourable for
   Christ to offer himself upon lower terms.--But I would now proceed,

   2dly, To show that you are not willing to have Christ for a Saviour. To
   convince you of it, consider,

   1. How it is possible that you should be willing to accept of Christ as
   a Saviour from the desert of a punishment that you are not sensible you
   have deserved. If you are truly willing to accept of Christ as a
   Saviour, it must be as a sacrifice to make atonement for your guilt.
   Christ came into the world on this errand, to offer himself as an
   atonement, to answer for our desert of punishment. But how can you be
   willing to have Christ for a Saviour from a desert of hell, if you be
   not sensible that you have a desert of hell? If you have not really
   deserved everlasting burnings in hell, then the very offer of an
   atonement for such a desert is an imposition upon you. If you have no
   such guilt upon you, then the very offer of a satisfaction for that
   guilt is an injury, because it implies in it a charge of guilt that you
   are free from. Now therefore it is impossible that a man who is not
   convinced of his guilt can be willing to accept of such an offer;
   because he cannot be willing to accept the charge which the offer
   implies. A man who is not convinced that he has deserved so dreadful a
   punishment, cannot willingly submit to be charged with it. If he thinks
   he is willing, it is but a mere forced, feigned business; because in
   his heart he looks upon himself greatly injured; and therefore he
   cannot freely accept of Christ, under that notion of a Saviour from the
   desert of such a punishment; for such an acceptance is an implicit
   owning that he does deserve such a punishment.

   I do not say, but that men may be willing to be saved from an
   undeserved punishment; they may rather not suffer it than suffer it.
   But a man cannot be willing to accept one at God's hands, under the
   notion of a Saviour from a punishment deserved from him which he thinks
   he has not deserved; it is impossible that any one should freely allow
   a Saviour under that notion. Such an one cannot like the way of
   salvation by Christ; for if he thinks he has not deserved hell, then he
   will think that freedom from hell is a debt; and therefore cannot
   willingly and heartily receive it as a free gift.--If a king should
   condemn a man to some tormenting death, which the condemned person
   thought himself not deserving of, but looked upon the sentence as
   unjust and cruel, and the king, when the time of execution drew nigh,
   should offer him his pardon, under the notion of a very great act of
   grace and clemency, the condemned person never could willingly and
   heartily allow it under that notion, because be judged himself unjustly
   condemned.

   Now by this it is evident that you are not willing to accept of Christ
   as your Saviour; because you never yet had such a sense of your own
   sinfulness, and such a conviction of your great guilt in God's sight,
   as to be indeed convinced that you lay justly condemned to the
   punishment of hell. You never was convinced that you had forfeited all
   favour, and was in God's hands, and at his sovereign and arbitrary
   disposal, to be either destroyed or saved, just as he pleased. You
   never yet was convinced of the sovereignty of God. Hence are there so
   many objections arising against the justice of your punishment from
   original sin, and from God's decrees, from mercy shown to others, and
   the like.

   2. That you are not sincerely willing to accept of Christ as your
   Saviour, appears by this, That you never have been convinced that he is
   sufficient for the work of your salvation. You never had a sight or
   sense of any such excellency or worthiness in Christ, as should give
   such great value to his blood and his mediation with God, as that it
   was sufficient to be accepted for such exceeding guilty creatures, who
   have so provoked God, and exposed themselves to such amazing wrath.
   Saying it is so, and allowing it to be as others say, is a very
   different thing from being really convinced of it, and a being made
   sensible of it in your own heart. The sufficiency of Christ depends
   upon, or rather consists in, his excellency. It is because he is so
   excellent a person that his blood is of sufficient value to atone for
   sin, and it is hence that his obedience is so worthy in God's sight; it
   is also hence that his intercession is so prevalent; and therefore
   those that never had any spiritual sight or sense of Christ's
   excellency, cannot be sensible of his sufficiency.

   And that sinners are not convinced that Christ is sufficient for the
   work he has undertaken, appears most manifestly when they are under
   great convictions of their sin, and danger of God's wrath. Though it
   may be before they thought they could allow Christ to be sufficient,
   (for it is easy to allow any one to be sufficient for our defence at a
   time when we see no danger,) yet when they come to be sensible of their
   guilt and God's wrath, what discouraging thoughts do they entertain!
   How are they ready to draw towards despair, as if there were no hope or
   help for such wicked creatures as they! The reason is, They have no
   apprehension or sense of any other way that God's majesty can be
   vindicated, but only in their misery. To tell them of the blood of
   Christ signifies nothing, it does not relieve their sinking, despairing
   hearts. This makes it most evident that they are not convinced that
   Christ is sufficient to be their Mediator.--And as long as they are
   unconvinced of this, it is impossible they should be willing to accept
   of him as their Mediator and Saviour. A man in distressing fear will
   not willingly betake himself to a fort that he judges not sufficient to
   defend him from the enemy. A man will not willingly venture out into
   the ocean in a ship that he suspects is leaky, and will sink before he
   gets through his voyage.

   3. It is evident that you are not willing to have Christ for your
   Saviour, because you have so mean an opinion of him, that you durst not
   trust his faithfulness. One that undertakes to be the Saviour of souls
   had need be faithful; for if he fails in such a trust, how great is the
   loss! But you are not convinced of Christ's faithfulness; as is
   evident, because at such times as when you are in a considerable
   measure sensible of your guilt and God's anger, you cannot be convinced
   that Christ is willing to accept of you, or that he stands ready to
   receive you, if you should come to him, though Christ so much invites
   you to come to him. and has so fully declared that he will not reject
   you, if you do come; as particularly, John vi. 37. "Him that cometh to
   me, I will in no wise cast out." Now, there is no man can be heartily
   willing to trust his eternal welfare in the hands of an unfaithful
   person, or one whose faithfulness he suspects.

   4. You are not willing to be saved in that way by Christ, as is
   evident, because you are not willing that your own goodness should be
   set at nought. In the way of salvation by Christ men's own goodness is
   wholly set at nought; there is no account at all made of it. Now you
   cannot be willing to be saved in away wherein your own goodness is set
   at nought, as is evident, since you make much of it yourself. You make
   much of your prayers and pains in religion, and are often thinking of
   them; how considerable do they appear to you, when you look back upon
   them! And some of you are thinking how much more you have done than
   others, and expecting some respect or regard that God should manifest
   to what you do. Now, if you make so much of what you do yourself, it is
   impossible that you should be freely willing that God should make
   nothing of it. As we may see in other things; if a man is proud of a
   great estate, or if he values himself much upon his honourable office,
   or his great abilities, it is impossible that he should like it, and
   heartily approve or it, that others should make light of these things
   and despise them.

   Seeing therefore it is so evident, that you refuse to accept of Christ
   as your Saviour, why is Christ to be blamed that he does not save you?
   Christ has offered himself to you to be your Saviour in time past, and
   he continues offering himself still, and you continue to reject him,
   and yet complain that he does not save you.--So strangely unreasonable,
   and inconsistent with themselves, are gospel sinners!

   But I expect there are many of you that still object. Such an objection
   as this, is probably now in the hearts of many here present.

   Object. If I am not willing to have Christ for my Saviour, I cannot
   make myself willing.--But I would give an answer to this objection by
   laying down two things, that must be acknowledged to be exceeding
   evident.

   1. It is no excuse, that you cannot receive Christ of yourself, unless
   you would if you could. This is so evident of itself, that it scarce
   needs any proof. Certainly if persons would not if they could, it is
   just the same thing as to the blame that lies upon them, whether they
   can or cannot. If you were willing, and then found that you could not,
   your being unable would alter the case, and might be some excuse;
   because then the defect would not be in your will, but only in your
   ability. But as long as you will not, it is no matter, whether you have
   ability or no ability.

   If you are not willing to accept of Christ, it follows that you have no
   sincere willingness to be willing; because the will always necessarily
   approves of and rests in its own acts. To suppose the contrary would be
   to suppose a contradiction; it would be to suppose that a man's will is
   contrary to itself, or that he wills contrary to what he himself wills.
   As you are not willing to come to Christ, and cannot make yourself
   willing, so you have no sincere desire to be willing; and therefore may
   most justly perish without a Saviour. There is no excuse at all for
   you; for say what you will about your inability, the seat of your blame
   lies in your perverse will, that is an enemy to the Saviour. It is in
   vain for you to tell of your want of power, as long as your will is
   found defective. If a man should hate you, and smite you in the face,
   but should tell you at the same time, that he hated you so much, that
   he could not help choosing and willing so to do, would you take it the
   more patiently for that? Would not your indignation be rather stirred
   up the more?

   2. If you would be willing if you could, that is no excuse, unless your
   willingness to be willing be sincere. That which is hypocritical, and
   does not come from the heart, but is merely forced, ought wholly to be
   set aside, as worthy of no consideration; because common sense teaches,
   that what is not hearty, but hypocritical, is indeed nothing, being
   only a show of what is not; but that which is good for nothing, ought
   to go for nothing. But if you set aside all that is not free, and call
   nothing a willingness, but a free hearty willingness, then see how the
   case stands, and whether or no you have not lost all your cause for
   standing out against the calls of the gospel. You say you would make
   yourself willing to accept if you could; but it is not from any good
   principle that you are willing for that. It is not from any free
   inclination, or true respect to Christ, or any love to your duty, or
   any spirit of obedience. It is not from the influence of any real
   respect, or tendency in your heart, towards any thing good, or from any
   other principle than such as is in the hearts of devils, and would make
   them have the same sort of willingness in the same circumstances It is
   therefore evident, that there can be no goodness in that would be
   willing to come to Christ: and that which has no goodness, cannot be an
   excuse for any badness. If there be no good in it, then it signifies
   nothing, and weighs nothing, when put into the scales to counterbalance
   that which is bad.

   Sinners therefore spend their time in foolish arguing and objecting,
   making much of that which is good for nothing, making those excuses
   that are not worth offering. It is in vain to keep making objections.
   You stand justly condemned. The blame lies at your door: Thrust it off
   from you as often as you will, it will return upon you. Sew fig-leaves
   as long as you will, your nakedness will appear. You continue wilfully
   and wickedly rejecting Jesus Christ, and will not have him for your
   Saviour, and therefore it is sottish madness in you to charge Christ
   with injustice that he does not save you.

   Here is the sin of unbelief! Thus the guilt of that great sin lies upon
   you! If you never had thus treated a Saviour, you might most justly
   have been damned to all eternity: it would but be exactly agreeable to
   your treatment of God. But besides this, when God, notwithstanding, has
   offered you his own dear Son, to save you from this endless misery you
   had deserved, and not only so, but to make you happy eternally in the
   enjoyment of himself, you have refused him, and would not have him for
   your Saviour, and still refuse to comply with the offers of the gospel;
   what can render any person more inexcusable? If you should now perish
   for ever, what can you have to say?

   Hereby the justice of God in your destruction appears in two respects:

   1. It is more abundantly manifest that it is just that you should be
   destroyed. Justice never appears so conspicuous as it does after
   refused and abused mercy. Justice in damnation appears abundantly the
   more clear and bright, after a wilful rejection of offered salvation.
   What can an offended prince do more than freely offer pardon to a
   condemned malefactor? And if he refuses to accept of it, will any one
   say that his execution is unjust?

   2. God's justice will appear in your greater destruction. Besides the
   guilt that you would have had if a Saviour never had been offered. You
   bring that great additional guilt upon you, of most ungratefully
   refusing offered deliverance. What more base and vile treatment of God
   can there be, than for you, when justly condemned to eternal misery,
   and ready to be executed, and God graciously sends his own Son, who
   comes and knocks at your door with a pardon in his hand, and not only a
   pardon, but a deed of eternal glory; I say, what can be worse, than for
   you, out of dislike and enmity against God and his Son, to refuse to
   accept those benefits at his hands? How justly may the anger of God be
   greatly incensed and increased by it! when a sinner thus ungratefully
   rejects mercy, his last error is worse than the first; this is more
   heinous than all his former rebellion, and may justly bring down more
   fearful wrath upon him.

   The heinousness of this sin of rejecting a Saviour especially appears
   in two things:

   1. The greatness of the benefits offered: which appears in the
   greatness of the deliverance, which is from inexpressible degrees of
   corruption and wickedness of heart and life, the least degree of which
   is infinitely evil; and from misery that is everlasting; and in the
   greatness and glory of the inheritance purchased and offered. Heb. ii.
   3. "How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation."

   2. The wonderfulness of the way in which these benefits are procured
   and offered. That God should lay help on his own Son, when our case was
   so deplorable that help could be had in no mere creature; and that he
   should undertake for us, and should come into the world, and take upon
   him our nature, and should not only appear in a low state of life, but
   should die such a death, and endure such torments and contempt for
   sinners while enemies, how wonderful is it! And what tongue or pen can
   set forth the greatness of the ingratitude, baseness, and perverseness
   there is in it, when a perishing sinner that is in the most extreme
   necessity of salvation, rejects it, after it is procured in such a way
   as this! That so glorious a person should be thus treated, and that
   when he comes on so gracious an errand! That he should stand so long
   offering himself and calling and inviting, as he has done to many of
   you, and all to no purpose, but all the while be set at nought! Surely
   you might justly be cast into hell without one more offer of a Saviour!
   yea, and thrust down into the lowest hell! Herein you have exceeded the
   very devils; for they never rejected the offers of such glorious mercy;
   no, nor of any mercy at all. This will be the distinguishing
   condemnation of gospel-sinners, John iii. 18. "He that believeth not,
   is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the
   only-begotten Son of God."--That outward smoothness of your carriage
   towards Christ, that appearance of respect to him in your looks, your
   speeches, and gestures, do not argue but that you set him at nought in
   your heart. There may be much of these outward shows of respect, and
   yet you be like Judas, that betrayed the Son of man with a kiss; and
   like those mockers that bowed the knee before him, and at the same time
   spit in his face.

   III. If God should for ever cast you off and destroy you, it would be
   agreeable to your treatment of others--It would be no other than what
   would be exactly answerable to your behaviour towards your
   fellow-creatures, that have the same human nature, and are naturally in
   the same circumstances with you, and that you ought to love as
   yourself. And that appears especially in two things.

   1. You have many of you been opposite in your spirit to the salvation
   of others. There are several ways that natural men manifest a spirit of
   opposition against the salvation of souls. It sometimes appears by a
   fear that their companions, acquaintance, and equals, will obtain
   mercy, and so become unspeakably happier than they. It is sometimes
   manifested by an uneasiness at the news of what others have hopefully
   obtained. It appears when persons envy others for it, and dislike them
   the more, and disrelish their talk, and avoid their company, and cannot
   bear to hear their religious discourse, and especially to receive
   warnings and counsels from them. And it oftentimes appears by their
   backwardness to entertain charitable thoughts of them, and by their
   being brought with difficulty to believe that they have obtained mercy,
   and a forwardness to listen to any thing that seems to contradict it.
   The devil hated to own Job's sincerity, Job i. 7, &c. and Job. ii. 3,
   4, 5. There appears very often much of this spirit of the devil in
   natural men. Sometimes they are ready to make a ridicule of others'
   pretended godliness: they speak of the ground of others' hopes, as the
   enemies of the Jews did of the wall that they built. Neh. iv. 3. "Now
   Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, That which they build, if
   a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone-wall." There are many
   that join with Sanballat and Tobiah, and are of the same spirit with
   them. There always was, and always will be, an enmity betwixt the seed
   of the serpent and the seed of the woman. It appeared in Cain, who
   hated his brother, because he was more acceptable to God than himself;
   and it appears still in these times, and in this place. There are many
   that are like the elder brother, who could not bear that the prodigal
   when he returned should be received with such joy and good
   entertainment, and was put into a fret by it, both against his brother
   that had returned, and his father that made him so welcome. Luke xv. .

   Thus have many of you been opposite to the salvation of others, who
   stand in as great necessity of it as you. You have been against their
   being delivered from everlasting misery, who can bear it no better than
   you; not because their salvation would do you any hurt, or their
   damnation help you, any otherwise than as it would gratify that vile
   spirit that is so much like the spirit of the devil, who, because he is
   miserable himself, is unwilling that others should be happy. How just
   therefore is it that God should be opposite to your salvation! If you
   have so little love or mercy in you as to begrudge your neighbour's
   salvation, whom you have no cause to hate, but the law of God and
   nature requires you to love, why is God bound to exercise such infinite
   love and mercy to you, as to save you at the price of his own blood?
   you, whom he is no way bound to love, but who have deserved his hatred
   a thousand and a thousand times? You are not willing that others should
   be converted, who have behaved themselves injuriously towards you; and
   yet, will you count it hard if God does not bestow converting grace
   upon you that have deserved ten thousand times as ill of God, as ever
   any of your neighbours have of you? You are opposite to God's showing
   mercy to those that you think have been vicious persons, and are very
   unworthy of such mercy. Is others' unworthiness a just reason why God
   should not bestow mercy on them? and yet will God be heard, if,
   notwithstanding all your unworthiness, and the abominableness of your
   spirit and practice in his sight, he does not show you mercy? You would
   have God bestow liberally on you, and upbraid not; but yet when he
   shows mercy to others, you are ready to upbraid as soon as you hear of
   it: you immediately are thinking with yourself how ill they have
   behaved themselves; and it may be your mouths on this occasion are
   open, enumerating and aggravating the sins they have been guilty of.
   You would have God bury all your faults, and wholly blot out all your
   transgressions; but yet if he bestows mercy on others, it may be you
   will take that occasion to rake up all their old faults that you can
   think of. You do not much reflect on and condemn yourself for your
   baseness and unjust spirit towards others, in your opposition to their
   salvation; you do not quarrel with yourself, and condemn yourself for
   this; but yet you in your heart will quarrel with God, and fret at his
   dispensations, because you think he seems opposite to showing mercy to
   you. One would think that the consideration of these things should for
   ever stop your mouth.

   2. Consider how you have promoted others' damnation. Many of you, by
   the bad examples you have set, by corrupting the minds of others, by
   your sinful conversation, by leading them into or strengthening them in
   sin, and by the mischief you have done in human society other ways that
   might be mentioned, have been guilty of those things that have tended
   to others' damnation. You have heretofore appeared on the side of sin
   and Satan, and have strengthened their interest, and have been many
   ways accessary to others' sins, have hardened their hearts, and thereby
   have done what has tended to the ruin of their souls.--Without doubt
   there are those here present who have been in a great measure the means
   of others' damnation. One man may really be a means of others'
   damnation as well as salvation. Christ charges the scribes and
   Pharisees with this, Matt. xxiii. 13. "Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven
   against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
   that are entering, to go in." We have no reason to think that this
   congregation has none in it who are cursed from day to day by poor
   souls that are roaring out in hell, whose damnation they have been the
   means of, or have greatly contributed to.-- There are many who
   contribute to their own children's damnation, by neglecting their
   education, by setting them bad examples, and bringing them up in sinful
   ways. They take some care of their bodies, but take little care of
   their poor souls; they provide for them bread to eat, but deny them the
   bread of life, that their famishing souls stand in need of. And are
   there no such parents here who have thus treated their children? If
   their children be not gone to hell, no thanks to them; it is not
   because they have not done what has tended to their destruction. Seeing
   therefore you have had no more regard to others' salvation, and have
   promoted their damnation, how justly might God leave you to perish
   yourself!

   IV. If God should eternally cast you off, it would but be agreeable to
   your own behaviour towards yourself; and that in two respects:

   1. In being so careless of your own salvation. You have refused to take
   care for your salvation, as God has counselled and commanded you from
   time to time; and why may not God neglect it, now you seek it of him?
   Is God obliged to be more careful of your happiness, than you are
   either of your own happiness or his glory? Is God bound to take that
   care for you, out of love to you, that you will not take for yourself,
   either from love to yourself, or regard to his authority? How long, and
   how greatly, have you neglected the welfare of your precious soul,
   refusing to take pains and deny yourself, or put yourself a little out
   of your way for your salvation, while God has been calling upon you!
   Neither your duty to God, nor love to your own soul, were enough to
   induce you to do little things for your own eternal welfare; and yet do
   you now expect that God should do great things, putting forth almighty
   power, and exercising infinite mercy for it? You was urged to take care
   for your salvation, and not to put it off. You was told that was the
   best time before you grew older, and that it might be, if you would put
   it off, God would not hear you afterwards; but yet you would not
   hearken; you would run the venture of it. Now how justly might God
   order it so, that it should be too late, leaving you to seek in vain!
   You was told, that you would repent of it if you delayed; but you would
   not hear: how justly therefore may God give you cause to repent of it,
   by refusing to show you mercy now! If God sees you going on in ways
   contrary to his commands and his glory, and requires you to forsake
   them, and tells you that they tend to the destruction of your own soul,
   and therefore counsels you to avoid them, and you refuse; how just
   would it be if God should be provoked by it, henceforward to be as
   careless of the good of your soul as you are yourself!

   2. You have not only neglected your salvation, but you have wilfully
   taken direct courses to undo yourself. You have gone on in those ways
   and practices which have directly tended to your damnation, and have
   been perverse and obstinate in it. You cannot plead ignorance: you had
   all the light set before you that you could desire. God told you that
   you was undoing yourself; but yet you would do it. He told you that the
   path you was going in led to destruction, and counselled you to avoid
   it; but you would not hearken. How justly therefore may God leave you
   to be undone! You have obstinately persisted to travel in the way that
   leads to hell for a long time, contrary to God's continual counsels and
   commands, till it may be at length you are got almost to your journey's
   end, and are come near to hell's gate, and so begin to be sensible of
   your danger and misery; and now account it unjust and hard if God will
   not deliver you! You have destroyed yourself, and destroyed yourself
   wilfully, contrary to God's repeated counsels, yea, and destroyed
   yourself in fighting against God. Now therefore, why do you blame any
   but yourself if you are destroyed? If you will undo yourself in
   opposing God, and while God opposes you by his calls and counsels, and,
   it may be too, by the convictions of his Spirit, what can you object
   against it, if God now leaves you to be undone? You would have your own
   way, and did not like that God should oppose you in it, and your way
   was to ruin your own soul; how just therefore is it, if, now at length,
   God ceases to oppose you, and falls in with you, and lets your soul be
   ruined; and as you would destroy yourself, so should put to his hand to
   destroy you too! The ways you went on in had a natural tendency to your
   misery: if you would drink poison in opposition to God, and in contempt
   of him and his advice, who can you blame but yourself if you are
   poisoned, and so perish? If you would run into the fire against all
   restraints both of God's mercy and authority, you must even blame
   yourself if you are burnt.

   Thus I have proposed some things to your consideration, which, if you
   are not exceeding blind, senseless, and perverse, will stop your mouth,
   and convince you that you stand justly condemned before God; and that
   he would in no wise deal hardly with you, but altogether justly, in
   denying you any mercy, and in refusing to hear your prayers, though you
   pray never so earnestly, and never so often, and continue in it never
   so long. God may utterly disregard your tears and moans, your heavy
   heart, your earnest desires, and great endeavours; and he may cast you
   into eternal destruction, without any regard to your welfare, denying
   you converting grace, and giving you over to Satan, and at last cast
   you into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, to be there to
   eternity, having no rest day or night, for ever glorifying his justice
   upon you in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the
   Lamb.

   Object. But here many may still object, (for I am sensible it is a hard
   thing to stop sinners' mouths,) "God shows mercy to others that have
   done these things as well as I, yea, that have done a great deal worse
   than I."

   Ans. 1. That does not prove that God is any way bound to show mercy to
   you, or them either. If God bestows it on others, he does not so
   because he is bound to bestow it: he might if he had pleased, with
   glorious justice, have denied it them. If God bestows it on some, that
   does not prove that he is bound to bestow it on any; and if he is bound
   to bestow it on none, then he is not bound to bestow it on you. God is
   in debt to none; and if he gives to some that he is not in debt to,
   because it is his pleasure, that does not bring him into debt to
   others. It alters not the case as to you, whether others have it, or
   have it not: you do not deserve damnation the less, than if mercy never
   had been bestowed on any at all. Matt. xx. 15. "Is thine eye evil,
   because mine is good?"

   2. If this objection be good, then the exercise of God's mercy is not
   in his own right, and his grace is not his own to give. That which God
   may not dispose of as he pleases, is not his own; for that which is
   one's own, is at his own disposal: but if it be not God's own, then he
   is not capable of making a gift or present of it to any one; it is
   impossible to give what is a debt.--What is it that you would make of
   God? Must the great God be tied up, that he must not use his own
   pleasure in bestowing his own gifts, but if he bestows them on one,
   must be looked upon obliged to bestow them on another? Is not God
   worthy to have the same right, with respect to the gifts of his grace,
   that a man has to his money or goods? Is it because God is not so
   great, and should be more in subjection than man, that this cannot be
   allowed him? If any of you see cause to show kindness to a neighbour,
   do all the rest of your neighbours come to you, and tell you, that you
   owe them so much as you have given to such a man? But this is the way
   that you deal with God, as though God were not worthy to have as
   absolute a property in his goods, as you have in yours.

   At this rate God cannot make a present of any thing; he has nothing of
   his own to bestow: if he has a mind to show peculiar favour to some, or
   to lay some particular persons under peculiar obligations to him, he
   cannot do it; because he has no special gift at his own disposal. If
   this be the case, why do you pray to God to bestow saving grace upon
   you? If God does not do fairly to deny it you, because he bestows it on
   others, then it is not worth your while to pray for it, but you may go
   and tell him that he has bestowed it on others as bad or worse than
   you, and so demand it of him as a debt. And at this rate persons never
   need to thank God for salvation, when it is bestowed; for what occasion
   is there to thank God for that which was not at his own disposal, and
   that he could not fairly have denied? The thing at bottom is, that men
   have low thoughts of God, and high thoughts of themselves; and
   therefore it is that they look upon God as having so little right, and
   they so much. Matt. xx. 15. "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
   with mine own?"

   3. God may justly show greater respect to others than to you, for you
   have shown greater respect to others than to God. You have rather
   chosen to offend God than men. God only shows a greater respect to
   others, who are by nature your equals, than to you; but you have shown
   a greater respect to those that are infinitely inferior to God than to
   him. You have shown a greater regard to wicked men than to God; you
   have honoured them more, loved them better, and adhered to them rather
   than to him. Yea, you have honoured the devil, in many respects, more
   than God: you have chosen his will and his interest, rather than God's
   will and his glory: you have chosen a little worldly self, rather than
   God: you have set more by a vile lust than by him: you have chosen
   these things, and rejected God. You have set your heart on these
   things, and cast God behind your back: and where is the injustice if
   God is pleased to show greater respect to others than to you, or if he
   chooses others and rejects you? You have shown great respect to vile
   and worthless things, and no respect to God's glory; and why may not
   God set his love on others, and have no respect to your happiness? You
   have shown great respect to others, and not to God, whom you are laid
   under infinite obligations to respect above all; and why may not God
   show respect to others, and not to you, who never have laid him under
   the least obligation?

   And will you not be ashamed, notwithstanding all these things, still to
   open your mouth, to object and cavil about the decrees of God, and
   other things that you cannot fully understand. Let the decrees of God
   be what they will, that alters not the case as to your liberty, any
   more than if God had only foreknown. And why is God to blame for
   decreeing things? Especially since he decrees nothing but good. How
   unbecoming an infinitely wise Being would it have been to have made a
   world, and let things run at random, without disposing events, or
   fore-ordering how they should come to pass? And what is that to you,
   how God has fore-ordered things, as long as your constant experience
   teaches you, that it does not hinder your doing what you choose to do.
   This you know, and your daily practice and behaviour amongst men
   declares that you are fully sensible of it, with respect to yourself
   and others. Still to object, because there are some things in God's
   dispensations above your understanding, is exceedingly unreasonable.
   Your own conscience charges you with great guilt, and with those things
   that have been mentioned, let the secret things of God be what they
   will. Your conscience charges you with those vile dispositions, and
   that base behaviour towards God, that you would at any time most highly
   resent in your neighbour towards you, and that not a whit the less for
   any concern those secret counsels and mysterious dispensations of God
   may have in the matter. It is in vain for you to exalt yourself against
   an infinitely great, and holy, and just God. If you continue in it, it
   will be to your eternal shame and confusion, when hereafter you shall
   see at whose door all the blame of your misery lies.

   I will finish what I have to say to natural men in the application of
   this doctrine, with a caution not to improve the doctrine to
   discouragement. For though it would be righteous in God for ever to
   cast you off, and destroy you, yet it would also be just in God to save
   you, in and through Christ, who has made complete satisfaction for all
   sin. Rom. iii. 25, 26. "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation,
   through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
   remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to
   declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just,
   and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus." Yea, God may,
   through this Mediator, not only justly, but honourably, show you mercy.
   The blood of Christ is so precious, that it is fully sufficient to pay
   the debt you have contracted, and perfectly to vindicate the Divine
   Majesty from all the dishonour cast upon it, by those many great sins
   of yours that have been mentioned. It was as great, and indeed a much
   greater thing, for Christ to die, than it would have been for you and
   all mankind to have burnt in hell to all eternity. Of such dignity and
   excellency is Christ in the eyes of God, that, seeing he has suffered
   so much for poor sinners, God is willing to be at peace with them,
   however vile and unworthy they have been, and on how many accounts
   soever the punishment would be just. So that you need not be at all
   discouraged from seeking mercy, for there is enough in Christ.

   Indeed it would not become the glory of God's majesty to show mercy to
   you, so sinful and vile a creature, for any thing that you have done;
   for such worthless and despicable things as your prayers, and other
   religious performances. It would be very dishonourable and unworthy of
   God so to do, and it is in vain to expect it. He will show mercy only
   on Christ's account, and that, according to his sovereign pleasure, on
   whom he pleases, when he pleases, and in what manner he pleases. You
   cannot bring him under obligation by your works; do what you will, he
   will not look on himself obliged. But if it be his pleasure, he can
   honourably show mercy through Christ to any sinner of you all, not one
   in this congregation excepted.--Therefore here is encouragement for you
   still to seek and wait, notwithstanding all your wickedness; agreeable
   to Samuel's speech to the children of Israel, when they were terrified
   with the thunder and rain that God sent, and when guilt stared them in
   the face, 1 Sam. xii. 20. "Fear not; ye have done all this wickedness;
   yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all
   your heart."

   I would conclude this discourse by putting the godly in mind of the
   freeness and wonderfulness of the grace of God towards them. For such
   were the same of you.--The case was just so with you as you have heard;
   you had such a wicked heart, you lived such a wicked life, and it would
   have been most just with God for ever to have cast you off: but he has
   had mercy upon you; he hath made his glorious grace appear in your
   everlasting salvation. You had no love to God; but yet he has exercised
   unspeakable love to you. You have contemned God, and set light by him;
   but so great a value has God's grace set on you and your happiness,
   that you have been redeemed at the price of the blood of his own Son.
   You chose to be with Satan in his service; but yet God hath made you a
   joint heir with Christ of his glory. You was ungrateful for past
   mercies; yet God not only continued those mercies, but bestowed
   unspeakably greater mercies upon you. You refused to hear when God
   called; yet God heard you when you called. You abused the infiniteness
   of God's mercy to encourage yourself in sin against him; yet God has
   manifested the infiniteness of that mercy, in the exercises of it
   towards you. You have rejected Christ, and set him at nought; and yet
   he is become your Saviour. You have neglected your own salvation; but
   God has not neglected it. You have destroyed yourself; but yet in God
   has been your help. God has magnified his free grace towards you, and
   not to others; because he has chosen you, and it hath pleased him to
   set his love upon you.

   O! what cause is here for praise! What obligations you are under to
   bless the Lord who hath dealt bountifully with you, and magnify his
   holy name! What cause for you to praise God in humility, to walk humbly
   before him. Ezek. xvi. 63. "That thou mayest remember and be
   confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame,
   when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou, saith the Lord God."
   You shall never open you mouth in boasting, or self-justification; but
   lie the lower before God for his mercy to you. You have reason, the
   more abundantly, to open your mouth in God's praises, that they may be
   continually in your mouth, both here and to all eternity, for his rich,
   unspeakable, and sovereign mercy to you, whereby he, and he alone, hath
   made you to differ from others.
     __________________________________________________________________

      DISCOURSE V.

   the excellency of christ.

   And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the
   tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and
   to loose the seven seals thereof. And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst
   of the throne, and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders,
   stood a Lamb as it had been slain--.

   The visions and revelations the apostle John had of the future events
   of God's providence, are here introduced with a vision of the book of
   God's decrees, by which those events were fore-ordained. This is
   represented (ver. 1.) as a book in the right hand of him who sat on the
   throne, "written within and on the back side, and sealed with seven
   seals." Books, in the form in which they were wont of old to be made,
   were broad leaves of parchment or paper, or something of that nature,
   joined together at one edge, and so rolled up together, and then
   sealed, or some way fastened together, to prevent their unfolding and
   opening. Hence we read of the roll of a book, Jer. xxxvi. 2. It seems
   to have been such a book that John had a vision of here; and therefore
   it is said to be "written within and on the back side," i. e. on the
   inside pages, and also on one of the outside pages, viz. that which was
   rolled in, in rolling the book up together. And it is said to be
   "sealed with seven seals," to signify that what was written in it was
   perfectly hidden and secret; or that God's decrees of future events are
   sealed, and shut up from all possibility of being discovered by
   creatures, till God is pleased to make them known. We find that seven
   is often used in Scripture as the number of perfection, to signify the
   superlative or most perfect degree of any thing; which probably arose
   from this, that on the seventh day God beheld the works of creation
   finished, and rested and rejoiced in them, as being complete and
   perfect.

   When John saw this book, he tells us, he Rev. v. 2-5. "saw a strong
   angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book,
   and to loose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven, nor in earth,
   neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look
   thereon." And that he wept much, because "no man was found worthy to
   open and read the book, neither to look thereon." And then tells us how
   his tears were dried up, viz. that "one of the elders said unto him,
   Weep not; Behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah hath prevailed," &c. as
   in the text. Though no man nor angel, nor any mere creature, was found
   either able to loose the seals, or worthy to be admitted to the
   privilege of reading the book; yet this was declared, for the comfort
   of this beloved disciple, that Christ was found both able and worthy.
   And we have an account in the succeeding chapters how he actually did
   it, opening the seals in order, first one, and then another, revealing
   what God had decreed should come to pass hereafter. And we have an
   account in this chapter, of his coming and taking the book out of the
   right hand of him that sat on the throne, and of the joyful praises
   that were sung to him in heaven and earth on that occasion.

   Many things might be observed in the words of the text; but it is to my
   present, purpose only to take notice of the NOT ENGLISH appellations
   here given to Christ.

   1. He is called the Lion. Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah. He
   seems to the Lion of the tribe of Judah, in allusion to what Jacob said
   in his blessing of the tribes on his death-bed; who, when he came to
   bless Judah, compares him to a lion, Gen. xlix. 9. "Judah is a lion's
   whelp; from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he
   couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?" And
   also to the standard of the camp of Judah in the wilderness, on which
   was displayed a lion, according to the ancient tradition of the Jews.
   It is much on account of the valiant acts of David that the tribe of
   Judah, of which David was, is in Jacob's prophetical blessing compared
   to a lion; but more especially with an eye to Jesus Christ, who also
   was of that tribe, and was descended of David, and is in our text
   called "the Root of David;" and therefore Christ is here called "the
   Lion of the tribe of Judah."

   2. He is called a Lamb. John was told of a Lion that had prevailed to
   open the book, and probably expected to see a lion in his vision; but
   while he is expecting, behold a Lamb appears to open the book, an
   exceeding diverse kind of creature from a lion. A lion is a devourer,
   one that is wont to make terrible slaughter of others; and no creature
   more easily falls a prey to him than a lamb. And Christ is here
   represented not only as a Lamb, a creature very liable to be slain, but
   a "Lamb as it had been slain," that is, with the marks of its deadly
   wounds appearing on it.

   That which I would observe from the words, for the subject of my
   present discourse, is this, viz.--

   "There is an admirable conjunction of diverse excellencies in Jesus
   Christ."

   The lion and the lamb, though very diverse kinds of creatures, yet have
   each their peculiar excellencies. The lion excels in strength, and in
   the majesty of his appearance and voice: the lamb excels in meekness
   and patience, besides the excellent nature of the creature as good for
   food, and yielding that which is fit for our clothing, and being
   suitable to be offered in sacrifice to God. But we see that Christ is
   in the text compared to both; because the diverse excellencies of both
   wonderfully meet in him,--In handling this subject I would,

   First, Show wherein there is an admirable conjunction of diverse
   excellencies in Christ.

   Secondly, How this admirable conjunction of excellencies appear in
   Christ's acts.

   And then make application.

   First, I would show wherein there is an admirable conjunction of
   diverse excellencies in Jesus Christ. Which appears in three things:

   I. There is a conjunction of such excellencies in Christ, as, in our
   manner of conceiving, are very diverse one from another.

   II. There is in him a conjunction of such really diverse excellencies,
   as otherwise would have seemed to us utterly incompatible in the same
   subject.

   III. Such diverse excellencies are exercised in him towards men that
   otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised towards the same
   object.

   I. There is a conjunction of such excellencies in Christ, as, in our
   manner of conceiving, are very diverse one from another. Such are the
   various divine perfections and excellencies that Christ is possessed
   of. Christ is a divine person; and therefore has all the attributes of
   God. The difference between these is chiefly relative, and in our
   manner of conceiving them. And those which, in this sense, are most
   diverse, meet in the person of Christ. I shall mention two instances

   1. There do meet in Jesus Christ infinite highness and infinite
   condescension. Christ, as he is God, is infinitely great and high above
   all. He is higher than the kings of the earth, for he is King of kings,
   and Lord of lords. He is higher than the heavens, and higher than the
   highest angels of heaven. So great is he, that all men, all kings and
   princes, are as worms of the dust before him; all nations are as the
   drop of the bucket, and the light dust of the balance; yea, and angels
   themselves are as nothing before him. He is so high, that he is
   infinitely above any need of us; above our reach, that we cannot be
   profitable to him; and above our conceptions, that we cannot comprehend
   him. Prov. xxx. 4. "What is his name, and what is his Son's name, if
   thou canst tell?" Our understandings, if we stretch them never so far,
   cannot reach up to his divine glory. Job xi. 8. "It is high as heaven,
   what canst thou do?" Christ is the Creator and great Possessor of
   heaven and earth. He is sovereign Lord of all. He rules over the whole
   universe, and doth whatsoever pleaseth him. His knowledge is without
   bound. His wisdom is perfect, and what none can circumvent. His power
   is infinite, and none can resist him. His riches are immense and
   inexhaustible. His majesty is infinitely awful.

   And yet he is one of infinite condescension. None are so low or
   inferior, but Christ's condescension is sufficient to take a gracious
   notice of them. He condescends not only to the angels, humbling himself
   to behold the things that are done in heaven, but he also condescends
   to such poor creatures as men; and that not only so as to take notice
   of princes and great men, but of those that are of meanest rank and
   degree, "the poor of the world," James ii. 5. Such as are commonly
   despised by their fellow-creatures, Christ does not despise. 1 Cor. i.
   28. "Base things of the world, and things that are despised, hath God
   chosen." Christ condescends to take notice of beggars, Luke xvi. 22.
   and people of the most despised nations. In Christ Jesus is neither
   "Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free," Col. iii. 11. He that is thus
   high, condescends to take a gracious notice of little children, Matt.
   xix. 14. "Suffer little children to come unto me." Yea, which is more,
   his condescension is sufficient to take a gracious notice of the most
   unworthy, sinful creatures, those that have no good deservings, and
   those that have infinite ill-deservings.

   Yea, so great is his condescension, that it is not only sufficient to
   take some gracious notice of such as these, but sufficient for every
   thing that is an act of condescension. His condescension is great
   enough to become their friend; to become their companion, to unite
   their souls to him in spiritual marriage. It is enough to take their
   nature upon him, to become one of them, that he may be one with them.
   Yea, it is great enough to abase himself yet lower for them, even to
   expose himself to shame and spitting; yea, to yield up himself to an
   ignominious death for them. And what act of condescension can be
   conceived of greater? Yet such an act as this, has his condescension
   yielded to, for those that are so low and mean, despicable and
   unworthy!

   Such a conjunction of infinite highness and low condescension, in the
   same person, is admirable. We see, by manifold instances, what a
   tendency a high station has in men, to make them to be of a quite
   contrary disposition. If one worm be a little exalted above another, by
   having more dust, or a bigger dunghill, how much does he make of
   himself! What a distance does he keep from those that are below him!
   And a little condescension is what he expects should be made much of,
   and greatly acknowledged. Christ condescends to wash our feet; but how
   would great men, (or rather the bigger worms,) account themselves
   debased by acts of far less condescension!

   2. There meet in Jesus Christ, infinite justice and infinite grace. As
   Christ is a divine person, he is infinitely holy and just; hating sin,
   and disposed to execute condign punishment for sin. He is the Judge of
   the world, and the infinitely just Judge of it, and will not at all
   acquit the wicked, or by any means clear the guilty.

   And yet he is infinitely gracious and merciful. Though his justice be
   so strict with respect to all sin, and every breach of the law, yet he
   has grace sufficient for every sinner, and even the chief of sinners.
   And it is not only sufficient for the most unworthy to show them mercy,
   and bestow some good upon them, but to bestow the greatest good; yea,
   it is sufficient to bestow all good upon them, and to do all things for
   them. There is no benefit or blessing that they can receive, so great
   but the grace of Christ is sufficient to bestow it on the greatest
   sinner that ever lived. And not only so, but so great is his grace,
   that nothing is too much as the means of this good. It is sufficient
   not only to do great things, but also to suffer in order to it; and not
   only to suffer, but to suffer most extremely even unto death, the most
   terrible of natural evils; and not only death, but the most ignominious
   and tormenting, and every way the most terrible that men could inflict;
   yea, and greater sufferings than men could inflict, who could only
   torment the body. He had sufferings in his soul, that were the more
   immediate fruits of the wrath of God against the sins of those he
   undertakes for.

   II. There do meet in the person of Christ such really diverse
   excellencies, which otherwise would have been thought utterly
   incompatible in the same subject; such as are conjoined in no other
   person whatever, either divine, human, or angelical; and such as
   neither men nor angels would ever have imagined could have met together
   in the same person, had it not been seen in the person of Christ. I
   would give some instances.

   1. In the person of Christ do meet together infinite glory and lowest
   humility. Infinite glory, and the virtue of humility, meet in no other
   person but Christ. They meet in no created person; for no created
   person has infinite glory; and they meet in no other divine person but
   Christ. For though the divine nature be infinitely abhorrent to pride,
   yet humility is not properly predicable of God the Father, and the Holy
   Ghost, that exists only in the divine nature; because it is proper
   excellency only of a created nature; for it consists radically in a
   sense of a comparative lowness and littleness before God, or the great
   distance between God and the subject of this virtue; but it would be a
   contradiction to suppose any such thing in God.

   But in Jesus Christ, who is both God and man, those two diverse
   excellencies are sweetly united. He is a person infinitely exalted in
   glory and dignity. Phil. ii. 6. "Being in the form of God, he thought
   it not robbery to be equal with God." There is equal honour due to him
   with the Father. John v. 23.--"That all men should honour the Son, even
   as they honour the Father." God himself says to him, "Thy throne, O
   God, is for ever and ever," Heb. i. 8. And there is the same supreme
   respect and divine worship paid to him by the angels of heaven, as to
   God the Father, Heb. i. 6. "Let all the angels of God worship him."

   But however he is thus above all, yet he is lowest of all in humility.
   There never was so great an instance of this virtue among either men or
   angels, as Jesus. None ever was so sensible of the distance between God
   and him, or had a heart so lowly before God, as the man Christ Jesus.
   Matt. xi. 29. What a wonderful spirit of humility appeared in him, when
   he was here upon earth, in all his behaviour! In his contentment in his
   mean outward condition, contentedly living in the family of Joseph the
   carpenter, and Mary his mother, for thirty years together, and
   afterwards choosing outward meanness, poverty, and contempt, rather
   than earthly greatness; in his washing his disciples' feet, and in all
   his speeches and deportment towards them; in his cheerfully sustaining
   the form of a servant through his whole life, and submitting to such
   immense humiliation at death!

   2. In the person of Christ do meet together infinite majesty and
   transcendent meekness. These again are two qualifications that meet
   together in no other person but Christ. Meekness, properly so called,
   is a virtue proper only to the creature: we scarcely ever find meekness
   mentioned as a divine attribute in Scripture; at least not in the New
   Testament; for thereby seems to be signified, a calmness and quietness
   of spirit, arising from humility in mutable beings that are naturally
   liable to be put into a ruffle by the assaults of a tempestuous and
   injurious world. But Christ being both God and man, hath both infinite
   majesty and superlative meekness.

   Christ was a person of infinite majesty. It is he that is spoken of,
   Psalm xlv. 3. "Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy
   glory and thy majesty." It is he that is mighty, that rideth on the
   heavens, and his excellency on the sky. It is he that is terrible out
   of his holy places; who is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea,
   than the mighty waves of the sea: before whom a fire goeth, and burneth
   up his enemies round about; at whose presence the earth quakes, and the
   hills melt; who sitteth on the circle of the earth, and all the
   inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; who rebukes the sea, and
   maketh it dry, and drieth up the rivers; whose eyes are as a flame of
   fire; from whose presence, and from the glory of whose power, the
   wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction; who is the
   blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who
   hath heaven for his throne, and the earth for his footstool, and is the
   high and lofty One who inhabits eternity, whose kingdom is an
   everlasting kingdom, and of whose dominion there is no end.

   And yet he was the most marvellous instance of meekness, and humble
   quietness of spirit, that ever was; agreeable to the prophecies of him,
   Matt. xxi. 4, 5. "All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which
   was spoken by the prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
   Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a
   colt the foal of an ass." And, agreeable to what Christ declares of
   himself, Matt. xi. 29. "I am meek and lowly in heart." And agreeable to
   what was manifest in his behaviour: for there never was such an
   instance seen on earth, of a meek behaviour, under injuries and
   reproaches, and towards enemies; who, when he was reviled, reviled not
   again. He had a wonderful spirit of forgiveness, was ready to forgive
   his worst enemies, and prayed for them with fervent and effectual
   prayers. With what meekness did he appear in the ring of soldiers that
   were contemning and mocking him; he was silent, and opened not his
   mouth, but went as a lamb to the slaughter. Thus is Christ a Lion in
   majesty, and a Lamb in meekness.

   3. There meet in the person of Christ the deepest reverence towards God
   and equality with God. Christ, when on earth, appeared full of holy
   reverence towards the Father. He paid the most reverential worship to
   him, praying to him with postures of reverence. Thus we read of his
   "kneeling down and praying," Luke xxii. 41. This became Christ, as one
   who had taken on him the human nature; but at the same time he existed
   in the divine nature; whereby his person was in all respects equal to
   the person of the Father. God the Father hath no attribute or
   perfection that the Son hath not, in equal degree, and equal glory.
   These things meet in no other person but Jesus Christ.

   4. There are conjoined in the person of Christ infinite worthiness of
   good, and the greatest patience under sufferings of evil. He was
   perfectly innocent, and deserved no suffering. He deserved nothing from
   God by any guilt of his own; and he deserved no ill from men. Yea, he
   was not only harmless and undeserving of suffering, but he was
   infinitely worthy; worthy of the infinite love of the Father, worthy of
   infinite and eternal happiness, and infinitely worthy of all possible
   esteem, love, and service from all men. And yet he was perfectly
   patient under the greatest sufferings that ever were endured in this
   world. Heb. xii. 2. "He endured the cross, despising the shame." He
   suffered not from his Father for his faults, but ours; and he suffered
   from men not for his faults, but for those things on account of which
   he was infinitely worthy of their love and honour; which made his
   patience the more wonderful and the more glorious. 1 Pet. ii. 20, &c.
   "For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall
   take it patiently, but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take
   it patiently; this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye
   called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
   that we should follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile
   found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
   suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth
   righteously: who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the
   tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness: by
   whose stripes ye were healed." There is no such conjunction of
   innocence, worthiness, and patience under sufferings, as in the person
   of Christ.

   5. In the person of Christ are conjoined an exceeding spirit of
   obedience, with supreme dominion over heaven and earth. Christ is the
   Lord of all things in two respects: he is so, as God-man and Mediator;
   and thus his dominion is appointed, and given him of the Father. Having
   it by delegation from God, he is as it were the Father's vicegerent.
   But he is Lord of all things in another respect, viz. as he is (by his
   original nature) God; and so he is by natural right the Lord of all,
   and supreme over all as much as the Father. Thus, he has dominion over
   the world, not by delegation, but in his own right. He is not an under
   God, as the Arians suppose, but, to all intents and purposes, supreme
   God.

   And yet in the same person is found the greatest spirit of obedience to
   the commands and laws of God that ever was in the universe; which was
   manifest in his obedience here in this world. John xiv. 31. "As the
   Father gave me commandment, even so I do." John xv. 10. "even as I have
   kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love." The greatness of
   his obedience appears in its perfection, and in his obeying commands of
   such exceeding difficulty. Never any one received commands from God of
   such difficulty, and that were so great a trial of obedience, as Jesus
   Christ. One of God's commands to him was, that he should yield himself
   to those dreadful sufferings that he underwent. See John x. 18. "No man
   taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself."--" This commandment
   received I of my Father." And Christ was thoroughly obedient to this
   command of God. Heb. v. 8. "Though he were a Son, yet he learned
   obedience by the things that he suffered." Philip. ii. 8. "He humbled
   himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross."
   Never was there such an instance of obedience in man or angel as this,
   though he was at the same time supreme Lord of both angels and men.

   6. In the person of Christ are conjoined absolute sovereignty and
   perfect resignation. This is another unparalleled conjunction. Christ,
   as he is God, is the absolute sovereign of the world; the sovereign
   disposer of all events. The decrees of God are all his sovereign
   decrees; and the work of creation, and all God's works of providence,
   are his sovereign works. It is he that worketh all things according to
   the counsel of his own will. Col. i. 16, 17. "By him, and through him,
   and to him, are all things.". John v. 17. "The Father worketh hitherto,
   and I work." Matt. viii. 3. "I will, be thou clean."

   But yet Christ was the most wonderful instance of resignation that ever
   appeared in the world. He was absolutely and perfectly resigned when he
   had a near and immediate prospect of his terrible sufferings, and the
   dreadful cup that he was to drink. The idea and expectation of this
   made his soul exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and put him into
   such an agony, that his sweat was as it were great drops or clots of
   blood, falling down to the ground. But in such circumstances he was
   wholly resigned to the will of God. Matt. xxvi. 39. "O my Father, if it
   be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will,
   but as thou wilt." Verse 42. "O my Father, if this cup may not pass
   from me, except I drink it, thy will be done."

   7. In Christ do meet together self-sufficiency, and an entire trust and
   reliance on God; which is another conjunction peculiar to the person of
   Christ. As he is a divine person, he is self-sufficient, standing in
   need of nothing. All creatures are dependent on him, but he is
   dependent on none, but is absolutely independent. His proceeding from
   the Father, in his eternal generation or filiation, argues no proper
   dependence on the will of the Father; for that proceeding was natural
   and necessary, and not arbitrary. But yet Christ entirely trusted in
   God: his enemies say that of him, "He trusted in God that he would
   deliver him," Matt. xxvii. 43. And the apostle testifies, 1 Pet. ii.
   23. "That he committed himself to God."

   III. Such diverse excellencies are expressed in him towards men, that
   otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised towards the same
   object; as particularly these three, justice, mercy, and truth. The
   same that are mentioned Psalm lxxxv. 10. "Mercy and truth are met
   together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other." The strict
   justice of God, and even his revenging justice, and that against the
   sins of men, never was so gloriously manifested as in Christ. He
   manifested an infinite regard to the attribute of God's justice, in
   that, when he had a mind to save sinners, he was willing to undergo
   such extreme sufferings, rather than that their salvation should be to
   the injury of the honour of that attribute. And as he is the Judge of
   the world, he doth himself exercise strict justice; he will not clear
   the guilty, nor at all acquit the wicked in judgment. Yet how
   wonderfully is infinite mercy towards sinners displayed in him! And
   what glorious and ineffable grace and love have been and are exercised
   by him, towards sinful men! Though he be the just Judge of a sinful
   world, yet he is also the Saviour of the world. Though he be a
   consuming fire to sin, yet he is the light and life of sinners. Rom.
   iii. 25, 26 "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, through
   faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
   sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to declare, I say,
   at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
   justifier of him which believeth in Jesus."

   So the immutable truth of God, in the threatenings of his law against
   the sins of men, was never so manifested as it is in Jesus Christ; for
   there never was any other so great a trial of the unalterableness of
   the truth of God in those threatenings, as when sin came to be imputed
   to his own Son. And then in Christ has been seen already an actual
   complete accomplishment of those threatenings, which never has been nor
   will be seen in any other instance; because the eternity that will be
   taken up in fulfilling those threatenings on others, never will be
   finished. Christ manifested an infinite regard to this truth of God in
   his sufferings. And, in his judging the world, he makes the covenant of
   works, that contains those dreadful threatenings, his rule of judgment.
   He will see to it, that it is not infringed in the least jot or tittle:
   he will do nothing contrary to the threatenings of the law, and their
   complete fulfilment. And yet in him we have many great and precious
   promises, promises of perfect deliverance from the penalty of the law.
   And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life.
   And in him are all the promises of God, yea, and Amen.

   Having thus shown wherein there is an admirable conjunction of
   excellencies in Jesus Christ, I now proceed,

   Secondly, To show how this admirable conjunction of excellencies
   appears in Christ's acts.

   1. It appears in what Christ did in taking on him our nature. In this
   act, his infinite condescension wonderfully appeared, that he who was
   God should become man; that the word should be made flesh, and should
   take on him a nature infinitely below his original nature! And it
   appears yet more remarkably in the low circumstances of his
   incarnation: he was conceived in the womb of a poor young woman, whose
   poverty appeared in this, when she came to offer sacrifices of her
   purification, she brought what was allowed of in the law only in case
   of poverty; as Luke ii. 24. "According to what is said in the law of
   the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons." This was
   allowed only in case the person was so poor that she was not able to
   offer a lamb. Lev. xii. 8.

   And though his infinite condescension thus appeared in the manner of
   his incarnation, yet his divine dignity also appeared in it; for though
   he was conceived in the womb of a poor virgin, yet he was conceived
   there by the power of the Holy Ghost. And his divine dignity also
   appeared in the holiness of his conception and birth. Though he was
   conceived in the womb of one of the corrupt race of mankind, yet he was
   conceived and born without sin; as the angel said to the blessed
   Virgin, Luke i. 35. "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
   of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing
   which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God."

   His infinite condescension marvellously appeared in the manner of his
   birth. He was brought forth in a stable, because there was no room for
   them in the inn. The inn was taken up by others, that were looked upon
   as persons of greater account. The blessed Virgin, being poor and
   despised, was turned or shut out. Though she was in such necessitous
   circumstances, yet those that counted themselves her betters would not
   give place to her; and therefore, in the time of her travail, she was
   forced to betake herself to a stable; and when the child was born, it
   was wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and laid in a manger. There Christ
   lay a little infant; and there he eminently appeared as a lamb. But yet
   this feeble infant, born thus in a stable, and laid in a manger, was
   born to conquer and triumph over Satan, that roaring lion. He came to
   subdue the mighty powers of darkness, and make a show of them openly;
   and so to restore peace on earth, and to manifest God's good-will
   towards men, and to bring glory to God in the highest; according as the
   end of his birth was declared by the joyful songs of the glorious hosts
   of angels appearing to the shepherds at the same time that the infant
   lay in the manger; whereby his divine dignity was manifested.

   II. This admirable conjunction of excellencies appears in the acts and
   various passages of Christ's life. Though Christ dwelt in mean outward
   circumstances, whereby his condescension and humility especially
   appeared, and his majesty was veiled; yet his divine dignity and glory
   did in many of his acts shine through the veil, and it illustriously
   appeared, that he was not only the Son of man, but the great God.

   Thus, in the circumstances of his infancy, his outward meanness
   appeared; yet there was something then to show forth his divine
   dignity, in the wise men's being stirred up to come from the east to
   give honour to him, their being led by a miraculous star, and coming
   and falling down and worshipping him, and presenting him with gold,
   frankincense, and myrrh. His humility and meekness wonderfully appeared
   in his subjection to his mother and reputed father when he was a child.
   Herein he appeared as a lamb. But his divine glory broke forth and
   shone when, at twelve years old, he disputed with doctors in the
   temple. In that he appeared, in some measure, as the Lion of the tribe
   of Judah.

   And so, after he entered on his public ministry, his marvellous
   humility and meekness was manifested in his choosing to appear in such
   mean outward circumstances; and in being contented in them, when he was
   so poor that he had not where to lay his head, and depended on the
   charity of some of his followers for his subsistence; as appears by
   Luke viii. at the beginning. How meek, condescending, and familiar his
   treatment of his disciples; his discourses with them, treating them as
   a father his children; yea, as friends and companions. How patient,
   bearing such affliction and reproach, and so many injuries from the
   scribes and Pharisees, and others. In these things he appeared as a
   Lamb. And yet he at the same time did in many ways show forth his
   divine majesty and glory, particularly in the miracles he wrought,
   which were evidently divine works, and manifested omnipotent power, and
   so declared him to be the Lion of the tribe of Judah. His wonderful and
   miraculous works plainly showed him to be the God of nature; in that it
   appeared by them that he had all nature in his hands, and could lay an
   arrest upon it, and stop and change its course as he pleased. In
   healing the sick, and opening the eyes of the blind, and unstopping the
   ears of the deaf, and healing the lame; he showed that he was the God
   that framed the eye, and created the ear, and was the author of the
   frame of man's body. By the dead's rising at his command, it appeared
   that he was the author and fountain of life, and that "God the Lord, to
   whom belong the issues from death." By his walking on the sea in a
   storm, when the waves were raised, he showed himself to be that God
   spoken of in Job ix. 8. "That treadeth on the waves of the sea." By his
   stilling the storm, and calming the rage of the sea, by his powerful
   command, saying, "Peace, be still," he showed that he has the command
   of the universe, and that he is that God who brings things to pass by
   the word of his power, who speaks and it is done, who commands and it
   stands fast; Psalm lxv. 7. "Who stilleth the noise of the seas, the
   noise of their waves." And Psalm cvii. 29. "That maketh the storm a
   calm, so that the waves thereof are still." And Psalm lxxxix. 8, 9. "O
   Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy
   faithfulness round about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when
   the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them." Christ, by casting out
   devils, remarkably appeared as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and
   showed that he was stronger than the roaring lion, that seeks whom he
   may devour. He commanded them to come out, and they were forced to
   obey. They were terribly afraid of him; they fall down before him, and
   beseech him not to torment them. He forces a whole legion of them to
   forsake their hold, by his powerful word; and they could not so much as
   enter into the swine without his leave. He showed the glory of his
   omniscience, by telling the thoughts of men; as we have often an
   account. Herein he appeared to be that God spoken of, Amos iv. 13.
   "That declareth unto man what is his thought." Thus, in the midst of
   his meanness and humiliation, his divine glory appeared in his
   miracles, John ii. 11. "This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
   Galilee, and manifested forth his glory."

   And though Christ ordinarily appeared without outward glory, and in
   great obscurity, yet at a certain time he threw off the veil, and
   appeared in his divine majesty, so far as it could be outwardly
   manifested to men in this frail state, when he was transfigured in the
   mount. The apostle Peter, 2 Pet. i. 16, 17. was an "eye-witness of his
   majesty, when he received from God the Father honour and glory, when
   there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my
   beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; which voice that came from
   heaven they heard, when they were with him in the holy mount."

   And at the same time that Christ was wont to appear in such meekness,
   condescension, and humility, in his familiar discourses with his
   disciples, appearing therein as the Lamb of God; he was also wont to
   appear as The Lion of the tribe of Judah, with divine authority and
   majesty, in his so sharply rebuking the scribes and Pharisees, and
   other hypocrites.

   III. This admirable conjunction of excellencies remarkably appears in
   his offering up himself a sacrifice for sinners in his last sufferings.
   As this was the greatest thing in all the works of redemption, the
   greatest act of Christ in that work; so in this act especially does
   there appear that admirable conjunction of excellencies that has been
   spoken of. Christ never so much appeared as a lamb, as when he was
   slain: "He came like a lamb to the slaughter," Isaiah liii. 7. Then he
   was offered up to God as a lamb without blemish, and without spot: then
   especially did he appear to be the anti-type of the lamb of the
   passover: 1 Cor. v. 7. "Christ our Passover sacrificed for us." And yet
   in that act he did in an especial manner appear as "the Lion of the
   tribe of Judah;" yea, in this above all other acts, in many respects,
   as may appear in the following things.

   1. Then was Christ in the greatest degree of his humiliation, and yet
   by that, above all other things, his divine glory appears. Christ's
   humiliation was great, in being born in such a low condition, of a poor
   virgin, and in a stable. His humiliation was great, in being subject to
   Joseph the carpenter, and Mary his mother, and afterwards living in
   poverty, so as not to have where to lay his head; and in suffering such
   manifold and bitter reproaches as he suffered, while he went about
   preaching and working miracles. But his humiliation was never so great
   as it was in his last sufferings, beginning with his agony in the
   garden, till he expired on the cross. Never was he subject to such
   ignominy as then; never did he suffer so much pain in his body, or so
   much sorrow in his soul; never was he in so great an exercise of his
   condescension, humility, meekness, and patience, as he was in these
   last sufferings; never was his divine glory and majesty covered with so
   thick and dark a veil; never did he so empty himself and make himself
   of no reputation, as at this time. And yet, never was his divine glory
   so manifested, by any act of his, as in yielding himself up to these
   sufferings. When the fruit of it came to appear, and the mystery and
   ends of it to be unfolded in its issue, then did the glory of it
   appear; then did it appear as the most glorious act of Christ that ever
   he exercised towards the creature. This act of his is celebrated by the
   angels and hosts of heaven with peculiar praises, as that which is
   above all others glorious, as you may see in the context, Rev. v. 9-12.
   "And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book,
   and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed
   us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
   and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we
   shall reign on the earth. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many
   angels round about the throne, and the beasts, and the elders: and the
   number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
   thousands; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain,
   to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and
   glory, and blessing."

   2. He never in any act gave so great a manifestation of love to God,
   and yet never so manifested his love to those that were enemies to God,
   as in that act. Christ never did any thing whereby his love to the
   Father was so eminently manifested, as in his laying down his life,
   under such inexpressible sufferings, in obedience to his command, and
   for the vindication of the honour of his authority and majesty; nor did
   ever any mere creature give such a testimony of love to God as that
   was. And yet this was the greatest expression of his love to sinful men
   who were enemies to God; Rom. v. 10. "When we were enemies, we were
   reconciled to God, by the death of his Son." The greatness of Christ's
   love to such, appears in nothing so much as in its being dying love.
   That blood of Christ which fell in great drops to the ground, in his
   agony, was shed from love to God's enemies, and his own. That shame and
   spitting, that torment of body, and that exceeding sorrow, even unto
   death, which he endured in his soul, was what he underwent from love to
   rebels against God, to save them from hell, and to purchase for them
   eternal glory. Never did Christ so eminently show his regard to God's
   honour, as in offering up himself a victim to justice. And yet in this
   above all, he manifested his love to them who dishonoured God, so as to
   bring such guilt on themselves, that nothing less than his blood could
   atone for it.

   3. Christ never so eminently appeared for divine justice, and yet never
   suffered so much from divine justice, as when he offered up himself a
   sacrifice for our sins. In Christ's great sufferings, did his infinite
   regard to the honour of God's justice distinguishingly appear; for it
   was from regard to that that he thus humbled himself. And yet in these
   sufferings, Christ was the mark of the vindictive expressions of that
   very justice of God. Revenging justice then spent all its force upon
   him, on account of our guilt; which made him sweat blood, and cry out
   upon the cross, and probably rent his vitals--broke his heart, the
   fountain of blood, or some other blood vessels--and by the violent
   fermentation turned his blood to water. For the blood and water that
   issued out of his side, when pierced by the spear, seems to have been
   extravasated blood; and so there might be a kind of literal fulfilment
   of Psalm xxii. 14. "I am poured out like water, and all my bones are
   out of joint: my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my
   bowels." And this was the way and means by which Christ stood up for
   the honour of God's justice, viz. by thus suffering its terrible
   executions. For when he had undertaken for sinners, and had substituted
   himself in their room, divine justice could have its due honour no
   other way than by his suffering its revenges.--In this the diverse
   excellencies that met in the person of Christ appeared, viz. his
   infinite regard to God's justice, and such love to those that have
   exposed themselves to it, as induced him thus to yield himself a
   sacrifice to it.

   4. Christ's holiness never so illustriously shone forth as it did in
   his last sufferings; and yet he never was to such a degree treated as
   guilty. Christ's holiness never had such a trial as it had then; and
   therefore never had so great a manifestation. When it was tried in this
   furnace, it came forth as gold, or as silver purified seven times. His
   holiness then above all appeared in his stedfast pursuit of the honour
   of God, and in his obedience to him. For his yielding himself unto
   death was transcendently the greatest act of obedience that ever was
   paid to God by any one since the foundation of the world.

   And yet then Christ was in the greatest degree treated as a wicked
   person would have been. He was apprehended and bound as a malefactor.
   His accusers represented him as a most wicked wretch. In his sufferings
   before his crucifixion, he was treated as if he had been the worst and
   vilest of mankind; and then, he was put to a kind of death, that none
   but the worst sort of malefactors were wont to suffer, those that were
   most abject in their persons, and guilty of the blackest crimes. And he
   suffered as though guilty from God himself, by reason of our guilt
   imputed to him; for he who knew no sin, was made sin for us; he was
   made subject to wrath, as if he had been sinful himself. He was made a
   curse for us.

   Christ never so greatly manifested his hatred of sin, as against God,
   as in his dying to take away the dishonour that sin had done to God;
   and yet never was he to such a degree subject to the terrible effects
   of God's hatred of sin, and wrath against it, as he was then. In this
   appears those diverse excellencies meeting in Christ, viz. love to God,
   and grace to sinners.

   5. He never was so dealt with, as unworthy, as in his last sufferings;
   and yet it is chiefly on account of them that he is accounted worthy.
   He was therein dealt with as if he had not been worthy to live: they
   cry out, "Away with him! away with him! Crucify him." John xix. 15. And
   they prefer Barabbas before him. And he suffered from the Father, as
   one whose demerits were infinite, by reason of our demerits that were
   laid upon him. And yet it was especially by that act of his subjecting
   himself to those sufferings, that he merited, and on the account of
   which chiefly he was accounted worthy of the glory of his exaltation.
   Philip. ii. 8, 9. "He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death;
   wherefore God hath highly exalted him." And we see that it is on this
   account chiefly, that he is extolled as worthy by saints and angels in
   the context; Rev. v. 12. "Worthy," say they," is the Lamb that was
   slain." This shows an admirable conjunction in him of infinite dignity,
   and infinite condescension and love to the infinitely unworthy.

   6. Christ in his last sufferings suffered most extremely from those
   towards whom he was then manifesting his greatest act of love. He never
   suffered so much from his Father, (though not from any hatred to him,
   but from hatred to our sins,) for he then forsook him, or took away the
   comforts of his presence; and then "it pleased the Lord to bruise him,
   and put him to grief," as Isaiah liii. 10. And yet never gave so great
   a manifestation of love to God as then, as has been already observed.
   So Christ never suffered so much from the hands of men as he did then;
   and yet never was in so high an exercise of love to men. He never was
   so ill treated by his disciples; who were so unconcerned about his
   sufferings, that they would not watch with him one hour, in his agony;
   and when he was apprehended, all forsook him and fled, except Peter,
   who denied him with oaths and curses. And yet then he was suffering,
   shedding his blood, and pouring out his soul unto death for them. Yea,
   he probably was then shedding his blood for some of them that shed his
   blood; for whom he prayed while they were crucifying him; and who were
   probably afterwards brought home to Christ by Peter's preaching.
   (Compare Luke xxiii. 34. Acts ii. 23, 36, 37, 41. Acts iii. 17. and
   Acts iv. 4. ) This shows an admirable meeting of justice and grace in
   the redemption of Christ.

   7. It was in Christ's last sufferings, above all, that he was delivered
   up to the power of his enemies; and yet by these, above all, he
   obtained victory over his enemies. Christ never was so in his enemies'
   hands, as in the time of his last sufferings. They sought his life
   before; but from time to time they were restrained, and Christ escaped
   out of their hands; and this reason is given for it, that his time was
   not yet come. But now they were suffered to work their will upon him;
   he was in a great degree delivered up to the malice and cruelty of both
   wicked men and devils. And therefore when Christ's enemies came to
   apprehend him, he says to them, Luke xxii. 53. "When I was daily with
   you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hand against me: but this is
   your hour, and the power of darkness."

   And yet it was principally by means of those sufferings that he
   conquered and overthrew his enemies. Christ never so effectually
   bruised Satan's head, as when Satan bruised his heel. The weapon with
   which Christ warred against the devil, and obtained a most complete
   victory and glorious triumph over him, was the cross, the instrument
   and weapon with which he thought he had overthrown Christ, and brought
   on him shameful destruction. Col. ii. 14, 15. "Blotting out the
   handwriting of ordinances,--nailing it to his cross: and having spoiled
   principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
   over them in it." In his last sufferings, Christ sapped the very
   foundations of Satan's kingdom; he conquered his enemies in their own
   territories, and beat them with their own weapons; as David cut off
   Goliath's head with his own sword. The devil had, as it were, swallowed
   up Christ, as the whale did Jonah; but it was deadly poison to him; he
   gave him a mortal wound in his own bowels. He was soon sick of his
   morsel, and was forced to do by him as the whale did by Jonah. To this
   day he is heart-sick of what he then swallowed as his prey. In those
   sufferings of Christ was laid the foundation of all that glorious
   victory he has already obtained over Satan, in the overthrow of his
   heathenish kingdom in the Roman empire, and all the success the gospel
   has had since; and also of all his future and still more glorious
   victory that is to be obtained in the earth. Thus Samson's riddle is
   most eminently fulfilled, Judges xiv. 14. "Out of the eater came forth
   meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness." And thus the true
   Samson does more towards the destruction of his enemies at his death
   than in his life; in yielding up himself to death, he pulls down the
   temple of Dagon, and destroys many thousands of his enemies, even while
   they are making themselves sport in his sufferings; and so he whose
   type was the ark, pulls down Dagon, and breaks off his head and hands
   in his own temple, even while he is brought in there as Dagon's
   captive.

   Thus Christ appeared at the same time, and in the same act, as both a
   lion and a lamb. He appeared as a lamb in the hands of his cruel
   enemies; as a lamb in the paws, and between the devouring jaws, of a
   roaring lion; yea, he was a lamb actually slain by this lion: and yet
   at the same time, as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, he conquers and
   triumphs over Satan, destroying his own devourer; as Samson did the
   lion that roared upon him, when he rent him as he would a kid. And in
   nothing has Christ appeared so much as a lion, in glorious strength
   destroying his enemies, as when he was brought as a lamb to the
   slaughter. In his greatest weakness he was most strong; and when he
   suffered most from his enemies, he brought the greatest confusion on
   his enemies.--Thus this admirable conjunction of diverse excellencies
   was manifest in Christ, in his offering up himself to God in his last
   sufferings.

   IV. It is still manifest in his acts, in his present state of
   exaltation in heaven. Indeed, in his exalted state, he most eminently
   appears in manifestation of those excellencies, on the account of which
   he is compared to a lion; but still he appears as a lamb; Rev. xiv. 1.
   "And I looked, and lo, a Lion stood on mount Sion;" as in his state of
   humiliation he chiefly appeared as a Lamb, and yet did not appear
   without manifestation of his divine majesty and power, as the Lion of
   the tribe of Judah. Though Christ be now at the right-hand of God,
   exalted as King of heaven, and Lord of the universe; yet as he still is
   in the human nature, he still excels in humility. Though the man Christ
   Jesus be the highest of all creatures in heaven, yet he as much excels
   them all in humility as he doth in glory and dignity; for none sees so
   much of the distance between God and him as he does. And though he now
   appears in such glorious majesty and dominion in heaven, yet he appears
   as a lamb in his condescending, mild, and sweet treatment of his saints
   there; for he is a Lamb still, even amidst the throne of his
   exaltation; and he that is the Shepherd of the whole flock is himself a
   Lamb, and goes before them in heaven as such. Rev. vii. 17. "For the
   Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall
   lead them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all
   tears from their eyes." Though in heaven every knee bows to him, and
   though the angels fall down before him adoring him, yet he treats his
   saints with infinite condescension, mildness, and endearment. And in
   his acts towards the saints on earth, he still appears as a lamb,
   manifesting exceeding love and tenderness in his intercession for them,
   as one that has had experience of affliction and temptation. He has not
   forgot what these things are; nor has he forgot how to pity those that
   are subject to them. And he still manifests his lamb-like excellencies,
   in his dealings with his saints on earth, in admirable forbearance,
   love, gentleness, and compassion. Behold him instructing, supplying,
   supporting, and comforting them; often coming to them, and manifesting
   himself to them by his Spirit, that he may sup with them, and they with
   him. Behold him admitting them to sweet communion, enabling them with
   boldness and confidence to come to him, and solacing their hearts. And
   in heaven Christ still appears, as it were with the marks of his wounds
   upon him; and so appears as a Lamb as it had been slain; as he was
   represented in vision to St. John, in the text, when he appeared to
   open the book sealed with seven seals, which is part of the glory of
   his exaltation.

   5. And lastly, this admirable conjunction of excellencies will be
   manifest in Christ's acts at the last judgment. He then, above all
   other times, will appear as the Lion of the tribe of Judah in infinite
   greatness and majesty, when he shall come in the glory of his Father,
   with all the holy angels, and the earth shall tremble before him, and
   the hills shall melt. This is he (Rev. xx. 11.) "that shall sit on a
   great white throne, before whose face the earth and heaven shall flee
   away." He will then appear in the most dreadful and amazing manner to
   the wicked. The devils tremble at the thought of that appearance; and
   when it shall be, the kings, and the great men, and the rich men, and
   the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond-man, and every
   free-man, shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
   mountains, and shall cry to the mountains and rocks to fall on them, to
   hide them from the face and wrath of the Lamb. And none can declare or
   conceive of the amazing manifestations of wrath in which he will then
   appear towards these; or the trembling and astonishment, the shrieking
   and gnashing of teeth, with which they shall stand before his
   judgment-seat, and receive the terrible sentence of his wrath.

   And yet he will at the same time appear as a Lamb to his saints; he
   will receive them as friends and brethren, treating them with infinite
   mildness and love. There shall be nothing in him terrible to them; but
   towards them he will clothe himself wholly with sweetness and
   endearment. The church shall be then admitted to him as his bride; that
   shall be her wedding-day. The saints shall all be sweetly invited to
   come with him to inherit the kingdom, and reign in it with him to all
   eternity.

      APPLICATION.

   I. From this doctrine we may learn one reason why Christ is called by
   such a variety of names, and held forth under such a variety of
   representations, in Scripture. It is the better to signify and exhibit
   to us that variety of excellencies that meet together and are conjoined
   in him. Many appellations are mentioned together in one verse, Isaiah
   ix. 6. "For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
   government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
   Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
   Prince of Peace." It shows a wonderful conjunction of excellencies,
   that the same person should be a Son, born and given, and yet be the
   everlasting Father, without beginning or end; that he should be a
   Child, and yet be he whose name is Counsellor, and the mighty God; and
   well may his name, in whom such things are conjoined, be called
   Wonderful.

   By reason of the same wonderful conjunction, Christ is represented by a
   great variety of sensible things, that are on some account excellent.
   Thus in some places he is called a Sun, as Mal. iv. 2. in others a
   Star, Numb. xxiv. 17. And he is especially represented by the
   Morning-star, as being that which excels all other stars in brightness,
   and is the forerunner of the day, Rev. xxii. 16. And, as in our text,
   he is compared to a lion in one verse, and a lamb in the next, so
   sometimes he is compared to a roe or a young hart, another creature
   most diverse from a lion. So in some places he is called a rock, in
   others he is compared to a pearl. In some places he is called a man of
   war, and the Captain of our Salvation, in other places he is
   represented as a bridegroom. In the second chapter of Canticles, the
   1st verse, he is compared to a rose and lily, that are sweet and
   beautiful flowers; in the next verse but one, he is compared to a tree
   bearing sweet fruit .In Isaiah liii. 2. he is called a Root out of a
   dry ground; but elsewhere, instead of that, he is called the Tree of
   Life, that grows (not in a dry or barren ground, but) "in the midst of
   the paradise of God," Rev. ii. 7.

   II. Let the consideration of this wonderful meeting of diverse
   excellencies in Christ induce you to accept of him, and close with him
   as your Saviour. As all manner of excellencies meet in him, so there
   are concurring in him all manner of arguments and motives, to move you
   to choose him for your Saviour, and every thing that tends to encourage
   poor sinners to come and put their trust in him: his fulness and
   all-sufficiency as a Saviour gloriously appear in that variety of
   excellencies that has been spoken of.

   Fallen man is in a state of exceeding great misery, and is helpless in
   it; he is a poor weak creature, like an infant cast out in its blood in
   the day that it is born. But Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Judah;
   he is strong, though we are weak; he hath prevailed to do that for us
   which no creature else could do. Fallen man is a mean despicable
   creature, a contemptible worm; but Christ, who has undertaken for us,
   is infinitely honourable and worthy. Fallen man is polluted, but Christ
   is infinitely holy; fallen man is hateful, but Christ is infinitely
   lovely; fallen man is the object of God's indignation, but Christ is
   infinitely dear to him. We have dreadfully provoked God, but Christ has
   performed that righteousness which is infinitely precious in God's
   eyes.

   And here is not only infinite strength and infinite worthiness, but
   infinite condescension, and love and mercy, as great as power and
   dignity. If you are a poor, distressed sinner, whose heart is ready to
   sink for fear that God never will have mercy on you, you need not be
   afraid to go to Christ, for fear that he is either unable or unwilling
   to help you. Here is a strong foundation, and an inexhaustible
   treasure, to answer the necessities of your poor soul; and here is
   infinite grace and gentleness to invite and imbolden a poor, unworthy,
   fearful soul to come to it. If Christ accepts of you, you need not fear
   but that you will be safe; for he is a strong Lion for your defence.
   And if you come, you need not fear but that you shall be accepted; for
   he is like a Lamb to all that come to him, and receives them with
   infinite grace and tenderness. It is true he has awful majesty; he is
   the great God, and infinitely high above you; but there is this to
   encourage and imbolden the poor sinner, that Christ is man as well as
   God; he is a creature, as well as the Creator; and he is the most
   humble and lowly in heart of any creature in heaven or earth. This may
   well make the poor unworthy creature bold in coming to him. You need
   not hesitate one moment; but may run to him, and cast yourself upon
   him. You will certainly be graciously and meekly received by him.
   Though he is a lion, he will only be a lion to your enemies; but he
   will be a lamb to you. It could not have been conceived, had it not
   been so in the person of Christ, that there could have been so much in
   any Saviour, that is inviting and tending to encourage sinners to trust
   in him. Whatever your circumstances are, you need not be afraid to come
   to such a Saviour as this. Be you never so wicked a creature, here is
   worthiness enough; be you never so poor, and mean, and ignorant a
   creature, there is no danger of being despised; for though he be so
   much greater than you, he is also immensely more humble than you. Any
   one of you that is a father or mother, will not despise one of your own
   children that comes to you in distress: much less danger is there of
   Christ despising you, if you in your heart come to him. Here let me a
   little expostulate with the poor, burdened, distressed soul.

   1. What are you afraid of, that you dare not venture your soul upon
   Christ? Are you afraid that he cannot save you; that he is not strong
   enough to conquer the enemies of your soul? But how can you desire one
   stronger than the "mighty God?" as Christ is called, Isa. ix. 6. Is
   there need of greater than infinite strength? Are you afraid that he
   will not be willing to stoop so low as to take any gracious notice of
   you? But then, look on him, as he stood in the ring of soldiers,
   exposing his blessed face to be buffeted and spit upon by them! Behold
   him bound with his back uncovered to those that smote him! And behold
   him hanging on the cross! Do you think that he that had condescension
   enough to stoop to these things, and that for his crucifiers, will be
   unwilling to accept of you if you come to him? Or, are you afraid that
   if he does accept of you, that God the Father will not accept of him
   for you? But consider, will God reject his own Son, in whom his
   infinite delight is, and has been, from all eternity, and who is so
   united to him, that if he should reject him he would reject himself?

   2. What is there that you can desire should be in a Saviour, that is
   not in Christ? Or, wherein should you desire a Saviour should be
   otherwise than Christ is? What excellency is there wanting? What is
   there that is great or good; what is there that is venerable or
   winning; what is there that is adorable or endearing; or, what can you
   think of that would be encouraging, which is not to be found in the
   person of Christ? Would you have your Saviour to be great and
   honourable, because you are not willing to be beholden to a mean
   person? And, is not Christ a person honourable enough to be worthy that
   you should be dependent on him; is he not a person high enough to be
   appointed to so honourable a work as your salvation? Would you not only
   have a Saviour of high degree, but would you have him, notwithstanding
   his exaltation and dignity, to be made also of low degree, that he
   might have experience of afflictions and trials, that he might learn by
   the things that he has suffered, to pity them that suffer and are
   tempted? And has not Christ been made low enough for you? and has he
   not suffered enough? Would you not only have him possess experience of
   the afflictions you now suffer, but also of that amazing wrath that you
   fear hereafter, that he may know how to pity those that are in danger,
   and afraid of it? This Christ has had experience of, which experience
   gave him a greater sense of it, a thousand times, than you have, or any
   man living has. Would you have your Saviour to be one who is near to
   God, that so his mediation might be prevalent with him? And can you
   desire him to be nearer to God than Christ is, who is his only-begotten
   Son, of the same essence with the Father? And would you not only have
   him near to God, but also near to you, that you may have free access to
   him? And would you have him nearer to you than to be in the same
   nature, united to you by a spiritual union, so close as to be fitly
   represented by the union of the wife to the husband, of the branch to
   the vine, of the member to the head; yea, so as to be one spirit? For
   so he will be united to you, if you accept of him. Would you have a
   Saviour that has given some great and extraordinary testimony of mercy
   and love to sinners, by something that he has done, as well as by what
   he says? And can you think or conceive of greater things than Christ
   has done? Was it not a great thing for him, who was God, to take upon
   him human nature; to be not only God, but man thenceforward to all
   eternity? But would you look upon suffering for sinners to be a yet
   greater testimony of love to sinners, than merely doing, though it be
   ever so extraordinary a thing that he has done? And would you desire
   that a Saviour should suffer more than Christ has suffered for sinners?
   What is there wanting, or what would you add if you could, to make him
   more fit to be your Saviour? But further, to induce you to accept of
   Christ as your Saviour, consider two things particularly.

   (1.) How much Christ appears as the Lamb of God in his invitations to
   you to come to him and trust in him. With what sweet grace and kindness
   does he, from time to time, call and invite you; as Prov. viii. 4.
   "Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men." And
   Isaiah lv. 1, 2, 3. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
   waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy
   wine and milk without money, and without price." How gracious is he
   here in inviting every one that thirsts, and in so repeating his
   invitation over and over, Isa. 55:1."Come ye to the waters; come, buy
   and eat; yea, come!" Mark the excellency of that entertainment which he
   invites you to accept of, "Come, buy wine and milk!" your poverty,
   having nothing to pay for it, shall be no objection,--"Come, he that
   hath no money, come without money, and without price!" What gracious
   arguments and expostulations he uses with you! Isaiah lv. 2. "Wherefore
   do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that
   which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which
   is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." As much as to
   say, It is altogether needless for you to continue labouring and
   toiling for that which can never serve your turn, seeking rest in the
   world, and in your own righteousness:--I have made abundant provision
   for you, of that which is really good, and will fully satisfy your
   desires, and answer your end, and stand ready to accept of you: you
   need not be afraid; if you will come to me, I will engage to see all
   your wants supplied, and you made a happy creature. As he promises in
   the third verse, Isaiah lv. 3."Incline your ear, and come unto me:
   Hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant
   with you, even the sure mercies of David." And so, Prov. ix. at the
   beginning. How gracious and sweet is the invitation there! "Whoso is
   simple, let him turn in hither;" let you be never so poor, ignorant,
   and blind a creature, you shall be welcome. And in the following words,
   Christ sets forth the provision that he has made for you, Prov. ix. 5.
   "Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled."
   You are in a poor famishing state, and have nothing wherewith to feed
   your perishing soul; you have been seeking something, but yet remain
   destitute. Hearken, how Christ calls you to eat of his bread, and to
   drink of the wine that he hath mingled! And how much like a lamb does
   Christ appear in Matt. xi. 28-30. "Come unto me, all ye that labour and
   are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and
   learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest
   to your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." O thou
   poor distressed soul! whoever thou art, consider that Christ mentions
   thy very case, when he calls to them who labour and are heavy laden!
   How he repeatedly promises you rest if you come to him! In the 28th
   verse he says, "I will give you rest." And in the 29th verse, "Ye shall
   find rest to your souls." This is what you want. This is the thing you
   have been so long in vain seeking after. O how sweet would rest be to
   you, if you could but obtain it! Come to Christ, and you shall obtain
   it. And hear how Christ, to encourage you, represents himself as a
   lamb! He tells you, that he is meek and lowly in heart; and are you
   afraid to come to such a one? And again, Rev. iii. 20. "Behold, I stand
   at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
   will come in to him, and I will sup with him, and he with me." Christ
   condescends not only to call you to him, but he comes to you; he comes
   to your door, and there knocks. He might send an officer and seize you
   as a rebel and vile malefactor; but instead of that, he comes and
   knocks at your door, and seeks that you would receive him into your
   house, as your Friend and Saviour. And he not only knocks at your door,
   but he stands there waiting, while you are backward and unwilling. And
   not only so, but he makes promises what he will do for you, if you will
   admit him, what privileges he will admit you to; he will sup with you,
   and you with him. And again, Rev. xxii. 16, 17. "I am the root and the
   offspring of David, and the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and
   the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth, say, come. And let him
   that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take of the water of
   life freely." How does Christ here graciously set before you his own
   winning attractive excellency! And how does he condescend to declare to
   you not only his own invitation, but the invitation of the Spirit and
   the bride, if by any means he might encourage you to come! And how does
   he invite every one that will, that they may "take of the water of life
   freely," that they may take it as a free gift, however precious it be,
   and though it be the water of life!

   (2.) If you do come to Christ, he will appear as a Lion, in his
   glorious power and dominion, to defend you. All those excellencies of
   his, in which he appears as a lion, shall be yours, and shall be
   employed for you in your defence, for your safety, and to promote your
   glory; he will be as a lion to fight against your enemies. He that
   touches you, or offends you, will provoke his wrath, as he that stirs
   up a lion. Unless your enemies can conquer this Lion, they shall not be
   able to destroy or hurt you; unless they are stronger than he, they
   shall not be able to hinder your happiness. Isa. xxxi. 4. "For thus
   hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion
   roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth
   against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself
   for the noise of them; so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
   for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof."

   III. Let what has been said be improved to induce you to love the Lord
   Jesus Christ, and choose him for your friend and portion. As there is
   such an admirable meeting of diverse excellencies in Christ, so there
   is every thing in him to render him worthy of your love and choice, and
   to win and engage it. Whatsoever there is or can be desirable in a
   friend, is in Christ, and that to the highest degree that can be
   desired.

   Would you choose for a friend a person of great dignity? It is a thing
   taking with men to have those for their friends who are much above
   them; because they look upon themselves honoured by the friendship of
   such. Thus, how taking would it be with an inferior maid to be the
   object of the dear love of some great and excellent prince. But Christ
   is infinitely above you, and above all the princes of the earth; for he
   is the King of kings. So honourable a person as this offers himself to
   you, in the nearest and dearest friendship.

   And would you choose to have a friend not only great but good? In
   Christ infinite greatness and infinite goodness meet together, and
   receive lustre and glory one from another. His greatness is rendered
   lovely by his goodness. The greater any one is without goodness, so
   much the greater evil; but when infinite goodness is joined with
   greatness, it renders it a glorious and adorable greatness. So, on the
   other hand, his infinite goodness receives lustre from his greatness.
   He that is of great understanding and ability, and is withal of a good
   and excellent disposition, is deservedly more esteemed than a lower and
   lesser being, with the same kind inclination and good will. Indeed
   goodness is excellent in whatever subject it be found; it is beauty and
   excellency itself, and renders all excellent that are possessed of it;
   and yet most excellent when joined with greatness. The very same
   excellent qualities of gold render the body in which they are inherent
   more precious, and of greater value, when joined with greater than when
   with lesser dimensions. And how glorious is the sight, to see him who
   is the great Creator and supreme Lord of heaven and earth, full of
   condescension, tender pity and mercy, towards the mean and unworthy!
   His almighty power, and infinite majesty and self-sufficiency, render
   his exceeding love and grace the more surprising. And how do his
   condescension and compassion endear his majesty, power, and dominion,
   and render those attributes pleasant, that would otherwise be only
   terrible! Would you not desire that your friend, though great and
   honourable, should be of such condescension and grace, and so to have
   the way opened to free access to him, that his exaltation above you
   might not hinder your free enjoyment of his friendship?--And would you
   choose not only that the infinite greatness and majesty of your friend
   should be, as it were, mollified and sweetened with condescension and
   grace; but would you also desire to have your friend brought nearer to
   you? Would you choose a friend far above you, and yet as it were upon a
   level with you too? Though it be taking with men to have a near and
   dear friend of superior dignity, yet there is also an inclination in
   them to have their friend a sharer with them in circumstances. Thus is
   Christ. Though he be the great God, yet he has, as it were, brought
   himself down to be upon a level with you, so as to become man as you
   are, that he might not only be your Lord, but your brother, and that he
   might be the more fit to be a companion for such a worm of the dust.
   This is one end of Christ's taking upon him man's nature, that his
   people might be under advantages for a more familiar converse with him,
   than the infinite distance of the divine nature would allow of. And
   upon this account the church longed for Christ's incarnation, Cant.
   viii. 1. "O that thou wert my brother, that sucked the breasts of my
   mother! when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yea, I
   should not be despised." One design of God in the gospel, is to bring
   us to make God the object of our undivided respect, that he may engross
   our regard every way, that whatever natural inclination there is in our
   souls, he may be the centre of it; that God may be all in all. But
   there is an inclination in the creature, not only to the adoration of a
   Lord and Sovereign, but to complacence in some one as a friend, to love
   and delight in some one that may be conversed with as a companion. And
   virtue and holiness do not destroy or weaken this inclination of our
   nature. But so hath God contrived in the affair of our redemption, that
   a divine person may be the object even of this inclination of our
   nature. And in order hereto, such an one is come down to us; and has
   taken our nature, and is become one of us, and calls himself our
   friend, brother, and companion. Psal. cxxii. 8. "For my brethren and
   companions' sake, will I now say, Peace be within thee."

   But is it not enough in order to invite and encourage you to free
   access to a friend so great and high, that he is one of infinite
   condescending grace, and also has taken your own nature, and is become
   man? But would you, further to imbolden and win you, have him a man of
   wonderful meekness and humility? Why, such an one is Christ! He is not
   only become man for you, but far the meekest and most humble of all
   men, the greatest instance of these sweet virtues that ever was, or
   will be. And besides these, he has all other human excellencies in the
   highest perfection. These, indeed, are no proper addition to his divine
   excellencies. Christ has no more excellency in his person, since his
   incarnation, than he had before; for divine excellency is infinite, and
   cannot be added to. Yet his human excellencies are additional
   manifestations of his glory and excellency to us, and are additional
   recommendations of him to our esteem and love, who are of finite
   comprehension. Though his human excellencies are but communications and
   reflections of his divine; and though this light, as reflected, falls
   infinitely short of the divine fountain of light in its immediate
   glory; yet the reflection shines not without its proper advantages, as
   presented to our view and affection. The glory of Christ in the
   qualifications of his human nature, appears to us in excellencies that
   are of our own kind, and are exercised in our own way and manner; and
   so, in some respects, are peculiarly fitted to invite our acquaintance
   and draw our affection. The glory of Christ as it appears in his
   divinity, though far brighter, more dazzles our eyes, and exceeds the
   strength of our sight or our comprehension; but, as it shines in the
   human excellencies of Christ, it is brought more to a level with our
   conceptions, and suitableness to our nature and manner, yet retaining a
   semblance of the same divine beauty, and a savour of the same divine
   sweetness. But as both divine and human excellencies meet together in
   Christ, they set off and recommend each other to us. It tends to endear
   the divine majesty and holiness of Christ to us, that these are
   attributes of one in our nature, one of us, who is become our brother,
   and is the meekest and humblest of men. It encourages us to look upon
   these divine perfections, however high and great; since we have some
   near concern in, and liberty freely to enjoy them. And on the other
   hand, how much more glorious and surprising do the meekness, the
   humility, obedience, resignation, and other human excellencies of
   Christ appear, when we consider that they are in so great a person, as
   the eternal Son of God, the Lord of heaven and earth!

   By your choosing Christ for your friend and portion, you will obtain
   these two infinite benefits.

   1. Christ will give himself to you, with all those various excellencies
   that meet in him, to your full and everlasting enjoyment. He will ever
   after treat you as his dear friend; and you shall ere long be where he
   is, and shall behold his glory, and dwell with him, in most free and
   intimate communion and enjoyment.

   When the saints get to heaven, they shall not merely see Christ, and
   have to do with him as subjects and servants with a glorious and
   gracious Lord and Sovereign, but Christ will entertain them as friends
   and brethren. This we may learn from the manner of Christ's conversing
   with his disciples here on earth: though he was their sovereign Lord,
   and did not refuse, but required, their supreme respect and adoration,
   yet he did not treat them as earthly sovereigns are wont to do their
   subjects. He did not keep them at an awful distance; but all along
   conversed with them with the most friendly familiarity, as a father
   amongst a company of children, yea, as with brethren. So he did with
   the twelve, and so he did with Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. He told his
   disciples, that he did not call them servants, but friends; and we read
   of one of them that leaned on his bosom: and doubtless he will not
   treat his disciples with less freedom and endearment in heaven. He will
   not keep them at a greater distance for his being in a state of
   exaltation; but he will rather take them into a state of exaltation
   with him. This will be the improvement Christ will make of his own
   glory, to make his beloved friends partakers with him, to glorify them
   in his glory, as he says to his Father, John xvii. 22, 23. "And the
   glory which thou hast given me, have I given them, that they may be
   one, even as we are one; I in them," &c. We are to consider, that
   though Christ is greatly exalted, yet he is exalted, not as a private
   person for himself only, but as his people's head; he is exalted in
   their name, and upon their account, as the first fruits, and as
   representing the whole harvest. He is not exalted that he may be at a
   greater distance from them, but that they may be exalted with him. The
   exaltation and honour of the head is not to make a greater distance
   between the head and the members; but the members have the same
   relation and union with the head they had before, and are honoured with
   the head; and instead of the distance being greater, the union shall be
   nearer and more perfect. When believers get to heaven, Christ will
   conform them to himself; as he is set down in his Father's throne, so
   they shall sit down with him on his throne, and shall in their measure
   be made like him.

   When Christ was going to heaven, he comforted his disciples with the
   thought, that after a while, he would come again and take them to
   himself, that they might be with him. And we are not to suppose that
   when the disciples got to heaven, they found him keeping a greater
   distance than he used to do. No, doubtless, he embraced them as
   friends, and welcomed them to his and their Father's house, and to his
   and their glory. They who had been his friends in this world, who had
   been together with him here, and had together partaken of sorrows and
   troubles, are now welcomed by him to rest, and to partake of glory with
   him. He took them and led them into his chambers, and showed them all
   his glory; as he prayed, John xvii. 24. "Father, I will that they also
   whom thou hast given me, be with me, that they may behold the glory
   which thou hast given me." And he led them to his living fountains of
   waters, and made them partake of his delights; as he prays, John xvii.
   13. "That my joy may be fulfilled in themselves;" and set them down
   with him at his table in his kingdom, and made them partake with him of
   his dainties, according to his promise, Luke xxii. 30. and led them
   into his banqueting house, and made them to drink new wine with him in
   the kingdom of his heavenly Father, as he foretold them when he
   instituted the Lord's supper, Matt. xxvi. 29.

   Yea, the saints' conversation with Christ in heaven shall not only be
   as intimate, and their access to him as free, as of the disciples on
   earth, but in many respects much more so; for in heaven, that vital
   union shall be perfect, which is exceeding imperfect here. While the
   saints are in this world, there are great remains of sin and darkness,
   to separate or disunite them from Christ, which shall then all be
   removed. This is not a time for that full acquaintance, and those
   glorious manifestations of love, which Christ designs for his people
   hereafter; which seems to be signified by his speech to Mary Magdalene,
   when ready to embrace him, when she met him after his resurrection;
   John xx. 17. "Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet
   ascended to my Father."

   When the saints shall see Christ's glory and exaltation in heaven, it
   will indeed possess their hearts with the greater admiration and
   adoring respect, but will not awe them into any separation, but will
   serve only to heighten their surprise and joy, when they find Christ
   condescending to admit them to such intimate access, and so freely and
   fully communicating himself to them. So that if we choose Christ for
   our friend and portion, we shall hereafter be so received to him, that
   there shall be nothing to hinder the fullest enjoyment of him, to the
   satisfying the utmost cravings of our souls. We may take our full swing
   at gratifying our spiritual appetite after these holy pleasures. Christ
   will then say, as in Cant. v. 1. "Eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink
   abundantly, O beloved." And this shall be our entertainment to all
   eternity! There shall never be any end of this happiness, or any thing
   to interrupt our enjoyment of it, or in the least to molest us in it!

   2. By your being united to Christ, you will have a more glorious union
   with and enjoyment of God the Father, than otherwise could be. For
   hereby the saints' relation to God becomes much nearer; they are the
   children of God in a higher manner than otherwise could be. For, being
   members of God's own Son, they are in a sort partakers of his relation
   to the Father: they are not only sons of God by regeneration, but by a
   kind of communion in the sonship of the eternal Son. This seems to be
   intended, Gal. iv. 4, 5, 6. "God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
   made under the law, to redeem them that are under the law, that we
   might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath
   sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba,
   Father." The church is the daughter of God, not only as he hath
   begotten her by his word and Spirit, but as she is the spouse of his
   eternal Son.

   So we being members of the Son, are partakers in our measure of the
   Father's love to the Son, and complacence in him. John xvii. 23. "I in
   them, and thou in me,-- Thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me."
   And John xvii. 26. "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be
   in them." And John xvi. 27. "The Father himself loveth you, because ye
   have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God." So we
   shall, according to our capacities, be partakers of the Son's enjoyment
   of God, and have his joy fulfilled in ourselves, John xvii. 13. And by
   this means we shall come to an immensely higher, more intimate and full
   enjoyment of God, than otherwise could have been. For there is
   doubtless an infinite intimacy between the Father and the Son; which is
   expressed by his being in the bosom of the Father. And saints being in
   him, shall, in their measure and manner, partake with him in it, and of
   the blessedness of it.

   And thus is the affair of our redemption ordered, that thereby we are
   brought to an immensely more exalted kind of union with God, and
   enjoyment of him, both the Father and the Son, than otherwise could
   have been. For Christ being united to the human nature, we have
   advantage for a more free and full enjoyment of him, than we could have
   had if he had remained only in the divine nature. So again, we being
   united to a divine person, as his members, can have a more intimate
   union and intercourse with God the Father, who is only in the divine
   nature, than otherwise could be. Christ, who is a divine person, by
   taking on him our nature, descends from the infinite distance and
   height above us, and is brought nigh to us; whereby we have advantage
   for the full enjoyment of him. And, on the other hand, we, by being in
   Christ a divine person, do as it were ascend up to God, through the
   infinite distance, and have hereby advantage for the full enjoyment of
   him also.

   This was the design of Christ, that he, and his Father, and his people,
   might all be united in one. John xvii. 21-23. "That they all may be
   one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be
   one in us; that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the
   glory which thou hast given me, I have given them, that they may be
   one, even as we are one; I in them and thou in me, that they may be
   made perfect in one." Christ has brought it to pass, that those whom
   the Father has given him should be brought into the household of God;
   that he and his Father, and his people, should be as one society, one
   family; that the church should be as it were admitted into the society
   of the blessed Trinity.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      THEOLOGICAL QUESTIONS.

   1. How does it appear that something has existed from eternity?

   2. How does it appear that this earth and the visible system are not
   from eternity?

   3. How does it appear that the existence of man is derived and
   dependent?

   4. How do you prove the natural perfections of God, viz. his
   intelligence, infinite power, foreknowledge, and immutability?

   5. How do you prove his moral perfections, that he is a friend of
   virtue, or absolutely holy, true, just, and good?

   6. How do yon prove that the Scriptures are a revelation from God? And
   what are the evidences, internal and external?

   7. How do you prove the divine mission of Christ?

   8. How do you prove the divinity of Christ?

   9. How do you prove the personality and divinity of the Holy Ghost?

   10. How do you prove that the persons in the Trinity are one God?

   11. Whence arose the Manichean notion of two Gods, and how is it
   confuted?

   12. Whence arose the polytheism of the pagans, and how confuted?

   13. Whence was it that the knowledge of the one true God, in which Noah
   was instructed, was not preserved among his posterity in all ages?

   14. Why are not mankind in all ages (their internal faculties and
   external advantages being sufficient) united in right sentiments of the
   one true God?

   15. Were the moral character of God and the moral law understood and
   loved, would there be any objections against revealed religion?

   16. What is the true idea of God's decrees?

   17. How do you prove absolute and particular election?

   18. Did God decree the existence of sin?

   19. Why did God decree sin?

   20. In what sense did he introduce sin into the universe?

   21. How do you reconcile this with the holiness and goodness of God?

   22. What is necessary to constitute a moral agent?

   23. Are men moral and free agents?

   24. What is the difference between natural and moral power and
   inability?

   25. How is absolute moral necessity, or inability, consistent with the
   free agency of men?

   26. How is the doctrine of universal, absolute decrees, consistent with
   the free agency of men?

   27. How do you prove an universal and special providence?

   28. What is the covenant of redemption?

   29. If man was created in original righteousness, how is that
   consistent with moral agency? It being said that a necessary holiness
   is no holiness.

   30. What was the constitution under which Adam in innocency was placed?

   31. Was Adam under the same necessity of falling that we are of
   sinning?

   32. Are all intelligences bound to love God supremely, sinners and
   devils?

   33. Is the law holy, just, and good, and how is it proved?

   34. Are they, who are under its curse, bound to delight in it?

   35. How great is the demerit of sin?

   36. Are the torments of hell eternal?

   37. How do you reconcile them with the justice and infinite goodness of
   God?

   38. How do you reconcile them with those texts which say Christ died
   for all men, that God will not that any should perish?

   39. How does it appear that human nature is originally depraved?

   40. Whence comes that depravity?

   41. How is it proved to be total?

   42. What is the covenant of grace?

   43. Are the law and gospel inconsistent with each other?

   44. Why was an atonement, and one so precious as the blood of Christ,
   necessary?

   45. In what manner did Christ atone for sin?

   46. To whom doth it belong to provide an atonement, God, or the sinner?

   47. Did Christ redeem all men alike, elect and non-elect?

   48. Can the offer of the gospel be made in sincerity to the non-elect?

   49. How is redemption applied?

   50. What is the office of the Holy Ghost in the work of redemption?

   51. What is regeneration?

   52. Whence arises the necessity of it?

   53. What is true love to God?

   54. What is true benevolence to men?

   55. What is true repentance, and how distinguished from legal?

   56. What is true faith?

   57. What is pardon and justification? What is their foundation, and
   what is the influence of faith therein?

   58. How are full satisfaction and free pardon consistent?

   59. Is the sinner forgiven before he repents?

   60. Is sanctifying grace needful at all to any man, unless with respect
   to that which is his duty, and in neglect of which he would be without
   excuse?

   61. What is the sum of man's duty, and what the effect produced by the
   sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit.

   62. Can that holy volition in us, which is the effect of divine power,
   be wholly our act, or our duty?

   63. How is it proved that unbelief is sin, and that all errors in moral
   matters are of a criminal nature?

   64. Will the wicked heathens, Jews, infidels, and errorists of every
   kind, be without excuse at the day of judgment?

   65. What is the essence of true virtue, or holiness?

   66. Is there no virtue in the exercise of natural conscience, the moral
   sense, natural compassion, and generosity?

   67. Is not self-love the root of all virtue?

   68. Do not the unregenerate desire to be regenerated, and can they not
   properly pray for regenerating grace T

   69. Do they not desire the heavenly happiness?

   70. What is the utmost the unregenerate do in the use of the means of
   grace?

   71. Is any duly done by them therein?

   72. Do they grow better in the use of means?

   73. To what are they to be exhorted?

   74. What is the real advantage of the assiduous use of means to the
   unregenerate?

   75. How do you prove that the institution of the Sabbath is of
   perpetual obligation?

   76. How is it that the Sabbath is changed from the seventh to the first
   day of the week?

   77. How do you prove that public worship is to be celebrated on the
   Sabbath?

   78. What is the foundation of the duty of prayer, since God is
   omniscient and immutable?

   79. How do you prove that family prayer is a duty?

   80. To whom are the promises of the gospel made, to the regenerate, or
   unregenerate?

   81. Are no encouragements given to the unregenerate?

   82. How do you prove the saints' perseverance?

   83. What is the nature of a Christian church?

   84. Who are fit for communion therein?

   85. What is the nature and import of baptism?

   86. How do you prove infant baptism?

   87. What is the nature of the Lord's supper?

   88. What are the rules and end of church discipline?

   89. What is the character of a good minister of Christ?

   90. In what does the happiness of heaven consist?

   END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1:2   [3]1:20   [4]1:21   [5]1:22   [6]1:24   [7]1:26
   [8]1:26-27   [9]1:28   [10]1:28   [11]1:28   [12]1:29   [13]2
   [14]2:7   [15]2:17   [16]2:19   [17]3   [18]3   [19]3:13   [20]3:15
   [21]3:15   [22]3:15   [23]3:15   [24]3:15   [25]3:15   [26]3:15
   [27]3:15   [28]3:15   [29]3:15   [30]3:15-20   [31]3:17-19
   [32]3:17-19   [33]3:18   [34]3:19   [35]3:19   [36]3:19   [37]3:19
   [38]3:19   [39]3:20   [40]4:1   [41]4:4   [42]4:14-15   [43]4:16
   [44]4:25   [45]4:26   [46]4:26   [47]5:3   [48]5:6   [49]5:9
   [50]5:24   [51]5:29   [52]5:29   [53]5:29   [54]6:1   [55]6:1-2
   [56]6:3   [57]6:3   [58]6:4   [59]6:5   [60]6:6   [61]6:6   [62]6:12
   [63]6:19   [64]7:23   [65]8:1   [66]8:20-22   [67]8:21   [68]8:21
   [69]8:21   [70]8:21   [71]8:21   [72]8:21   [73]9   [74]9   [75]9:1-3
   [76]9:3   [77]9:7   [78]9:9-10   [79]9:25-27   [80]10:10-12
   [81]11:4   [82]11:31   [83]12:1   [84]12:1   [85]12:1-4   [86]12:2
   [87]12:2-3   [88]12:2-3   [89]13:14-17   [90]13:16   [91]13:16
   [92]14:4-7   [93]14:19-20   [94]14:21-24   [95]15   [96]15   [97]15:1
   [98]15:1   [99]15:1   [100]15:4-7   [101]15:4-7   [102]15:5
   [103]15:5-6   [104]15:5-6   [105]15:12-13   [106]15:13
   [107]15:13-14   [108]15:16   [109]15:16   [110]15:19   [111]16:12
   [112]17   [113]17   [114]17   [115]17:5   [116]17:9   [117]17:10
   [118]17:20   [119]18:10   [120]18:10   [121]18:18   [122]18:18
   [123]18:19   [124]18:23   [125]18:25   [126]19:4   [127]19:14
   [128]19:22   [129]20:4   [130]20:4   [131]20:6-7   [132]20:9
   [133]21:8-9   [134]21:23-34   [135]22:1   [136]22:2   [137]22:12
   [138]22:12   [139]22:12   [140]22:14   [141]22:15-18   [142]22:16-17
   [143]22:16-18   [144]22:16-18   [145]22:16-18   [146]22:21
   [147]23:11-12   [148]24   [149]24   [150]24:63   [151]25:1-2
   [152]26:3-4   [153]26:28-35   [154]27:29   [155]28:14   [156]31:1
   [157]31:24   [158]31:39   [159]31:44   [160]31:53   [161]31:53
   [162]31:53   [163]33:3   [164]34:30-31   [165]35:5   [166]35:10-15
   [167]39:9   [168]41:56-57   [169]45:13   [170]45:22   [171]46
   [172]46:34   [173]49:8   [174]49:8   [175]49:9   [176]49:10
   [177]49:10   [178]49:10   [179]49:16   [180]49:22   [181]49:24
   [182]50:20

   Exodus

   [183]2:6   [184]2:23   [185]3   [186]3:2-3   [187]3:8   [188]3:11
   [189]3:14   [190]3:14   [191]3:18-19   [192]3:19   [193]4:21
   [194]4:22   [195]4:23   [196]4:23   [197]5   [198]5:2   [199]5:19
   [200]6   [201]6:3   [202]6:7   [203]7   [204]7:2-5   [205]7:4
   [206]7:5   [207]7:16   [208]7:16   [209]7:17   [210]8:1   [211]8:1-2
   [212]8:1-2   [213]8:10   [214]8:20   [215]8:20   [216]8:20
   [217]8:21   [218]8:21   [219]8:22   [220]8:25   [221]9:1   [222]9:1-5
   [223]9:12   [224]9:13   [225]9:13-17   [226]9:16   [227]9:16
   [228]9:16   [229]9:27   [230]9:27   [231]9:27-28   [232]9:30
   [233]10:1-2   [234]10:2   [235]10:3   [236]10:3   [237]10:3
   [238]10:6   [239]10:6   [240]10:8-10   [241]10:9   [242]10:17
   [243]10:24   [244]11:9   [245]12:11   [246]12:12   [247]12:27
   [248]12:47-48   [249]14:4   [250]14:8   [251]14:17-18   [252]14:17-18
   [253]14:18   [254]15:6   [255]15:16   [256]15:25   [257]15:27
   [258]16:4   [259]16:4   [260]16:7   [261]16:12   [262]16:12
   [263]16:28   [264]17:14-16   [265]19   [266]19   [267]19:8
   [268]19:9   [269]19:16   [270]20   [271]20   [272]20:5-6   [273]21
   [274]21:20   [275]21:32   [276]22:28   [277]23:7   [278]23:25
   [279]23:31   [280]24:3   [281]24:7   [282]24:9   [283]24:11
   [284]24:16-17   [285]24:23   [286]25:31   [287]28:2   [288]28:8
   [289]28:32   [290]28:34   [291]28:40   [292]28:43   [293]29:43
   [294]29:44-46   [295]30:11-16   [296]31:13   [297]32:34   [298]33
   [299]33:18   [300]33:18-19   [301]33:18-19   [302]34:6-7   [303]34:8
   [304]34:24   [305]35:20   [306]35:29   [307]37:17-24   [308]39:22
   [309]39:23   [310]39:26   [311]40:35   [312]40:35   [313]40:35
   [314]45:5   [315]45:7-8

   Leviticus

   [316]5:7   [317]6   [318]6:13   [319]8   [320]9   [321]9:24
   [322]9:24   [323]10:1-2   [324]10:1-2   [325]10:3   [326]10:6
   [327]10:10   [328]12:8   [329]13:45   [330]16:2   [331]16:21
   [332]16:21   [333]17:3-4   [334]17:3-4   [335]17:7   [336]17:7
   [337]18:5   [338]19:32   [339]22:9   [340]23   [341]25:9   [342]26:11
   [343]26:39   [344]26:40-42   [345]26:40-42   [346]26:40-42
   [347]26:40-42   [348]26:41   [349]26:42

   Numbers

   [350]1:53   [351]5   [352]7   [353]9   [354]10:29   [355]10:29
   [356]11:29   [357]12:3   [358]12:8   [359]14:10   [360]14:20-22
   [361]14:21   [362]14:21   [363]14:23   [364]14:24   [365]14:31
   [366]14:31   [367]14:39-40   [368]16:19   [369]16:19   [370]16:37-38
   [371]18:5   [372]18:22   [373]21:5   [374]23:9-10   [375]23:19
   [376]24:2   [377]24:16-17   [378]24:17   [379]24:17-19   [380]25
   [381]31:17   [382]32:11-12   [383]32:20-23

   Deuteronomy

   [384]1:36   [385]1:39   [386]2:16   [387]2:30   [388]4:2   [389]4:2
   [390]4:3-4   [391]4:4   [392]4:9   [393]4:32   [394]4:32
   [395]4:32-34   [396]4:33   [397]4:34   [398]4:34-35   [399]5
   [400]5:24   [401]5:27-29   [402]5:29   [403]6:4-5   [404]6:6
   [405]6:13   [406]6:13   [407]7:7-8   [408]7:9   [409]8:2   [410]8:2
   [411]8:2   [412]8:2-3   [413]8:15   [414]8:15   [415]8:15
   [416]8:15-16   [417]8:16   [418]8:16   [419]8:16   [420]9:4-6
   [421]9:4-6   [422]9:5   [423]9:5   [424]9:6   [425]9:6   [426]10:12
   [427]10:16   [428]10:20   [429]10:20   [430]10:20   [431]11:18
   [432]11:24   [433]12:5-7   [434]12:11   [435]13:1   [436]13:3
   [437]13:6   [438]17:16-17   [439]18:18   [440]18:18   [441]23:1
   [442]23:3-4   [443]25:1   [444]26:16-17   [445]26:16-18   [446]26:17
   [447]26:17-18   [448]26:19   [449]26:19   [450]28:16   [451]28:17
   [452]28:53-57   [453]28:58   [454]28:63   [455]29   [456]29:5-6
   [457]29:24   [458]30:6   [459]30:6   [460]30:15   [461]30:19
   [462]31:24-26   [463]32   [464]32:5   [465]32:6-19   [466]32:8
   [467]32:18-20   [468]32:21   [469]32:21   [470]32:21   [471]32:21-25
   [472]32:22   [473]32:30   [474]32:35   [475]32:35   [476]32:36
   [477]32:36-37   [478]32:36-39   [479]32:36-39   [480]33:5
   [481]33:8-11   [482]33:9   [483]33:13   [484]33:26   [485]33:27
   [486]33:29   [487]39:12

   Joshua

   [488]1:3-4   [489]2:12   [490]3:10   [491]5:9   [492]5:13-14
   [493]5:13-15   [494]6:19   [495]6:21   [496]6:25   [497]6:25
   [498]7:8-9   [499]9:20   [500]11:4   [501]11:20   [502]13:8
   [503]14:6   [504]14:8   [505]14:9   [506]14:14   [507]15:63
   [508]18:1   [509]18:1   [510]22:2   [511]22:2   [512]22:11-34
   [513]22:24-25   [514]22:25   [515]22:25   [516]23:8   [517]23:8
   [518]23:8   [519]23:14   [520]24:2   [521]24:14   [522]24:14
   [523]24:31

   Judges

   [524]2:7   [525]2:17   [526]2:17   [527]2:21-22   [528]2:22
   [529]2:22   [530]3:1   [531]3:4   [532]3:27-28   [533]5:2   [534]5:3
   [535]5:3   [536]5:9   [537]5:9   [538]5:14   [539]5:14   [540]5:14-18
   [541]5:15   [542]5:19   [543]5:20   [544]5:23   [545]5:24   [546]6:8
   [547]6:11   [548]7:2   [549]7:2   [550]7:12   [551]7:23-24   [552]8
   [553]8:10   [554]9:4   [555]9:15-20   [556]10:14   [557]11:29-40
   [558]13:5   [559]13:5   [560]13:7   [561]13:8   [562]13:17-21
   [563]13:24   [564]14:14   [565]16:10   [566]16:13

   Ruth

   [567]1:6-16   [568]1:10   [569]1:14   [570]1:15   [571]1:16
   [572]1:16   [573]1:16   [574]1:16   [575]2:11

   1 Samuel

   [576]1:22   [577]1:24-25   [578]1:27   [579]2   [580]2:2   [581]2:25
   [582]2:27   [583]3   [584]3   [585]3:1   [586]4:21   [587]5:11
   [588]6   [589]8:7-8   [590]9:21   [591]10:2-3   [592]10:5
   [593]10:10   [594]11:6   [595]12:2   [596]12:20   [597]12:20
   [598]12:22   [599]14:35   [600]15:3   [601]15:3   [602]15:11
   [603]15:29   [604]16:7   [605]16:7   [606]16:13   [607]16:14
   [608]17:26   [609]17:36   [610]17:46   [611]18:1   [612]18:2
   [613]19:20   [614]20:3   [615]20:16-17   [616]20:42   [617]22
   [618]24:16-17   [619]24:16-17   [620]24:17   [621]25:16-19
   [622]26:21   [623]26:21   [624]26:21

   2 Samuel

   [625]4:11   [626]5   [627]6   [628]6:1   [629]6:18-19   [630]6:19
   [631]6:22   [632]7   [633]7   [634]7:9   [635]7:13   [636]7:14-15
   [637]7:16   [638]7:18   [639]7:18   [640]7:23   [641]7:26   [642]8:3
   [643]12:11-12   [644]12:13   [645]12:13   [646]14:26   [647]15:19-22
   [648]16:10-11   [649]19:7   [650]19:43   [651]20   [652]22:18
   [653]23:1   [654]23:5   [655]23:5   [656]23:5   [657]23:5

   1 Kings

   [658]1:4-8   [659]1:4-8   [660]1:37   [661]2:37   [662]3:4-5
   [663]3:7   [664]4:20   [665]4:20   [666]4:24   [667]4:34   [668]6:18
   [669]6:29   [670]7:18-19   [671]8   [672]8:1   [673]8:3   [674]8:9
   [675]8:11   [676]8:21-22   [677]8:21-22   [678]8:23   [679]8:41-43
   [680]8:43   [681]8:44   [682]8:46   [683]8:56   [684]8:59-60
   [685]8:60   [686]9:8   [687]9:20-22   [688]10:2   [689]10:24
   [690]11:11-13   [691]11:13   [692]11:17   [693]12:11   [694]12:27-28
   [695]13:1-6   [696]13:32   [697]14   [698]14:8   [699]15:4
   [700]15:4   [701]16   [702]16:1   [703]16:7   [704]16:9-13
   [705]16:20   [706]18:4   [707]18:31   [708]18:32   [709]19
   [710]19:12-13   [711]20:28   [712]21:20-22   [713]21:27   [714]21:27
   [715]22:22

   2 Kings

   [716]2:15   [717]2:23   [718]4:38   [719]5:14   [720]5:14   [721]5:15
   [722]5:18   [723]6:1-2   [724]6:14   [725]7   [726]7:9   [727]8:12
   [728]8:13   [729]10:6   [730]10:31   [731]10:32   [732]11:4
   [733]15:27   [734]15:29   [735]17   [736]17:18   [737]17:18-19
   [738]17:26-27   [739]17:32-33   [740]19:4   [741]19:16   [742]19:19
   [743]19:29   [744]19:30-31   [745]20:3   [746]20:3   [747]20:5
   [748]20:17-19   [749]21:13   [750]22   [751]22:8   [752]22:14
   [753]22:15-20   [754]22:19   [755]23:3   [756]23:3   [757]23:3
   [758]24:20

   1 Chronicles

   [759]3:17   [760]9   [761]12   [762]12:18   [763]12:18   [764]12:22
   [765]12:23   [766]12:32   [767]13:1   [768]13:2   [769]13:5
   [770]15:11-12   [771]15:25   [772]15:28   [773]15:28   [774]16:2-3
   [775]16:15-16   [776]16:24   [777]16:28-29   [778]17:8   [779]17:13
   [780]17:27   [781]18:1   [782]22:5   [783]23   [784]23:26
   [785]24:10   [786]25   [787]28:9   [788]28:11-12   [789]28:19
   [790]29:23   [791]29:29   [792]29:29

   2 Chronicles

   [793]3:1   [794]5   [795]5:2   [796]5:4   [797]5:14   [798]6
   [799]6:5-6   [800]6:23   [801]7   [802]7:1   [803]7:1-3   [804]9:29
   [805]11:13   [806]11:16   [807]12   [808]12:13   [809]12:15
   [810]12:15   [811]13:3   [812]13:4-5   [813]13:5-6   [814]13:8
   [815]13:12   [816]13:18   [817]13:22   [818]14:9   [819]14:11
   [820]15:12   [821]15:12   [822]15:12-14   [823]19:2   [824]19:10
   [825]20   [826]20   [827]20:25-26   [828]20:34   [829]21:7
   [830]22:9   [831]23:18   [832]24:18   [833]26:22   [834]28:13
   [835]29:30   [836]30:8   [837]31:20-21   [838]32:25   [839]32:25
   [840]34:31   [841]36:13   [842]36:20-21   [843]36:21   [844]36:22-23

   Ezra

   [845]1:1-4   [846]1:2-3   [847]1:4   [848]2   [849]2:55   [850]2:63
   [851]4   [852]4:20   [853]5   [854]6   [855]6   [856]7   [857]7
   [858]7:23   [859]9:4   [860]9:4   [861]10   [862]10:3   [863]10:19

   Nehemiah

   [864]2   [865]2:20   [866]3   [867]3   [868]3   [869]3:5   [870]3:5
   [871]3:9-19   [872]3:10   [873]3:12   [874]3:23   [875]3:26
   [876]3:28   [877]3:30   [878]3:31   [879]3:32   [880]3:32   [881]4
   [882]4:3   [883]4:5   [884]8   [885]8   [886]8:9-12   [887]8:16-17
   [888]8:17   [889]9   [890]9   [891]9   [892]9:2   [893]9:8
   [894]9:10   [895]9:10   [896]9:17   [897]9:31   [898]9:33-35
   [899]10   [900]10   [901]10:28-29   [902]11:3   [903]13:18

   Esther

   [904]1:4   [905]3:8   [906]3:13   [907]5:11   [908]8:16

   Job

   [909]1:7   [910]1:8   [911]1:9-10   [912]2:3-5   [913]4:1   [914]4:7
   [915]4:7   [916]4:7-9   [917]5:1   [918]5:11   [919]6:14   [920]9:2-3
   [921]9:2-3   [922]9:8   [923]9:8   [924]10:9   [925]11:8   [926]12:11
   [927]13:11   [928]14:4   [929]14:4   [930]15:7-10   [931]15:14-16
   [932]15:16   [933]15:17-35   [934]15:32-33   [935]16:9-11
   [936]17:2-4   [937]17:8-10   [938]17:9   [939]18:5-21   [940]18:8
   [941]19:9   [942]19:25   [943]19:25   [944]19:29   [945]20:4
   [946]20:4-8   [947]20:12-13   [948]20:23-29   [949]21:16-18
   [950]21:20-26   [951]21:29-32   [952]21:32   [953]22:13-20
   [954]22:15-16   [955]22:28   [956]23:10   [957]23:10   [958]23:13-14
   [959]24:19   [960]24:20   [961]24:24   [962]25:4   [963]25:5
   [964]27:3   [965]27:5   [966]27:5   [967]27:8-10   [968]27:8-10
   [969]27:11-23   [970]28:28   [971]28:28   [972]29:3   [973]29:20
   [974]30:8   [975]30:26   [976]31:3   [977]31:3-7   [978]31:18
   [979]31:23   [980]33:2-3   [981]33:16   [982]33:18   [983]33:22
   [984]33:22-24   [985]33:23   [986]33:24   [987]33:25   [988]33:27-28
   [989]33:27-28   [990]33:28   [991]33:28   [992]33:30   [993]34:3
   [994]34:11   [995]34:11   [996]34:21-26   [997]34:22   [998]36:6
   [999]36:7   [1000]36:9   [1001]37:6-7   [1002]37:12   [1003]37:18
   [1004]37:19   [1005]37:20   [1006]38:7   [1007]38:13   [1008]39:16
   [1009]42:2   [1010]42:6

   Psalms

   [1011]1   [1012]1   [1013]1   [1014]1   [1015]1   [1016]1:9
   [1017]1:16   [1018]1:16   [1019]2   [1020]2   [1021]2   [1022]2:1-2
   [1023]2:5   [1024]2:6-7   [1025]2:6-7   [1026]2:10-12   [1027]2:11
   [1028]2:11   [1029]2:11   [1030]4   [1031]4   [1032]4:2   [1033]6:1-5
   [1034]6:4   [1035]7:6   [1036]7:8-9   [1037]7:8-9   [1038]7:11
   [1039]7:11   [1040]8   [1041]8   [1042]8:1   [1043]8:1   [1044]8:1
   [1045]8:1-2   [1046]8:9   [1047]9:1   [1048]9:1   [1049]9:1-2
   [1050]9:10   [1051]9:11   [1052]9:14   [1053]9:14   [1054]10
   [1055]10:2-4   [1056]10:7   [1057]11   [1058]11   [1059]11:7
   [1060]12:1   [1061]13:3   [1062]14:2-3   [1063]14:2-3   [1064]14:4
   [1065]14:5   [1066]14:13   [1067]15   [1068]15:20   [1069]16:3
   [1070]16:5-6   [1071]16:10   [1072]17:9   [1073]18:25-26
   [1074]18:27   [1075]18:46   [1076]18:46   [1077]19:1   [1078]19:1
   [1079]19:1   [1080]19:4   [1081]19:4   [1082]19:6   [1083]19:7
   [1084]19:7-10   [1085]19:7-10   [1086]19:8   [1087]19:12   [1088]21:1
   [1089]21:8   [1090]21:14-15   [1091]22   [1092]22:6-7   [1093]22:11
   [1094]22:14   [1095]22:14   [1096]22:17   [1097]22:21-22
   [1098]22:21-23   [1099]22:23   [1100]23:3   [1101]23:5   [1102]23:14
   [1103]24:1-3   [1104]24:3-4   [1105]24:5   [1106]24:6   [1107]24:8
   [1108]24:10   [1109]25:5   [1110]25:7   [1111]25:9   [1112]25:11
   [1113]25:11   [1114]25:11   [1115]26:4-5   [1116]26:7   [1117]26:8
   [1118]27   [1119]27:1   [1120]27:4   [1121]27:4   [1122]27:4
   [1123]28:7   [1124]29:1-2   [1125]29:2   [1126]30   [1127]30:2-3
   [1128]30:5   [1129]30:9   [1130]30:9   [1131]30:9   [1132]30:12
   [1133]31:3   [1134]31:16   [1135]31:23   [1136]31:24   [1137]32
   [1138]32   [1139]32   [1140]32   [1141]32   [1142]32   [1143]32
   [1144]32   [1145]32   [1146]32:3-5   [1147]32:3-5   [1148]32:5
   [1149]32:5   [1150]33:1   [1151]33:2   [1152]33:10-11   [1153]33:18
   [1154]33:18   [1155]33:18   [1156]34:11   [1157]34:11   [1158]34:11
   [1159]34:18   [1160]34:18   [1161]34:21   [1162]35   [1163]35:4-5
   [1164]35:23   [1165]35:27-28   [1166]36   [1167]36:1   [1168]36:5-6
   [1169]36:8-9   [1170]36:10   [1171]37   [1172]37:4   [1173]37:9
   [1174]37:9-11   [1175]37:9-11   [1176]37:11   [1177]37:21
   [1178]37:21   [1179]37:26   [1180]37:29   [1181]38:4   [1182]38:10
   [1183]40:6-7   [1184]40:6-8   [1185]40:6-8   [1186]40:6-8   [1187]41
   [1188]42   [1189]42:1   [1190]42:1-2   [1191]42:4   [1192]42:4
   [1193]43:1   [1194]43:3-4   [1195]44:8   [1196]44:23   [1197]44:26
   [1198]45:3   [1199]45:3-4   [1200]45:3-4   [1201]45:3-4   [1202]45:4
   [1203]45:7   [1204]45:10   [1205]45:10   [1206]45:10-11   [1207]45:12
   [1208]45:13   [1209]45:13-14   [1210]45:14   [1211]46   [1212]46:9
   [1213]46:10   [1214]49:11   [1215]49:16-17   [1216]50   [1217]50:14
   [1218]50:16   [1219]50:16   [1220]50:17   [1221]50:23   [1222]50:23
   [1223]50:23   [1224]51:1-3   [1225]51:4   [1226]51:5   [1227]51:5
   [1228]51:5   [1229]51:6   [1230]51:6   [1231]51:9-12   [1232]51:10
   [1233]51:14   [1234]51:17   [1235]51:17   [1236]53:2-3
   [1237]55:12-14   [1238]55:17   [1239]56   [1240]57:4   [1241]57:5
   [1242]58   [1243]58:1-2   [1244]58:3   [1245]58:3-4   [1246]59:1
   [1247]59:4   [1248]63:1   [1249]63:1-2   [1250]63:1-2   [1251]63:3
   [1252]63:3-7   [1253]63:5   [1254]63:5-6   [1255]63:8   [1256]63:11
   [1257]65:3   [1258]65:7   [1259]66:3   [1260]66:3   [1261]66:3
   [1262]66:3   [1263]66:10   [1264]66:10-11   [1265]67:3-5   [1266]68:1
   [1267]68:3   [1268]68:3   [1269]68:6   [1270]68:13   [1271]68:13
   [1272]68:14   [1273]68:14   [1274]68:18-24   [1275]68:27   [1276]69
   [1277]69:4   [1278]69:4-9   [1279]69:6   [1280]69:7-8   [1281]69:8
   [1282]69:9   [1283]69:19   [1284]69:20   [1285]69:28   [1286]69:28
   [1287]69:29   [1288]69:32   [1289]69:32   [1290]69:35
   [1291]69:35-36   [1292]69:36   [1293]70:4   [1294]71:5-6
   [1295]71:17-18   [1296]71:18   [1297]71:22-23   [1298]71:23
   [1299]72:6   [1300]72:6   [1301]72:18-19   [1302]73   [1303]73:25
   [1304]74   [1305]74:7   [1306]74:8   [1307]74:12-14   [1308]74:19
   [1309]75:9   [1310]76:1   [1311]76:1   [1312]76:8-9   [1313]76:9
   [1314]78:7   [1315]78:7-8   [1316]78:34-37   [1317]78:36-37
   [1318]78:36-37   [1319]78:38-39   [1320]78:57   [1321]78:70-71
   [1322]79:9   [1323]79:9   [1324]79:9   [1325]79:13   [1326]81:12
   [1327]82   [1328]82   [1329]82   [1330]82:1   [1331]82:8
   [1332]82:18   [1333]83:25   [1334]84:1-2   [1335]84:1-2   [1336]84:2
   [1337]84:2   [1338]84:2   [1339]84:10   [1340]85:10   [1341]86:12
   [1342]87:6   [1343]88:9-11   [1344]88:10   [1345]88:15
   [1346]88:18-19   [1347]89:3-4   [1348]89:8-9   [1349]89:15
   [1350]89:15-16   [1351]89:19-20   [1352]89:20   [1353]89:34-36
   [1354]90   [1355]90:3-12   [1356]90:10   [1357]91:1   [1358]91:14
   [1359]92:12   [1360]95:7-10   [1361]96:2-3   [1362]96:9   [1363]96:11
   [1364]97:10   [1365]97:11-12   [1366]97:12   [1367]98:1
   [1368]99:2-3   [1369]99:2-3   [1370]99:5   [1371]99:8-9   [1372]100:4
   [1373]101:1   [1374]101:2-3   [1375]101:5   [1376]101:6
   [1377]102:15   [1378]102:16   [1379]102:21   [1380]102:25-26
   [1381]102:28   [1382]103:3   [1383]103:8   [1384]103:9
   [1385]103:14-15   [1386]103:17-18   [1387]103:19-22   [1388]104:33-34
   [1389]105:12-15   [1390]105:15   [1391]106:3   [1392]106:8
   [1393]106:8   [1394]106:12   [1395]106:12-15   [1396]106:32-33
   [1397]106:32-33   [1398]106:34   [1399]106:47   [1400]107:17
   [1401]107:21-22   [1402]107:22   [1403]107:29   [1404]107:29
   [1405]107:31-32   [1406]107:41   [1407]108:3-5   [1408]109:21
   [1409]110   [1410]110   [1411]110   [1412]110:1   [1413]110:3
   [1414]110:3   [1415]110:3   [1416]110:4   [1417]111:1   [1418]112:2
   [1419]112:4   [1420]112:4   [1421]112:5   [1422]112:7   [1423]112:9
   [1424]114   [1425]114:1-12   [1426]114:5   [1427]114:12
   [1428]114:13   [1429]115:1   [1430]115:1   [1431]115:4-8
   [1432]115:17-18   [1433]116:1   [1434]116:4   [1435]116:12
   [1436]117:27   [1437]118   [1438]118:17   [1439]118:17-18
   [1440]118:22   [1441]118:24   [1442]119   [1443]119:1   [1444]119:1-3
   [1445]119:2   [1446]119:6   [1447]119:6   [1448]119:8   [1449]119:14
   [1450]119:14   [1451]119:18   [1452]119:18   [1453]119:20
   [1454]119:20   [1455]119:20   [1456]119:28   [1457]119:53
   [1458]119:53   [1459]119:57   [1460]119:61   [1461]119:67
   [1462]119:71   [1463]119:75   [1464]119:97   [1465]119:99-100
   [1466]119:104   [1467]119:104   [1468]119:105   [1469]119:106
   [1470]119:111-112   [1471]119:120   [1472]119:120   [1473]119:120
   [1474]119:128   [1475]119:128   [1476]119:128   [1477]119:130
   [1478]119:131   [1479]119:131   [1480]119:136   [1481]119:136
   [1482]119:138   [1483]119:140   [1484]119:164   [1485]119:166
   [1486]119:172   [1487]122:3   [1488]122:8   [1489]125:4-5
   [1490]125:5   [1491]129   [1492]129   [1493]129   [1494]129:1-2
   [1495]130   [1496]130   [1497]130:6   [1498]131   [1499]131:1
   [1500]131:2   [1501]132   [1502]132:13-15   [1503]133:1-2
   [1504]133:1-2   [1505]135:3   [1506]135:3   [1507]135:13
   [1508]135:15-18   [1509]136   [1510]136:10   [1511]136:15
   [1512]136:17-20   [1513]137:9   [1514]137:9   [1515]138:2
   [1516]138:6   [1517]139:14-15   [1518]139:19   [1519]139:21
   [1520]139:21-22   [1521]140:3   [1522]143:2   [1523]143:2
   [1524]143:6-7   [1525]143:7   [1526]145:5-10   [1527]145:6
   [1528]145:8   [1529]145:11   [1530]145:12   [1531]146   [1532]146:4
   [1533]146:5   [1534]146:5-9   [1535]146:8   [1536]146:8   [1537]147:1
   [1538]147:1   [1539]147:6   [1540]147:6   [1541]147:11   [1542]147:11
   [1543]147:11   [1544]147:13   [1545]148   [1546]148:13   [1547]148:13
   [1548]148:13   [1549]148:13   [1550]149:1-2   [1551]149:2
   [1552]149:5   [1553]149:5   [1554]149:6   [1555]150:2   [1556]157:13
   [1557]158   [1558]160   [1559]160:31

   Proverbs

   [1560]1:3   [1561]1:18   [1562]1:20   [1563]1:24   [1564]2
   [1565]2:3   [1566]3:3   [1567]3:5   [1568]3:7   [1569]3:7
   [1570]3:34   [1571]4:14-19   [1572]4:18   [1573]5:5-6   [1574]5:19
   [1575]5:23   [1576]6:16-17   [1577]6:21   [1578]6:23   [1579]6:34
   [1580]7:3   [1581]7:27   [1582]8:3-4   [1583]8:4   [1584]8:13
   [1585]8:13   [1586]8:13   [1587]8:16   [1588]8:30   [1589]8:30-31
   [1590]8:36   [1591]8:36   [1592]9   [1593]9   [1594]9:4-6   [1595]9:5
   [1596]9:18   [1597]10:2   [1598]10:3   [1599]10:7   [1600]10:16
   [1601]10:20   [1602]10:21   [1603]10:21   [1604]10:24
   [1605]10:28-32   [1606]10:32   [1607]11:3   [1608]11:4   [1609]11:5
   [1610]11:9   [1611]11:11   [1612]11:18-23   [1613]11:19   [1614]11:19
   [1615]11:30   [1616]11:31   [1617]11:31   [1618]12:2   [1619]12:5-6
   [1620]12:17   [1621]12:23   [1622]12:23   [1623]12:26   [1624]12:28
   [1625]13:4   [1626]13:14   [1627]13:22   [1628]14:12   [1629]14:27
   [1630]14:31   [1631]14:31   [1632]15:2   [1633]15:10   [1634]15:19
   [1635]16:4   [1636]16:6   [1637]16:23   [1638]16:32   [1639]17:3
   [1640]17:15   [1641]17:15   [1642]17:27   [1643]18:5   [1644]18:21
   [1645]19:16   [1646]19:16   [1647]19:21   [1648]19:21   [1649]20:6
   [1650]20:6   [1651]20:6   [1652]20:6   [1653]20:9   [1654]20:11
   [1655]20:11   [1656]20:27   [1657]20:27   [1658]21:4   [1659]21:4
   [1660]21:8   [1661]21:26   [1662]22:1   [1663]22:1   [1664]22:6
   [1665]22:15   [1666]22:15   [1667]22:20-21   [1668]23:13
   [1669]23:13-14   [1670]24:12   [1671]25:2   [1672]25:14   [1673]26:11
   [1674]26:12   [1675]27:3   [1676]28   [1677]28:13   [1678]28:13
   [1679]28:13   [1680]28:13   [1681]28:13   [1682]28:14   [1683]29:21
   [1684]29:25   [1685]29:25   [1686]30:2-4   [1687]30:4   [1688]30:5-6
   [1689]30:6   [1690]30:6   [1691]30:17   [1692]30:32

   Ecclesiastes

   [1693]1:4   [1694]2:4-16   [1695]3:14   [1696]4:1-3   [1697]5:2-6
   [1698]7   [1699]7   [1700]7:8   [1701]7:15   [1702]7:20   [1703]7:20
   [1704]7:25-29   [1705]7:29   [1706]7:29   [1707]8:1   [1708]8:2
   [1709]8:14   [1710]9:2-3   [1711]9:3   [1712]9:3   [1713]9:10
   [1714]9:10   [1715]10:2-3   [1716]10:15   [1717]11:5   [1718]12:14
   [1719]25:24

   Song of Solomon

   [1720]1:3   [1721]1:4   [1722]1:15   [1723]2:1   [1724]2:1-6
   [1725]2:5   [1726]2:7   [1727]2:7   [1728]2:8   [1729]2:11-12
   [1730]2:12-13   [1731]2:14   [1732]2:15   [1733]3:1-2   [1734]3:5
   [1735]3:11   [1736]5:1   [1737]5:2   [1738]5:2   [1739]5:8
   [1740]6:1   [1741]6:8   [1742]6:12   [1743]6:19   [1744]7:2
   [1745]7:7   [1746]7:7-8   [1747]7:9   [1748]7:11-12   [1749]8:1
   [1750]8:4   [1751]8:6   [1752]8:11-12

   Isaiah

   [1753]1   [1754]1:2-4   [1755]1:10   [1756]1:10   [1757]1:11-17
   [1758]1:12-15   [1759]1:12-18   [1760]1:16   [1761]1:18   [1762]1:19
   [1763]1:22   [1764]2   [1765]2:3-4   [1766]2:3-4   [1767]2:4
   [1768]2:12   [1769]2:12-15   [1770]2:17   [1771]2:17   [1772]2:17-18
   [1773]2:18   [1774]2:18   [1775]3:13-15   [1776]3:24   [1777]4
   [1778]4   [1779]4:2   [1780]4:3   [1781]4:3-4   [1782]5:1-8
   [1783]5:14   [1784]5:20   [1785]5:21   [1786]5:90   [1787]6   [1788]6
   [1789]6   [1790]6:1   [1791]6:1   [1792]6:1-3   [1793]6:2-3
   [1794]6:3   [1795]6:3   [1796]6:9-11   [1797]6:10   [1798]6:10
   [1799]7   [1800]7:2   [1801]7:6   [1802]7:14   [1803]7:16   [1804]8:4
   [1805]8:14-15   [1806]8:14-16   [1807]8:14-17   [1808]8:20
   [1809]9:2   [1810]9:6   [1811]9:6   [1812]10:3   [1813]10:6
   [1814]10:16   [1815]10:18   [1816]10:19   [1817]10:22   [1818]11:1
   [1819]11:1   [1820]11:3   [1821]11:4   [1822]11:4   [1823]11:6
   [1824]11:6-7   [1825]11:6-9   [1826]11:6-10   [1827]11:9
   [1828]11:12   [1829]11:17   [1830]12:3   [1831]12:4   [1832]12:6
   [1833]13   [1834]13:14   [1835]14   [1836]14:3   [1837]14:4-6
   [1838]14:12   [1839]14:27   [1840]15   [1841]16:40   [1842]17:3-4
   [1843]17:4   [1844]17:12-13   [1845]18:3   [1846]19:18   [1847]19:18
   [1848]21:16   [1849]22:21   [1850]23:10   [1851]23:18   [1852]23:18
   [1853]24:1   [1854]24:15   [1855]24:19   [1856]24:23   [1857]24:23
   [1858]24:23   [1859]24:23   [1860]25:3   [1861]25:6   [1862]25:7
   [1863]26:4   [1864]26:5   [1865]26:8   [1866]26:10-11   [1867]26:17
   [1868]27:1   [1869]27:2-3   [1870]27:13   [1871]27:13   [1872]28:7
   [1873]28:9   [1874]28:13   [1875]28:13   [1876]28:13   [1877]28:16
   [1878]28:16   [1879]28:16   [1880]28:24-26   [1881]29   [1882]29:9
   [1883]29:13   [1884]29:14   [1885]29:19   [1886]29:24   [1887]30:9
   [1888]30:18   [1889]30:27   [1890]30:29   [1891]31:4   [1892]32
   [1893]32:2   [1894]32:2   [1895]32:3-4   [1896]32:5   [1897]32:8
   [1898]32:15   [1899]32:18   [1900]33:5   [1901]33:6   [1902]33:8
   [1903]33:14   [1904]33:16   [1905]35:1   [1906]35:1   [1907]35:3
   [1908]35:8   [1909]35:8   [1910]35:8   [1911]35:10   [1912]35:10
   [1913]36:2   [1914]38:3   [1915]38:6   [1916]38:18-19
   [1917]38:18-19   [1918]40:1-2   [1919]40:2   [1920]40:3   [1921]40:3
   [1922]40:3-5   [1923]40:4   [1924]40:5   [1925]40:6   [1926]40:8
   [1927]40:9   [1928]40:13   [1929]40:14   [1930]41   [1931]41:1
   [1932]41:2-3   [1933]41:3   [1934]41:4   [1935]41:8-9   [1936]41:10
   [1937]41:15   [1938]41:15   [1939]41:18-19   [1940]41:22-23
   [1941]42:5   [1942]42:6   [1943]42:8   [1944]42:10-12
   [1945]42:10-12   [1946]42:12   [1947]42:12   [1948]42:13-15
   [1949]42:14   [1950]42:21   [1951]43   [1952]43   [1953]43
   [1954]43:1-2   [1955]43:1-4   [1956]43:1-7   [1957]43:3-4
   [1958]43:6-7   [1959]43:16   [1960]43:20   [1961]43:21   [1962]43:22
   [1963]44   [1964]44   [1965]44:1   [1966]44:3   [1967]44:3-5
   [1968]44:3-5   [1969]44:6-7   [1970]44:12   [1971]44:23   [1972]44:23
   [1973]44:23   [1974]44:28   [1975]45   [1976]45:1   [1977]45:7
   [1978]45:9   [1979]45:11   [1980]45:11   [1981]45:11   [1982]45:11
   [1983]45:11   [1984]45:12   [1985]45:22   [1986]45:22
   [1987]45:22-25   [1988]45:22-25   [1989]45:23   [1990]45:23-24
   [1991]45:23-24   [1992]45:23-25   [1993]46:10   [1994]46:13
   [1995]47   [1996]47:12   [1997]47:15   [1998]48:1-2   [1999]48:1-2
   [2000]48:1-2   [2001]48:2   [2002]48:9   [2003]48:9   [2004]48:9-10
   [2005]48:9-11   [2006]48:9-11   [2007]48:9-12   [2008]48:10-11
   [2009]48:11   [2010]48:11   [2011]48:12   [2012]49   [2013]49
   [2014]49:1   [2015]49:3   [2016]49:3   [2017]49:3   [2018]49:4-7
   [2019]49:5-7   [2020]49:7-9   [2021]49:7-9   [2022]49:14-16
   [2023]49:15   [2024]49:22-23   [2025]49:23   [2026]49:23   [2027]50:5
   [2028]50:5-6   [2029]50:6   [2030]50:10   [2031]50:10   [2032]51:4-8
   [2033]51:6   [2034]51:6   [2035]51:8   [2036]51:8   [2037]51:8
   [2038]51:8   [2039]51:8   [2040]51:8   [2041]51:8   [2042]51:8
   [2043]51:22   [2044]52:1   [2045]52:1   [2046]52:7   [2047]52:7-8
   [2048]52:13   [2049]53   [2050]53   [2051]53   [2052]53:1-3
   [2053]53:2   [2054]53:7   [2055]53:8   [2056]53:9   [2057]53:10
   [2058]53:10-11   [2059]53:10-12   [2060]53:10-12   [2061]53:11-12
   [2062]53:12   [2063]54:8-9   [2064]54:9   [2065]54:10   [2066]54:17
   [2067]55   [2068]55:1   [2069]55:1   [2070]55:1-3   [2071]55:1-3
   [2072]55:2   [2073]55:3   [2074]55:3   [2075]55:4   [2076]55:6
   [2077]55:6   [2078]55:7   [2079]55:7   [2080]55:12   [2081]56
   [2082]56   [2083]56   [2084]56:1   [2085]56:1-8   [2086]56:3
   [2087]56:6   [2088]56:6-7   [2089]56:6-7   [2090]56:7   [2091]56:7-9
   [2092]57   [2093]57:1   [2094]57:1   [2095]57:5   [2096]57:14
   [2097]57:15   [2098]57:15   [2099]58:1   [2100]58:1-4   [2101]58:2
   [2102]58:4   [2103]58:5-7   [2104]58:7   [2105]58:8   [2106]59
   [2107]59:9   [2108]59:13   [2109]59:19   [2110]59:19   [2111]59:19
   [2112]59:21   [2113]60:1   [2114]60:1-2   [2115]60:3   [2116]60:4-5
   [2117]60:5   [2118]60:5-9   [2119]60:6   [2120]60:6   [2121]60:7
   [2122]60:8   [2123]60:9   [2124]60:9   [2125]60:9   [2126]60:11
   [2127]60:12   [2128]60:13   [2129]60:13   [2130]60:15   [2131]60:16
   [2132]60:16   [2133]60:19-20   [2134]60:20   [2135]60:20
   [2136]60:20   [2137]60:21   [2138]60:21   [2139]60:21   [2140]60:22
   [2141]61:1-2   [2142]61:1-2   [2143]61:2   [2144]61:3   [2145]61:4
   [2146]61:6   [2147]61:10   [2148]61:10-11   [2149]61:11   [2150]62:1
   [2151]62:1-2   [2152]62:2   [2153]62:4-5   [2154]62:5   [2155]62:5-6
   [2156]62:6-7   [2157]62:10   [2158]62:11   [2159]62:18   [2160]63
   [2161]63:8-10   [2162]63:12   [2163]63:15   [2164]63:17   [2165]64
   [2166]64:1-2   [2167]64:4   [2168]64:4   [2169]64:5   [2170]64:6
   [2171]65:1   [2172]65:5   [2173]65:5   [2174]65:8-9   [2175]65:13
   [2176]65:15-16   [2177]65:17   [2178]65:17-18   [2179]65:17-18
   [2180]65:20   [2181]65:20   [2182]65:20   [2183]65:21   [2184]65:25
   [2185]66:2   [2186]66:2   [2187]66:2   [2188]66:2   [2189]66:3
   [2190]66:5   [2191]66:5   [2192]66:7-8   [2193]66:7-9   [2194]66:8-9
   [2195]66:11   [2196]66:11-12   [2197]66:12   [2198]66:14
   [2199]66:16   [2200]66:19   [2201]66:19   [2202]66:22   [2203]66:24

   Jeremiah

   [2204]1   [2205]1:5   [2206]1:6   [2207]1:18-19   [2208]2:1-7
   [2209]2:2   [2210]2:2   [2211]2:2-3   [2212]2:2-3   [2213]2:2-3
   [2214]2:2-3   [2215]2:7   [2216]2:10-11   [2217]2:12   [2218]2:12-13
   [2219]2:21   [2220]2:21   [2221]2:23   [2222]3   [2223]3   [2224]3
   [2225]3   [2226]3:8   [2227]3:8   [2228]3:10   [2229]3:10
   [2230]3:12-14   [2231]3:13   [2232]3:13   [2233]3:14   [2234]3:14
   [2235]3:14   [2236]3:14   [2237]3:19   [2238]3:19   [2239]3:19
   [2240]3:19   [2241]3:19   [2242]3:21-23   [2243]3:21-23   [2244]3:22
   [2245]3:23-25   [2246]3:24-25   [2247]4:1   [2248]4:1-4   [2249]4:2
   [2250]4:2   [2251]4:2   [2252]4:3-4   [2253]4:19   [2254]5:1
   [2255]5:2   [2256]5:7   [2257]5:21   [2258]5:23   [2259]6:10-11
   [2260]6:10-11   [2261]6:13   [2262]6:20   [2263]6:29   [2264]6:30
   [2265]7:1-7   [2266]7:2   [2267]7:2   [2268]7:4   [2269]7:25-27
   [2270]7:27-29   [2271]8:7   [2272]8:11   [2273]9:1   [2274]10:11
   [2275]10:11   [2276]10:16   [2277]11:1-6   [2278]11:6   [2279]11:20
   [2280]11:20   [2281]12:5   [2282]12:9   [2283]12:16   [2284]12:16
   [2285]12:16   [2286]13:9   [2287]13:11   [2288]13:11   [2289]13:11
   [2290]13:11   [2291]13:11   [2292]13:11   [2293]13:15-16
   [2294]13:16   [2295]13:17   [2296]13:17   [2297]14:7   [2298]14:17
   [2299]14:21   [2300]15:4   [2301]15:19   [2302]16:14-15   [2303]17:5
   [2304]17:5   [2305]17:6   [2306]17:7   [2307]17:7-8   [2308]17:9
   [2309]17:9   [2310]17:10   [2311]17:10   [2312]17:13   [2313]17:24-27
   [2314]19:2   [2315]22:8-9   [2316]22:15-16   [2317]22:15-16
   [2318]22:16   [2319]23   [2320]23:5   [2321]23:5-6   [2322]23:5-8
   [2323]23:7-8   [2324]24:7   [2325]25:1-7   [2326]25:3   [2327]25:9
   [2328]25:11-12   [2329]25:11-12   [2330]25:14   [2331]25:15-27
   [2332]26:1-8   [2333]26:13   [2334]27:4-6   [2335]27:4-6   [2336]27:5
   [2337]29   [2338]29:10-11   [2339]29:12-14   [2340]29:26-27
   [2341]29:32   [2342]31:2-3   [2343]31:8-9   [2344]31:12-13
   [2345]31:18-31   [2346]31:27   [2347]31:29-31   [2348]31:30
   [2349]31:34   [2350]31:35-40   [2351]32:6-15   [2352]32:19
   [2353]32:30   [2354]32:30-31   [2355]32:39   [2356]32:41-44
   [2357]33:8   [2358]33:8-9   [2359]33:9   [2360]33:9   [2361]33:15
   [2362]33:15   [2363]33:15   [2364]33:20-21   [2365]33:24-26
   [2366]33:25-26   [2367]36:2   [2368]38:17-18   [2369]43:10-11
   [2370]44:26   [2371]44:26   [2372]44:26-27   [2373]48:11
   [2374]48:11   [2375]50   [2376]50:4-5   [2377]50:35   [2378]50:38
   [2379]51   [2380]51   [2381]51   [2382]51:10   [2383]51:20
   [2384]51:39   [2385]51:57   [2386]52:3   [2387]52:30

   Lamentations

   [2388]1:17   [2389]3   [2390]3:24   [2391]3:25   [2392]3:28
   [2393]3:33   [2394]3:37   [2395]3:39-40   [2396]5:7

   Ezekiel

   [2397]1:22   [2398]1:26   [2399]1:26-28   [2400]1:28   [2401]2:3-4
   [2402]3:7   [2403]3:7   [2404]3:18   [2405]3:19-20   [2406]3:20
   [2407]3:20   [2408]3:21   [2409]3:23   [2410]4:6   [2411]4:14
   [2412]5:5-10   [2413]5:13   [2414]6:7   [2415]6:8-10   [2416]6:10
   [2417]6:11   [2418]6:13   [2419]6:14   [2420]7:4   [2421]7:9
   [2422]7:16   [2423]7:27   [2424]8:1-2   [2425]8:4   [2426]9
   [2427]9:1-8   [2428]9:3   [2429]9:4   [2430]9:5-6   [2431]9:9-10
   [2432]10:4   [2433]10:18-19   [2434]11:10-12   [2435]11:19
   [2436]11:19   [2437]11:19   [2438]11:22-23   [2439]12:15-16
   [2440]12:20   [2441]13:4-5   [2442]13:7   [2443]13:9   [2444]13:14
   [2445]13:21   [2446]13:23   [2447]14:8   [2448]14:22-23   [2449]15:7
   [2450]16:2-3   [2451]16:46-47   [2452]16:47-48   [2453]16:51
   [2454]16:56   [2455]16:59   [2456]16:60   [2457]16:61-63
   [2458]16:62   [2459]16:63   [2460]16:63   [2461]16:63   [2462]16:63
   [2463]17:16   [2464]18:1-20   [2465]18:4   [2466]18:4   [2467]18:9
   [2468]18:13   [2469]18:17-21   [2470]18:21   [2471]18:24
   [2472]18:24   [2473]18:26   [2474]18:28   [2475]18:32   [2476]19:12
   [2477]20   [2478]20:6-8   [2479]20:6-8   [2480]20:7-8   [2481]20:8
   [2482]20:9   [2483]20:9   [2484]20:12   [2485]20:14   [2486]20:20
   [2487]20:22   [2488]20:34-38   [2489]20:35-36   [2490]20:35-37
   [2491]20:37-38   [2492]20:38   [2493]20:38-40   [2494]20:41
   [2495]20:42   [2496]20:42-43   [2497]20:43   [2498]20:43-44
   [2499]20:44   [2500]21:5   [2501]21:26   [2502]21:27   [2503]22:3
   [2504]22:14   [2505]22:16   [2506]22:18   [2507]22:26   [2508]23:3
   [2509]23:8   [2510]23:8   [2511]23:27   [2512]23:49   [2513]24
   [2514]24:13-14   [2515]24:17   [2516]24:21   [2517]25:5   [2518]25:7
   [2519]25:11   [2520]25:17   [2521]26:6   [2522]27:22-24   [2523]28:7
   [2524]28:17   [2525]28:22   [2526]28:22   [2527]28:25-26   [2528]29:9
   [2529]29:16   [2530]29:21   [2531]30:8   [2532]30:19   [2533]30:24-26
   [2534]30:26   [2535]30:26   [2536]31:18   [2537]32:8   [2538]32:15
   [2539]32:29   [2540]33:6   [2541]33:8-9   [2542]33:11
   [2543]33:12-13   [2544]33:12-13   [2545]33:12-14   [2546]33:13
   [2547]33:15   [2548]33:18   [2549]33:19   [2550]33:20   [2551]33:31
   [2552]33:31-32   [2553]34   [2554]34:23-24   [2555]34:27   [2556]35:4
   [2557]35:9   [2558]35:12   [2559]35:15   [2560]36:11   [2561]36:20
   [2562]36:21-22   [2563]36:21-23   [2564]36:25   [2565]36:25-26
   [2566]36:25-27   [2567]36:26   [2568]36:26   [2569]36:26-27
   [2570]36:31   [2571]36:37   [2572]36:38   [2573]37   [2574]37:6
   [2575]37:13   [2576]38:23   [2577]39:6-7   [2578]39:13   [2579]39:21
   [2580]39:21-22   [2581]39:21-23   [2582]39:22   [2583]39:25
   [2584]39:28-29   [2585]39:29   [2586]40:3-4   [2587]43:2   [2588]44:4
   [2589]44:6-7   [2590]44:6-8   [2591]44:6-9   [2592]44:9   [2593]47
   [2594]47

   Daniel

   [2595]2   [2596]2   [2597]2:3-4   [2598]2:31   [2599]2:40
   [2600]2:44   [2601]2:44   [2602]3:2   [2603]3:28-30   [2604]4:1-3
   [2605]4:1-3   [2606]4:13   [2607]4:17   [2608]4:17   [2609]4:23
   [2610]4:34   [2611]4:35   [2612]4:37   [2613]5   [2614]5:11
   [2615]5:23   [2616]5:27   [2617]5:30   [2618]6:25   [2619]6:25-27
   [2620]6:26   [2621]7   [2622]7   [2623]7   [2624]7   [2625]7:7
   [2626]7:8   [2627]7:8   [2628]7:10   [2629]7:11   [2630]7:13-14
   [2631]7:13-14   [2632]7:13-14   [2633]7:13-14   [2634]7:13-14
   [2635]7:14   [2636]7:19   [2637]7:20   [2638]7:20-21   [2639]7:20-21
   [2640]7:21   [2641]7:21   [2642]7:21   [2643]7:21   [2644]7:23
   [2645]7:25   [2646]7:27   [2647]7:27   [2648]7:27   [2649]7:27
   [2650]8   [2651]8   [2652]8:9   [2653]8:9   [2654]8:14
   [2655]8:15-16   [2656]8:21   [2657]8:23   [2658]8:23-27   [2659]8:25
   [2660]9   [2661]9   [2662]9:2   [2663]9:5   [2664]9:15   [2665]9:16
   [2666]9:19   [2667]9:24   [2668]9:27   [2669]9:27   [2670]10
   [2671]10:5-6   [2672]10:6-8   [2673]10:8   [2674]11   [2675]11
   [2676]11   [2677]11   [2678]11   [2679]11:3   [2680]11:4
   [2681]11:31-38   [2682]11:32   [2683]11:32   [2684]11:32
   [2685]11:32-34   [2686]11:34   [2687]11:35   [2688]11:45   [2689]12:1
   [2690]12:2   [2691]12:3   [2692]12:4   [2693]12:6   [2694]12:10
   [2695]12:10   [2696]12:10   [2697]12:11   [2698]12:12   [2699]34
   [2700]35   [2701]37

   Hosea

   [2702]1:2   [2703]1:10   [2704]1:11   [2705]2   [2706]2   [2707]2
   [2708]2:14   [2709]2:23   [2710]4:6   [2711]4:15   [2712]4:15
   [2713]5:15   [2714]5:15   [2715]6:1-3   [2716]6:1-3   [2717]6:6
   [2718]6:6   [2719]6:7   [2720]6:7   [2721]7:8   [2722]7:16
   [2723]8:2   [2724]9:10   [2725]9:10   [2726]9:11   [2727]10:4
   [2728]11:1   [2729]11:1   [2730]12:9-10   [2731]13:1   [2732]13:1
   [2733]13:5   [2734]13:9-10   [2735]14   [2736]14   [2737]14:4
   [2738]14:9

   Joel

   [2739]2:12-13   [2740]2:28-29   [2741]3:17   [2742]3:17

   Amos

   [2743]3:2   [2744]4:13   [2745]4:13   [2746]5:18   [2747]5:21
   [2748]7:14-15   [2749]8:14   [2750]9:7   [2751]9:11   [2752]9:13

   Jonah

   [2753]1:2   [2754]1:2-3   [2755]1:5-6   [2756]2   [2757]2:4
   [2758]2:4   [2759]2:5   [2760]2:5   [2761]2:7   [2762]2:7   [2763]2:7
   [2764]2:7   [2765]2:12   [2766]3:8-9   [2767]4:2   [2768]4:2
   [2769]4:7-8

   Micah

   [2770]3:11   [2771]4:4   [2772]4:5   [2773]5:1   [2774]5:2
   [2775]6:7-8   [2776]6:8   [2777]6:8   [2778]6:8   [2779]7:8-9
   [2780]7:18   [2781]7:19-20

   Nahum

   [2782]2:9

   Habakkuk

   [2783]2:4   [2784]2:5-12   [2785]2:5-20   [2786]2:14   [2787]3:16
   [2788]3:16   [2789]3:16

   Zephaniah

   [2790]1:5   [2791]3:4   [2792]3:9   [2793]3:15   [2794]3:17
   [2795]3:20

   Haggai

   [2796]1:8   [2797]2:3   [2798]2:6-7   [2799]2:7   [2800]2:7
   [2801]2:7   [2802]2:9   [2803]2:21-23

   Zechariah

   [2804]4:4-6   [2805]4:6-7   [2806]6:12-13   [2807]7   [2808]7:12
   [2809]7:12   [2810]8:4   [2811]8:5   [2812]8:10-11   [2813]8:23
   [2814]9:9   [2815]9:9-11   [2816]9:10   [2817]9:15-16   [2818]9:15-17
   [2819]9:16   [2820]9:16   [2821]9:20   [2822]10:3   [2823]10:8-9
   [2824]11:10-11   [2825]12:1-10   [2826]12:2-3   [2827]12:8
   [2828]12:8   [2829]12:9   [2830]12:10   [2831]12:10   [2832]12:10
   [2833]12:12-14   [2834]13:4   [2835]13:4   [2836]13:5   [2837]13:5
   [2838]13:9   [2839]14   [2840]14:6-7   [2841]14:9   [2842]14:20-21
   [2843]14:21   [2844]14:21

   Malachi

   [2845]1   [2846]1:11   [2847]1:13   [2848]2:7   [2849]3:1   [2850]3:3
   [2851]3:6   [2852]3:10   [2853]3:17   [2854]3:17   [2855]3:18
   [2856]4   [2857]4:1-3   [2858]4:2   [2859]4:2   [2860]4:2-3
   [2861]4:4   [2862]4:6

   Matthew

   [2863]1   [2864]1:21   [2865]2:19   [2866]3:2   [2867]3:5-6
   [2868]3:5-6   [2869]3:6   [2870]3:7   [2871]3:7   [2872]3:8
   [2873]3:9-11   [2874]3:10   [2875]3:11   [2876]3:13-15
   [2877]3:16-17   [2878]4:2   [2879]4:5-6   [2880]4:8   [2881]4:17
   [2882]4:17   [2883]4:18-22   [2884]5   [2885]5   [2886]5   [2887]5:3
   [2888]5:3-4   [2889]5:4   [2890]5:4   [2891]5:6   [2892]5:7
   [2893]5:7   [2894]5:9   [2895]5:12   [2896]5:12   [2897]5:15-16
   [2898]5:16   [2899]5:16   [2900]5:19   [2901]5:29-30   [2902]5:29-30
   [2903]5:45-46   [2904]5:46   [2905]6   [2906]6:5   [2907]6:5-6
   [2908]6:5-6   [2909]6:6   [2910]6:12   [2911]6:12   [2912]6:14
   [2913]6:14   [2914]6:14   [2915]6:14-15   [2916]6:15   [2917]6:16
   [2918]6:16-18   [2919]6:17   [2920]6:24   [2921]6:29   [2922]7
   [2923]7   [2924]7   [2925]7   [2926]7   [2927]7:11   [2928]7:11
   [2929]7:13-14   [2930]7:14   [2931]7:15   [2932]7:15   [2933]7:16
   [2934]7:19-20   [2935]7:20   [2936]7:23   [2937]7:23   [2938]8:3
   [2939]8:3   [2940]8:5-13   [2941]8:11   [2942]8:19-20   [2943]8:19-22
   [2944]8:20   [2945]8:20   [2946]8:24-26   [2947]9:8   [2948]9:9-13
   [2949]9:12   [2950]9:12   [2951]9:13   [2952]9:13   [2953]9:13
   [2954]9:13   [2955]9:28   [2956]9:36   [2957]10:7   [2958]10:7
   [2959]10:13-14   [2960]10:14-15   [2961]10:14-15   [2962]10:16
   [2963]10:16-17   [2964]10:16-17   [2965]10:16-18   [2966]10:21
   [2967]10:22   [2968]10:22   [2969]10:28   [2970]10:34-36
   [2971]10:37-39   [2972]10:37-39   [2973]10:37-39   [2974]10:37-39
   [2975]10:39   [2976]10:39   [2977]10:41   [2978]10:41-42
   [2979]10:42   [2980]10:42   [2981]10:42   [2982]11   [2983]11:11
   [2984]11:11   [2985]11:11   [2986]11:12   [2987]11:12
   [2988]11:19-24   [2989]11:27   [2990]11:27   [2991]11:27
   [2992]11:28   [2993]11:28-29   [2994]11:28-30   [2995]11:28-30
   [2996]11:29   [2997]11:29   [2998]11:29   [2999]11:29   [3000]12
   [3001]12:7   [3002]12:7   [3003]12:18   [3004]12:30   [3005]12:32
   [3006]12:33   [3007]12:33   [3008]12:34-35   [3009]12:34-35
   [3010]12:37   [3011]12:37   [3012]12:39   [3013]12:43-45
   [3014]12:45   [3015]12:45   [3016]12:45   [3017]12:49-50
   [3018]12:50   [3019]13   [3020]13   [3021]13   [3022]13:4-8
   [3023]13:8   [3024]13:14   [3025]13:14-15   [3026]13:14-15
   [3027]13:17   [3028]13:19-23   [3029]13:20   [3030]13:21
   [3031]13:23-30   [3032]13:26   [3033]13:31-32   [3034]13:33
   [3035]13:38   [3036]13:38   [3037]13:38   [3038]13:44
   [3039]13:44-46   [3040]14:12   [3041]14:14   [3042]14:31   [3043]15:3
   [3044]15:9   [3045]15:21-28   [3046]15:22   [3047]15:26
   [3048]15:26-28   [3049]15:26-28   [3050]15:26-28   [3051]15:31
   [3052]15:32   [3053]16:15-17   [3054]16:16   [3055]16:16-17
   [3056]16:17   [3057]16:17   [3058]16:18   [3059]16:18   [3060]16:18
   [3061]16:18   [3062]16:21   [3063]16:23   [3064]16:23   [3065]16:23
   [3066]16:24   [3067]16:27   [3068]16:27   [3069]16:28   [3070]17:5
   [3071]17:27   [3072]18:3   [3073]18:3   [3074]18:3   [3075]18:3
   [3076]18:3   [3077]18:3   [3078]18:3-4   [3079]18:4   [3080]18:4
   [3081]18:6   [3082]18:7   [3083]18:8-9   [3084]18:11   [3085]18:19
   [3086]18:21   [3087]18:21-22   [3088]18:21-35   [3089]18:22
   [3090]18:31   [3091]18:34   [3092]18:35   [3093]18:35   [3094]18:35
   [3095]19:4   [3096]19:6   [3097]19:10   [3098]19:14   [3099]19:14
   [3100]19:14   [3101]19:16   [3102]19:21   [3103]19:27   [3104]19:28
   [3105]19:29   [3106]19:29   [3107]20:8-15   [3108]20:12-16
   [3109]20:15   [3110]20:15   [3111]20:16   [3112]20:17-19
   [3113]20:23   [3114]21:4-5   [3115]21:5   [3116]21:8-10   [3117]21:9
   [3118]21:15-16   [3119]21:16   [3120]21:18   [3121]21:19
   [3122]21:19   [3123]21:21   [3124]21:28-32   [3125]21:32
   [3126]21:32   [3127]21:32   [3128]21:32   [3129]21:33
   [3130]21:33-42   [3131]21:33-42   [3132]21:34   [3133]21:42
   [3134]22   [3135]22   [3136]22:1-7   [3137]22:1-10   [3138]22:4
   [3139]22:6   [3140]22:11   [3141]22:11-13   [3142]22:12   [3143]22:13
   [3144]22:14   [3145]22:14   [3146]22:30   [3147]22:37-40
   [3148]22:39-40   [3149]23   [3150]23   [3151]23   [3152]23:1-33
   [3153]23:6-7   [3154]23:13   [3155]23:13   [3156]23:14   [3157]23:23
   [3158]23:25-34   [3159]23:29-31   [3160]23:34   [3161]23:34-39
   [3162]24   [3163]24   [3164]24   [3165]24:2   [3166]24:4-5
   [3167]24:9   [3168]24:10   [3169]24:10-13   [3170]24:11
   [3171]24:12-13   [3172]24:12-13   [3173]24:21   [3174]24:21
   [3175]24:22   [3176]24:30   [3177]24:30-31   [3178]24:31
   [3179]24:31   [3180]24:35   [3181]25   [3182]25   [3183]25   [3184]25
   [3185]25   [3186]25   [3187]25   [3188]25   [3189]25   [3190]25
   [3191]25:8   [3192]25:19-30   [3193]25:26   [3194]25:30   [3195]25:31
   [3196]25:32-33   [3197]25:34   [3198]25:34   [3199]25:35
   [3200]25:35   [3201]25:35   [3202]25:41   [3203]25:41   [3204]25:46
   [3205]26   [3206]26:8-16   [3207]26:14-16   [3208]26:21-25
   [3209]26:23   [3210]26:28   [3211]26:28   [3212]26:29   [3213]26:31
   [3214]26:31-35   [3215]26:39   [3216]26:41   [3217]26:41
   [3218]26:42   [3219]26:53-54   [3220]26:64-65   [3221]26:75
   [3222]27:29   [3223]27:34   [3224]27:35   [3225]27:40   [3226]27:43
   [3227]27:43   [3228]27:48   [3229]28   [3230]28:8   [3231]28:8
   [3232]28:9   [3233]28:18-19   [3234]28:19-20   [3235]45:46

   Mark

   [3236]1:3   [3237]1:4   [3238]1:4   [3239]1:15   [3240]1:15
   [3241]1:15   [3242]1:22   [3243]2:12   [3244]2:17   [3245]2:28
   [3246]3:5   [3247]3:5   [3248]4:26-28   [3249]4:26-28   [3250]4:33
   [3251]5:25   [3252]6:3   [3253]6:20   [3254]6:34   [3255]6:34
   [3256]7:18-20   [3257]8:38   [3258]9:1   [3259]9:24   [3260]9:41
   [3261]10:15   [3262]10:17   [3263]10:17-23   [3264]10:46-48
   [3265]11:12   [3266]11:23   [3267]11:25-26   [3268]12:30   [3269]13:9
   [3270]14:3   [3271]14:4-11   [3272]14:10-11   [3273]14:20
   [3274]14:33   [3275]14:49   [3276]14:65   [3277]14:72   [3278]15:23
   [3279]15:31   [3280]16:15-16   [3281]16:15-16   [3282]16:16

   Luke

   [3283]1   [3284]1   [3285]1:6   [3286]1:16-17   [3287]1:17
   [3288]1:17   [3289]1:32   [3290]1:32   [3291]1:33   [3292]1:35
   [3293]1:35   [3294]1:35   [3295]1:41   [3296]1:45   [3297]1:46
   [3298]1:46   [3299]1:53   [3300]1:54-55   [3301]1:72   [3302]1:72-73
   [3303]1:73   [3304]1:74-75   [3305]1:74-75   [3306]2   [3307]2:1
   [3308]2:7   [3309]2:9   [3310]2:9   [3311]2:14   [3312]2:14
   [3313]2:24   [3314]2:24   [3315]2:25   [3316]2:25   [3317]2:36
   [3318]2:37   [3319]2:38   [3320]2:42   [3321]2:51   [3322]3:3
   [3323]3:3   [3324]3:3   [3325]3:3   [3326]3:4   [3327]3:6
   [3328]3:10-14   [3329]3:12   [3330]3:12   [3331]3:14   [3332]3:14
   [3333]4:15   [3334]5   [3335]5:5   [3336]5:6-7   [3337]5:26
   [3338]5:27-28   [3339]5:27-28   [3340]6   [3341]6:23   [3342]6:32
   [3343]6:47   [3344]7   [3345]7   [3346]7   [3347]7:6-9   [3348]7:6-9
   [3349]7:13   [3350]7:16   [3351]7:18   [3352]7:29-30   [3353]7:37
   [3354]7:37   [3355]7:37-38   [3356]7:37-38   [3357]7:37-38
   [3358]7:47   [3359]7:50   [3360]7:50   [3361]7:50   [3362]8   [3363]8
   [3364]8:2-3   [3365]8:13   [3366]8:43-44   [3367]9:22   [3368]9:31-32
   [3369]9:55   [3370]9:57-58   [3371]9:62   [3372]10:3   [3373]10:3
   [3374]10:16   [3375]10:21   [3376]10:21-22   [3377]10:28
   [3378]10:29   [3379]10:42   [3380]10:42   [3381]11:4   [3382]11:24
   [3383]11:49-51   [3384]11:52   [3385]12:11   [3386]12:33-34
   [3387]12:35   [3388]12:49-53   [3389]12:51   [3390]12:56
   [3391]12:57   [3392]12:57   [3393]13:1-5   [3394]13:3   [3395]13:3
   [3396]13:3   [3397]13:5   [3398]13:5   [3399]13:6   [3400]13:16
   [3401]13:21   [3402]13:23-24   [3403]13:24   [3404]13:24
   [3405]13:25   [3406]13:25-29   [3407]13:26   [3408]13:27
   [3409]13:28   [3410]13:28-30   [3411]13:33-35   [3412]13:34
   [3413]14   [3414]14   [3415]14:7   [3416]14:10   [3417]14:14
   [3418]14:16-20   [3419]14:16-21   [3420]14:16-24   [3421]14:16-24
   [3422]14:16-24   [3423]14:25-27   [3424]14:25-27   [3425]14:25-33
   [3426]14:25-33   [3427]14:26-27   [3428]14:33   [3429]14:33
   [3430]15   [3431]15   [3432]15:7   [3433]15:7   [3434]15:10
   [3435]15:10   [3436]15:18   [3437]15:26-32   [3438]16:13
   [3439]16:13   [3440]16:16   [3441]16:16   [3442]16:16   [3443]16:16
   [3444]16:22   [3445]16:26   [3446]16:30   [3447]16:30
   [3448]17:12-19   [3449]17:25   [3450]17:26   [3451]17:32   [3452]18
   [3453]18:7   [3454]18:8   [3455]18:9   [3456]18:9   [3457]18:9
   [3458]18:11   [3459]18:11   [3460]18:11   [3461]18:14   [3462]18:14
   [3463]18:14   [3464]18:14   [3465]18:38-39   [3466]19:1-10
   [3467]19:4   [3468]19:10   [3469]19:10   [3470]19:14   [3471]19:15-23
   [3472]19:27   [3473]19:39-40   [3474]19:41-42   [3475]19:41-42
   [3476]19:41-42   [3477]19:41-44   [3478]19:44   [3479]20:13-18
   [3480]20:13-18   [3481]20:16   [3482]20:35   [3483]20:35
   [3484]20:35   [3485]20:35   [3486]20:35-36   [3487]21:12
   [3488]21:16   [3489]21:17   [3490]21:22   [3491]21:22-23
   [3492]21:27   [3493]21:28   [3494]21:28   [3495]21:28   [3496]21:36
   [3497]21:36   [3498]21:36   [3499]21:41-43   [3500]22:3-6
   [3501]22:7   [3502]22:8-10   [3503]22:15   [3504]22:20   [3505]22:21
   [3506]22:21-22   [3507]22:28   [3508]22:28   [3509]22:28
   [3510]22:28   [3511]22:29   [3512]22:30   [3513]22:30
   [3514]22:31-34   [3515]22:41   [3516]22:53   [3517]22:53
   [3518]22:62   [3519]23:29   [3520]23:34   [3521]23:34   [3522]23:34
   [3523]23:34-39   [3524]24:18   [3525]24:26   [3526]24:32
   [3527]24:32   [3528]24:44   [3529]24:45   [3530]24:47   [3531]24:47
   [3532]24:49   [3533]24:53

   John

   [3534]1:5   [3535]1:11   [3536]1:12   [3537]1:12   [3538]1:12
   [3539]1:12   [3540]1:12-13   [3541]1:14   [3542]1:14   [3543]1:14
   [3544]1:14   [3545]1:14   [3546]1:14   [3547]1:16   [3548]1:16
   [3549]1:17   [3550]1:17   [3551]1:18   [3552]1:34   [3553]1:47
   [3554]2:11   [3555]2:11   [3556]2:17   [3557]2:17   [3558]2:23-25
   [3559]3:1-11   [3560]3:3   [3561]3:3-11   [3562]3:5   [3563]3:5
   [3564]3:6   [3565]3:6   [3566]3:6   [3567]3:6   [3568]3:6
   [3569]3:11   [3570]3:15   [3571]3:16   [3572]3:16   [3573]3:16
   [3574]3:18   [3575]3:18-19   [3576]3:18-19   [3577]3:19-20
   [3578]3:24   [3579]3:26   [3580]3:30   [3581]3:30   [3582]3:30
   [3583]3:30   [3584]3:35   [3585]3:36   [3586]3:36   [3587]3:39
   [3588]4:9   [3589]4:14   [3590]4:14   [3591]4:14   [3592]4:14
   [3593]4:14   [3594]4:21   [3595]4:23   [3596]4:24   [3597]4:32
   [3598]4:34   [3599]4:34   [3600]4:35-36   [3601]4:35-38   [3602]4:39
   [3603]5:17   [3604]5:23   [3605]5:24   [3606]5:24   [3607]5:24
   [3608]5:24   [3609]5:24   [3610]5:24-29   [3611]5:33   [3612]5:33
   [3613]5:35   [3614]5:35   [3615]5:35   [3616]5:35   [3617]5:35
   [3618]5:36   [3619]5:38-40   [3620]5:38-40   [3621]5:40   [3622]5:40
   [3623]5:42   [3624]5:43   [3625]5:43   [3626]5:45   [3627]6
   [3628]6:19   [3629]6:19   [3630]6:28   [3631]6:28   [3632]6:35-39
   [3633]6:35-39   [3634]6:37   [3635]6:39-40   [3636]6:40   [3637]6:40
   [3638]6:40   [3639]6:40   [3640]6:40   [3641]6:40   [3642]6:45
   [3643]6:47   [3644]6:49-50   [3645]6:50   [3646]6:50   [3647]6:51
   [3648]6:51   [3649]6:54   [3650]6:54   [3651]6:58   [3652]6:68-69
   [3653]7:5   [3654]7:7   [3655]7:7   [3656]7:18   [3657]7:18
   [3658]7:20   [3659]7:37   [3660]7:37-38   [3661]7:37-38
   [3662]7:37-39   [3663]7:38-39   [3664]7:38-39   [3665]8:23
   [3666]8:23   [3667]8:28   [3668]8:30-31   [3669]8:30-31
   [3670]8:30-31   [3671]8:31   [3672]8:31   [3673]8:33-44   [3674]8:34
   [3675]8:44   [3676]8:48   [3677]8:51   [3678]8:56   [3679]9:7
   [3680]9:22   [3681]9:39   [3682]9:40   [3683]10:16   [3684]10:17-18
   [3685]10:17-18   [3686]10:17-18   [3687]10:18   [3688]10:18
   [3689]10:18   [3690]10:20   [3691]10:25   [3692]10:27   [3693]10:34
   [3694]10:34-36   [3695]11   [3696]11:25-26   [3697]11:26
   [3698]11:35   [3699]11:40   [3700]12:4   [3701]12:8   [3702]12:18
   [3703]12:19   [3704]12:19-21   [3705]12:23   [3706]12:23
   [3707]12:23-24   [3708]12:23-24   [3709]12:23-24   [3710]12:23-32
   [3711]12:23-32   [3712]12:24   [3713]12:24   [3714]12:27-28
   [3715]12:27-28   [3716]12:27-29   [3717]12:28   [3718]12:28
   [3719]12:28-29   [3720]12:31   [3721]12:31   [3722]12:31-32
   [3723]12:32   [3724]12:39-40   [3725]12:39-41   [3726]12:40
   [3727]12:41   [3728]12:45   [3729]12:49-50   [3730]12:49-50
   [3731]13   [3732]13:2   [3733]13:15-16   [3734]13:15-16   [3735]13:17
   [3736]13:24-27   [3737]13:27-30   [3738]13:31-32   [3739]13:31-32
   [3740]13:31-32   [3741]13:31-32   [3742]13:33   [3743]13:34
   [3744]13:34   [3745]13:34-35   [3746]13:35   [3747]13:35
   [3748]13:35   [3749]13:36   [3750]13:38   [3751]14   [3752]14
   [3753]14   [3754]14:15   [3755]14:16-17   [3756]14:16-17
   [3757]14:17   [3758]14:17   [3759]14:17   [3760]14:18   [3761]14:19
   [3762]14:21   [3763]14:21   [3764]14:21   [3765]14:21   [3766]14:21
   [3767]14:23   [3768]14:24   [3769]14:28   [3770]14:31   [3771]14:31
   [3772]14:31   [3773]15   [3774]15   [3775]15   [3776]15:1
   [3777]15:1   [3778]15:1-2   [3779]15:2   [3780]15:4   [3781]15:5
   [3782]15:6   [3783]15:6-7   [3784]15:6-7   [3785]15:6-8   [3786]15:8
   [3787]15:8   [3788]15:8   [3789]15:8   [3790]15:8   [3791]15:8
   [3792]15:8   [3793]15:9-10   [3794]15:9-10   [3795]15:10
   [3796]15:10   [3797]15:10   [3798]15:10   [3799]15:10   [3800]15:11
   [3801]15:12   [3802]15:12   [3803]15:12   [3804]15:13
   [3805]15:13-15   [3806]15:14   [3807]15:14   [3808]15:14
   [3809]15:16   [3810]15:16   [3811]15:17   [3812]15:18-19
   [3813]15:18-19   [3814]15:18-21   [3815]15:24   [3816]15:25
   [3817]16   [3818]16:1-4   [3819]16:8   [3820]16:12-13
   [3821]16:12-13   [3822]16:13   [3823]16:15   [3824]16:20-21
   [3825]16:20-22   [3826]16:23   [3827]16:27   [3828]16:27
   [3829]16:32   [3830]16:32   [3831]16:33   [3832]17   [3833]17
   [3834]17   [3835]17:1   [3836]17:1   [3837]17:1   [3838]17:2
   [3839]17:2   [3840]17:3   [3841]17:4   [3842]17:4-5   [3843]17:5
   [3844]17:6-8   [3845]17:6-8   [3846]17:7   [3847]17:8   [3848]17:9
   [3849]17:10   [3850]17:11   [3851]17:13   [3852]17:13   [3853]17:13
   [3854]17:14   [3855]17:19   [3856]17:20   [3857]17:21   [3858]17:21
   [3859]17:21   [3860]17:21-23   [3861]17:22   [3862]17:22-23
   [3863]17:23   [3864]17:23   [3865]17:24   [3866]17:26   [3867]17:26
   [3868]17:26   [3869]18:1-2   [3870]18:11   [3871]18:11   [3872]18:31
   [3873]18:36   [3874]19:9   [3875]19:15   [3876]19:24   [3877]19:29
   [3878]19:30   [3879]20   [3880]20:17   [3881]20:19   [3882]20:22
   [3883]20:26   [3884]20:29   [3885]21:3   [3886]21:6   [3887]21:7
   [3888]21:14   [3889]21:15   [3890]21:15   [3891]21:18-19
   [3892]21:22   [3893]22:30-32

   Acts

   [3894]1:3   [3895]1:4   [3896]1:13-14   [3897]1:16-17   [3898]2
   [3899]2   [3900]2   [3901]2   [3902]2   [3903]2   [3904]2   [3905]2:1
   [3906]2:11   [3907]2:13   [3908]2:16   [3909]2:17   [3910]2:23
   [3911]2:23   [3912]2:23   [3913]2:29-30   [3914]2:29-30   [3915]2:30
   [3916]2:36   [3917]2:37   [3918]2:37   [3919]2:38   [3920]2:38
   [3921]2:38   [3922]2:38   [3923]2:38   [3924]2:38-39   [3925]2:39
   [3926]2:41   [3927]2:41   [3928]2:41   [3929]2:42   [3930]2:42
   [3931]2:46   [3932]2:46   [3933]2:46   [3934]2:46   [3935]2:46-47
   [3936]2:46-47   [3937]2:46-47   [3938]2:47   [3939]3   [3940]3:8
   [3941]3:14   [3942]3:17   [3943]3:17-18   [3944]3:18   [3945]3:19
   [3946]3:19   [3947]3:19   [3948]3:19   [3949]3:19   [3950]3:21
   [3951]3:24   [3952]3:24   [3953]3:24   [3954]4:4   [3955]4:11
   [3956]4:13   [3957]4:21   [3958]4:25-28   [3959]4:27   [3960]4:27-28
   [3961]4:28   [3962]4:32   [3963]4:32   [3964]4:32   [3965]4:32
   [3966]4:34-35   [3967]5:1-11   [3968]5:4   [3969]5:31   [3970]5:31
   [3971]5:31   [3972]5:42   [3973]6:1   [3974]6:7   [3975]6:15
   [3976]7   [3977]7   [3978]7   [3979]7:6-7   [3980]7:42   [3981]7:45
   [3982]7:45   [3983]7:51-53   [3984]7:55   [3985]8   [3986]8:8-12
   [3987]8:13   [3988]8:22   [3989]8:23   [3990]8:37   [3991]8:37
   [3992]8:37   [3993]9:6   [3994]9:16   [3995]10   [3996]10
   [3997]10:22   [3998]10:28   [3999]10:43   [4000]11   [4001]11
   [4002]11:18   [4003]11:18   [4004]11:18   [4005]11:19-21
   [4006]11:23   [4007]11:26   [4008]11:26   [4009]12:25   [4010]13:5
   [4011]13:24   [4012]13:32-33   [4013]13:33   [4014]13:34
   [4015]13:41   [4016]13:41   [4017]13:41   [4018]13:43   [4019]13:45
   [4020]13:46   [4021]13:46   [4022]13:46-47   [4023]13:48
   [4024]13:48   [4025]14:3   [4026]14:17   [4027]14:22   [4028]15
   [4029]15   [4030]15:9   [4031]15:14   [4032]15:18   [4033]15:21
   [4034]15:32   [4035]15:37   [4036]15:41   [4037]16   [4038]16:3
   [4039]16:3   [4040]16:3   [4041]16:29   [4042]16:31   [4043]16:31
   [4044]17:6   [4045]17:18   [4046]17:22   [4047]17:26-27   [4048]17:30
   [4049]17:30   [4050]18:6   [4051]18:6   [4052]19   [4053]19:4
   [4054]19:4   [4055]19:4   [4056]19:4   [4057]19:4-5   [4058]19:8-10
   [4059]19:8-10   [4060]19:9   [4061]20:1   [4062]20:18   [4063]20:19
   [4064]20:20   [4065]20:21   [4066]20:21   [4067]20:23
   [4068]20:26-27   [4069]20:29-30   [4070]20:31   [4071]20:32
   [4072]21:11   [4073]21:20   [4074]21:20   [4075]22:3   [4076]22:11
   [4077]22:18   [4078]26:18   [4079]26:18   [4080]26:18   [4081]26:18
   [4082]26:20   [4083]26:20   [4084]26:20   [4085]26:24   [4086]26:25
   [4087]27:9   [4088]28:4   [4089]28:24   [4090]28:25-27   [4091]28:28
   [4092]46   [4093]47   [4094]100

   Romans

   [4095]1   [4096]1   [4097]1:1-3   [4098]1:4   [4099]1:5   [4100]1:7
   [4101]1:9   [4102]1:11   [4103]1:12-13   [4104]1:16   [4105]1:16-17
   [4106]1:17   [4107]1:17   [4108]1:19-21   [4109]1:20   [4110]1:20
   [4111]1:21   [4112]1:21   [4113]1:24   [4114]1:24   [4115]1:25
   [4116]1:25   [4117]1:26   [4118]1:26   [4119]1:27   [4120]1:27
   [4121]1:28   [4122]1:28   [4123]1:32   [4124]1:36   [4125]2:1
   [4126]2:1-3   [4127]2:4-5   [4128]2:5   [4129]2:5   [4130]2:5
   [4131]2:5   [4132]2:5   [4133]2:5   [4134]2:6-13   [4135]2:7
   [4136]2:7   [4137]2:7   [4138]2:7   [4139]2:7   [4140]2:7   [4141]2:9
   [4142]2:9   [4143]2:10   [4144]2:10   [4145]2:12   [4146]2:12
   [4147]2:12   [4148]2:12   [4149]2:12-16   [4150]2:13   [4151]2:13
   [4152]2:13   [4153]2:14   [4154]2:14   [4155]2:14   [4156]2:14
   [4157]2:14-15   [4158]2:14-15   [4159]2:15   [4160]2:15   [4161]2:15
   [4162]2:17-19   [4163]2:17-20   [4164]2:18   [4165]2:18   [4166]2:19
   [4167]2:19-20   [4168]2:20   [4169]2:20   [4170]2:20   [4171]2:22-23
   [4172]2:22-23   [4173]2:22-23   [4174]2:22-23   [4175]2:22-23
   [4176]2:22-23   [4177]2:23   [4178]2:27   [4179]2:27   [4180]2:27
   [4181]2:27   [4182]2:27   [4183]2:28-29   [4184]2:28-29   [4185]2:29
   [4186]2:31   [4187]3   [4188]3   [4189]3   [4190]3   [4191]3:7
   [4192]3:7   [4193]3:9   [4194]3:9   [4195]3:9   [4196]3:9   [4197]3:9
   [4198]3:9-10   [4199]3:9-15   [4200]3:9-15   [4201]3:9-24
   [4202]3:9-24   [4203]3:9-24   [4204]3:10-12   [4205]3:10-12
   [4206]3:10-19   [4207]3:10-19   [4208]3:11   [4209]3:12   [4210]3:13
   [4211]3:13-15   [4212]3:14-15   [4213]3:14-15   [4214]3:15
   [4215]3:15   [4216]3:16-18   [4217]3:18   [4218]3:19   [4219]3:19
   [4220]3:19   [4221]3:19   [4222]3:19   [4223]3:19-20   [4224]3:19-20
   [4225]3:19-20   [4226]3:20   [4227]3:20   [4228]3:20   [4229]3:20
   [4230]3:20   [4231]3:20   [4232]3:20   [4233]3:20   [4234]3:23
   [4235]3:23   [4236]3:24   [4237]3:24   [4238]3:25-26   [4239]3:25-26
   [4240]3:25-26   [4241]3:26-28   [4242]3:26-28   [4243]3:27
   [4244]3:27   [4245]3:27   [4246]4   [4247]4   [4248]4   [4249]4
   [4250]4   [4251]4   [4252]4   [4253]4   [4254]4   [4255]4   [4256]4
   [4257]4   [4258]4   [4259]4   [4260]4:1-2   [4261]4:2   [4262]4:2
   [4263]4:4   [4264]4:4   [4265]4:4   [4266]4:4   [4267]4:5   [4268]4:5
   [4269]4:5   [4270]4:5   [4271]4:5   [4272]4:5   [4273]4:6   [4274]4:6
   [4275]4:6   [4276]4:6   [4277]4:6-8   [4278]4:6-8   [4279]4:7-8
   [4280]4:7-8   [4281]4:7-8   [4282]4:11   [4283]4:13-15
   [4284]4:13-16   [4285]4:13-16   [4286]4:14   [4287]4:15   [4288]4:15
   [4289]4:15   [4290]4:16   [4291]4:16   [4292]4:16   [4293]4:16
   [4294]4:16   [4295]4:18   [4296]4:18   [4297]4:18   [4298]4:18-25
   [4299]4:20   [4300]4:24   [4301]4:24   [4302]4:25   [4303]4:25
   [4304]4:25   [4305]4:25   [4306]4:25   [4307]5   [4308]5   [4309]5
   [4310]5   [4311]5   [4312]5   [4313]5   [4314]5   [4315]5   [4316]5
   [4317]5   [4318]5   [4319]5:1-2   [4320]5:1-2   [4321]5:1-5
   [4322]5:2   [4323]5:2-3   [4324]5:3   [4325]5:4   [4326]5:5
   [4327]5:6   [4328]5:6   [4329]5:6-10   [4330]5:6-10   [4331]5:6-10
   [4332]5:6-11   [4333]5:10   [4334]5:11   [4335]5:11   [4336]5:12
   [4337]5:12   [4338]5:12   [4339]5:12   [4340]5:12   [4341]5:12
   [4342]5:12   [4343]5:12   [4344]5:12   [4345]5:12   [4346]5:12
   [4347]5:12   [4348]5:12   [4349]5:12   [4350]5:12   [4351]5:12
   [4352]5:12-14   [4353]5:13   [4354]5:13   [4355]5:13   [4356]5:13
   [4357]5:13-14   [4358]5:13-14   [4359]5:13-14   [4360]5:14
   [4361]5:14   [4362]5:14   [4363]5:14   [4364]5:14   [4365]5:14
   [4366]5:15   [4367]5:15   [4368]5:15   [4369]5:15   [4370]5:15
   [4371]5:15   [4372]5:15-17   [4373]5:15-18   [4374]5:15-18
   [4375]5:16   [4376]5:16   [4377]5:16   [4378]5:16   [4379]5:17
   [4380]5:17   [4381]5:17   [4382]5:17   [4383]5:17   [4384]5:17
   [4385]5:18   [4386]5:18   [4387]5:18   [4388]5:18   [4389]5:18
   [4390]5:18   [4391]5:18   [4392]5:18-19   [4393]5:18-19
   [4394]5:18-19   [4395]5:19   [4396]5:19   [4397]5:19   [4398]5:19
   [4399]5:19   [4400]5:19   [4401]5:19   [4402]5:19   [4403]5:19
   [4404]5:20   [4405]5:20   [4406]5:20   [4407]5:20   [4408]5:20
   [4409]5:20   [4410]5:20   [4411]5:20   [4412]5:20   [4413]5:20
   [4414]5:20   [4415]5:20   [4416]5:21   [4417]5:21   [4418]5:21
   [4419]6   [4420]6   [4421]6   [4422]6   [4423]6   [4424]6   [4425]6
   [4426]6:3   [4427]6:3-5   [4428]6:3-8   [4429]6:4   [4430]6:4-6
   [4431]6:6   [4432]6:9   [4433]6:11   [4434]6:17   [4435]6:17-18
   [4436]6:23   [4437]6:23   [4438]7   [4439]7   [4440]7   [4441]7
   [4442]7   [4443]7   [4444]7   [4445]7   [4446]7   [4447]7:1
   [4448]7:3-4   [4449]7:3-4   [4450]7:4-6   [4451]7:4-13   [4452]7:5
   [4453]7:5   [4454]7:5   [4455]7:6   [4456]7:6   [4457]7:6   [4458]7:7
   [4459]7:7   [4460]7:7   [4461]7:8   [4462]7:8-10   [4463]7:11
   [4464]7:13   [4465]7:13   [4466]7:13   [4467]7:13   [4468]7:13
   [4469]7:14   [4470]7:14   [4471]7:14   [4472]7:15-17   [4473]7:18
   [4474]7:18   [4475]7:18   [4476]7:18   [4477]7:20   [4478]7:22
   [4479]7:23   [4480]7:24   [4481]7:24   [4482]7:25   [4483]7:25
   [4484]8   [4485]8   [4486]8   [4487]8   [4488]8   [4489]8   [4490]8
   [4491]8:1   [4492]8:1   [4493]8:1   [4494]8:1   [4495]8:1   [4496]8:3
   [4497]8:3   [4498]8:3   [4499]8:3   [4500]8:3   [4501]8:4
   [4502]8:4-13   [4503]8:5-6   [4504]8:6   [4505]8:6   [4506]8:6-7
   [4507]8:6-7   [4508]8:7   [4509]8:7-8   [4510]8:7-8   [4511]8:8
   [4512]8:9   [4513]8:9   [4514]8:9   [4515]8:9-11   [4516]8:10
   [4517]8:11   [4518]8:13   [4519]8:13   [4520]8:14   [4521]8:14
   [4522]8:15   [4523]8:15   [4524]8:15   [4525]8:15   [4526]8:15-16
   [4527]8:15-17   [4528]8:16   [4529]8:17   [4530]8:18   [4531]8:18
   [4532]8:20   [4533]8:22   [4534]8:23   [4535]8:24   [4536]8:24
   [4537]8:26   [4538]8:27   [4539]8:28   [4540]8:28   [4541]8:28
   [4542]8:28   [4543]8:28   [4544]8:29   [4545]8:29   [4546]8:30
   [4547]8:34   [4548]8:34   [4549]8:34   [4550]8:35-37   [4551]8:35-37
   [4552]9   [4553]9   [4554]9:2   [4555]9:3   [4556]9:3-5   [4557]9:3-5
   [4558]9:5   [4559]9:5   [4560]9:16   [4561]9:18   [4562]9:20
   [4563]9:22   [4564]9:22   [4565]9:22-23   [4566]9:22-23
   [4567]9:22-23   [4568]9:22-23   [4569]9:23   [4570]9:23
   [4571]9:23-24   [4572]9:27   [4573]9:30-31   [4574]9:31   [4575]9:31
   [4576]9:31-32   [4577]9:31-32   [4578]9:31-32   [4579]9:31-32
   [4580]9:31-32   [4581]9:31-32   [4582]9:33   [4583]10   [4584]10
   [4585]10:2   [4586]10:2   [4587]10:3   [4588]10:3   [4589]10:3
   [4590]10:3   [4591]10:3   [4592]10:3   [4593]10:5   [4594]10:5-6
   [4595]10:5-6   [4596]10:9-10   [4597]10:9-10   [4598]10:9-10
   [4599]10:17   [4600]10:17   [4601]10:18   [4602]10:18   [4603]10:19
   [4604]10:19   [4605]10:19-20   [4606]10:20   [4607]10:20-21
   [4608]11   [4609]11   [4610]11:5   [4611]11:5   [4612]11:6
   [4613]11:6   [4614]11:6   [4615]11:6   [4616]11:6   [4617]11:6
   [4618]11:7   [4619]11:7   [4620]11:12   [4621]11:13-14   [4622]11:15
   [4623]11:17   [4624]11:17-25   [4625]11:20   [4626]11:20
   [4627]11:20   [4628]11:21   [4629]11:22   [4630]11:22   [4631]11:24
   [4632]11:28   [4633]11:28-29   [4634]11:28-29   [4635]11:28-29
   [4636]11:30   [4637]11:30   [4638]11:30-32   [4639]11:31
   [4640]11:32   [4641]11:32   [4642]11:33   [4643]11:36   [4644]11:36
   [4645]11:36   [4646]11:36   [4647]11:36   [4648]12   [4649]12:1-2
   [4650]12:2   [4651]12:2   [4652]12:2   [4653]12:3-8   [4654]12:4-5
   [4655]12:4-8   [4656]12:5   [4657]12:10   [4658]12:11   [4659]12:15
   [4660]12:16   [4661]12:18   [4662]13:7   [4663]13:7   [4664]13:8
   [4665]13:8   [4666]13:8-10   [4667]13:8-10   [4668]13:10
   [4669]13:10   [4670]13:14   [4671]14:3-4   [4672]14:4   [4673]14:6
   [4674]14:6   [4675]14:6-8   [4676]14:7-8   [4677]14:9   [4678]14:10
   [4679]14:11   [4680]14:11   [4681]14:13   [4682]14:16   [4683]14:19
   [4684]14:22   [4685]14:23   [4686]15:1-2   [4687]15:3   [4688]15:5-6
   [4689]15:5-6   [4690]15:5-6   [4691]15:8   [4692]15:14
   [4693]15:15-16   [4694]16   [4695]16:20   [4696]16:25   [4697]16:27

   1 Corinthians

   [4698]1:2   [4699]1:5-7   [4700]1:7   [4701]1:8   [4702]1:8-9
   [4703]1:10   [4704]1:16-17   [4705]1:18   [4706]1:19-20
   [4707]1:19-21   [4708]1:21   [4709]1:21-28   [4710]1:23
   [4711]1:27-29   [4712]1:28   [4713]1:29   [4714]1:29-30
   [4715]1:29-31   [4716]1:29-31   [4717]1:29-31   [4718]1:30
   [4719]1:30   [4720]2   [4721]2:4   [4722]2:7   [4723]2:7   [4724]2:8
   [4725]2:9   [4726]2:9   [4727]2:12   [4728]2:12   [4729]2:13-14
   [4730]2:13-14   [4731]2:14   [4732]2:14   [4733]2:14   [4734]2:14
   [4735]2:14   [4736]2:14-15   [4737]2:14-15   [4738]2:14-15   [4739]3
   [4740]3:1   [4741]3:1   [4742]3:1-2   [4743]3:3   [4744]3:3-4
   [4745]3:8   [4746]3:8   [4747]3:9   [4748]3:9   [4749]3:10-15
   [4750]3:13   [4751]3:16   [4752]3:21   [4753]3:21-23   [4754]3:22-23
   [4755]4:3-4   [4756]4:5   [4757]4:5   [4758]4:15   [4759]4:15
   [4760]4:15   [4761]4:20   [4762]5:5   [4763]5:6-8   [4764]5:7
   [4765]6:1-3   [4766]6:1-3   [4767]6:2   [4768]6:2   [4769]6:2
   [4770]6:3   [4771]6:9   [4772]6:9   [4773]6:9-10   [4774]6:16
   [4775]6:17   [4776]6:17   [4777]6:19   [4778]6:20   [4779]6:20
   [4780]7:20   [4781]7:29-32   [4782]8:2   [4783]9:19-23   [4784]9:25
   [4785]9:26   [4786]9:26   [4787]9:26   [4788]10:1-2   [4789]10:11
   [4790]10:11   [4791]10:16   [4792]10:17   [4793]10:22   [4794]10:30
   [4795]10:31   [4796]10:32-33   [4797]11:7   [4798]11:14   [4799]11:14
   [4800]11:15   [4801]11:19   [4802]11:19   [4803]11:28   [4804]11:28
   [4805]11:28   [4806]11:28   [4807]11:28   [4808]11:28   [4809]11:28
   [4810]11:29   [4811]11:29   [4812]11:30-32   [4813]12:2   [4814]12:3
   [4815]12:12   [4816]12:14   [4817]12:18   [4818]12:18   [4819]12:25
   [4820]12:26   [4821]12:29   [4822]12:31   [4823]13   [4824]13
   [4825]13:1   [4826]13:1-3   [4827]13:2   [4828]13:2   [4829]13:2
   [4830]13:4   [4831]13:4   [4832]13:4-5   [4833]13:6   [4834]13:8
   [4835]13:8-12   [4836]13:10-11   [4837]13:13   [4838]14:7
   [4839]14:14   [4840]14:20   [4841]14:20   [4842]14:26
   [4843]14:29-31   [4844]14:31   [4845]14:31-33   [4846]14:33
   [4847]14:33   [4848]14:37-38   [4849]15   [4850]15   [4851]15:10
   [4852]15:17   [4853]15:18   [4854]15:19   [4855]15:20
   [4856]15:21-22   [4857]15:21-22   [4858]15:21-22   [4859]15:22
   [4860]15:22   [4861]15:22   [4862]15:22   [4863]15:23   [4864]15:24
   [4865]15:25   [4866]15:25-26   [4867]15:27   [4868]15:29-32
   [4869]15:35   [4870]15:40   [4871]15:41   [4872]15:42   [4873]15:43
   [4874]15:45   [4875]15:45-49   [4876]15:47-49   [4877]15:49
   [4878]15:49   [4879]15:50   [4880]15:50   [4881]15:50
   [4882]15:51-53   [4883]15:53   [4884]15:56   [4885]16:1-2
   [4886]16:2   [4887]16:20   [4888]16:22   [4889]16:22   [4890]26
   [4891]27

   2 Corinthians

   [4892]1   [4893]1:4   [4894]1:7   [4895]1:8-10   [4896]1:12
   [4897]1:12   [4898]1:12   [4899]1:12   [4900]1:12   [4901]1:14
   [4902]1:19   [4903]1:20   [4904]1:22   [4905]1:22   [4906]1:22
   [4907]1:24   [4908]2:4   [4909]2:4   [4910]2:4   [4911]2:4
   [4912]2:6-11   [4913]2:8   [4914]2:14   [4915]2:14   [4916]3:3-4
   [4917]3:6-7   [4918]3:7   [4919]3:7   [4920]3:8   [4921]3:8
   [4922]3:9   [4923]3:10   [4924]3:10   [4925]3:12   [4926]3:12-13
   [4927]3:16   [4928]3:18   [4929]3:18   [4930]3:18   [4931]3:18
   [4932]3:18   [4933]3:18   [4934]3:18   [4935]3:18   [4936]3:18
   [4937]4:3-4   [4938]4:3-6   [4939]4:4   [4940]4:4   [4941]4:6
   [4942]4:6   [4943]4:6   [4944]4:6   [4945]4:7   [4946]4:11
   [4947]4:11   [4948]4:11-14   [4949]4:14-15   [4950]4:15   [4951]4:15
   [4952]4:16   [4953]4:16   [4954]4:17   [4955]4:18   [4956]4:18
   [4957]5:1   [4958]5:5   [4959]5:5   [4960]5:5   [4961]5:6-8
   [4962]5:7   [4963]5:7   [4964]5:8   [4965]5:8   [4966]5:10
   [4967]5:14   [4968]5:14   [4969]5:14   [4970]5:14-15   [4971]5:15
   [4972]5:16-17   [4973]5:17   [4974]5:17   [4975]5:18-20   [4976]6
   [4977]6:4-7   [4978]6:10   [4979]6:11   [4980]6:16   [4981]6:16
   [4982]7:4   [4983]7:7   [4984]7:11-16   [4985]7:13   [4986]7:15
   [4987]7:15   [4988]8:2   [4989]8:8   [4990]8:8   [4991]8:8
   [4992]8:8   [4993]8:16   [4994]8:19   [4995]9   [4996]9:13
   [4997]9:14   [4998]10:4   [4999]10:4-5   [5000]10:5   [5001]11:2-3
   [5002]11:31   [5003]12   [5004]12:6   [5005]12:9   [5006]12:15-16
   [5007]12:19   [5008]12:20   [5009]13   [5010]13:5   [5011]13:5
   [5012]13:5   [5013]13:5   [5014]13:11   [5015]13:11   [5016]13:12
   [5017]16

   Galatians

   [5018]1:4-5   [5019]1:6-7   [5020]1:6-7   [5021]1:6-9   [5022]1:6-9
   [5023]1:14   [5024]1:14-16   [5025]2:4   [5026]2:15   [5027]2:15
   [5028]2:15-16   [5029]2:16   [5030]2:16   [5031]2:16   [5032]2:16
   [5033]2:18   [5034]2:18   [5035]2:20   [5036]2:20   [5037]2:20
   [5038]2:20   [5039]2:20   [5040]2:20   [5041]2:20   [5042]2:20
   [5043]2:20   [5044]2:21   [5045]2:21   [5046]2:21   [5047]2:21
   [5048]2:21   [5049]2:21   [5050]3   [5051]3   [5052]3   [5053]3:1
   [5054]3:3   [5055]3:6   [5056]3:6   [5057]3:8   [5058]3:10
   [5059]3:10   [5060]3:10   [5061]3:10   [5062]3:10   [5063]3:10
   [5064]3:10   [5065]3:10   [5066]3:10   [5067]3:10   [5068]3:10-11
   [5069]3:10-13   [5070]3:10-13   [5071]3:11   [5072]3:12   [5073]3:12
   [5074]3:12   [5075]3:12   [5076]3:12   [5077]3:12   [5078]3:12
   [5079]3:12   [5080]3:12   [5081]3:13   [5082]3:13   [5083]3:13
   [5084]3:13   [5085]3:13-14   [5086]3:14   [5087]3:15   [5088]3:16
   [5089]3:17   [5090]3:17   [5091]3:17   [5092]3:17-19   [5093]3:21
   [5094]3:21   [5095]3:21   [5096]3:22   [5097]3:22   [5098]3:29
   [5099]4:1-2   [5100]4:1-3   [5101]4:4   [5102]4:4-6   [5103]4:6
   [5104]4:8   [5105]4:8   [5106]4:11   [5107]4:11   [5108]4:11
   [5109]4:11   [5110]4:13   [5111]4:15   [5112]4:15   [5113]4:15
   [5114]4:15-16   [5115]4:19   [5116]4:26   [5117]4:26   [5118]4:26
   [5119]5   [5120]5   [5121]5:2-4   [5122]5:2-4   [5123]5:4   [5124]5:4
   [5125]5:4   [5126]5:4   [5127]5:4   [5128]5:4   [5129]5:4   [5130]5:4
   [5131]5:14   [5132]5:14   [5133]5:14   [5134]5:14   [5135]5:16
   [5136]5:16   [5137]5:17   [5138]5:18   [5139]5:18   [5140]5:19
   [5141]5:19-20   [5142]5:19-21   [5143]5:19-26   [5144]5:22
   [5145]5:22-23   [5146]5:24   [5147]5:24   [5148]5:25   [5149]6
   [5150]6:1   [5151]6:1   [5152]6:3-4   [5153]6:4   [5154]6:7
   [5155]6:7   [5156]6:9   [5157]6:14   [5158]50   [5159]55:22

   Ephesians

   [5160]1   [5161]1:1   [5162]1:3   [5163]1:3   [5164]1:4   [5165]1:4
   [5166]1:4-5   [5167]1:5   [5168]1:6   [5169]1:6   [5170]1:6
   [5171]1:6   [5172]1:6   [5173]1:6   [5174]1:7   [5175]1:8   [5176]1:8
   [5177]1:9   [5178]1:10   [5179]1:11   [5180]1:12   [5181]1:12
   [5182]1:12   [5183]1:12-13   [5184]1:13   [5185]1:13   [5186]1:13-14
   [5187]1:13-14   [5188]1:13-14   [5189]1:14   [5190]1:14   [5191]1:14
   [5192]1:14   [5193]1:14   [5194]1:14   [5195]1:14   [5196]1:16-23
   [5197]1:17-20   [5198]1:18   [5199]1:18   [5200]1:18-19   [5201]1:19
   [5202]1:19   [5203]1:20-22   [5204]1:20-23   [5205]2   [5206]2:1
   [5207]2:2   [5208]2:3   [5209]2:3   [5210]2:3   [5211]2:3   [5212]2:3
   [5213]2:4   [5214]2:4   [5215]2:4-7   [5216]2:5   [5217]2:5
   [5218]2:6   [5219]2:6   [5220]2:6   [5221]2:7   [5222]2:7   [5223]2:8
   [5224]2:8-9   [5225]2:8-9   [5226]2:8-9   [5227]2:8-9   [5228]2:9
   [5229]2:9   [5230]2:10   [5231]2:10   [5232]2:11   [5233]2:11
   [5234]2:14-15   [5235]2:15   [5236]2:17   [5237]2:19   [5238]2:19
   [5239]2:19   [5240]2:19-22   [5241]2:20   [5242]2:20   [5243]2:20-21
   [5244]2:22   [5245]3:3-5   [5246]3:6   [5247]3:6   [5248]3:7
   [5249]3:7   [5250]3:8-10   [5251]3:8-10   [5252]3:9-11   [5253]3:9-12
   [5254]3:11   [5255]3:16   [5256]3:17-18   [5257]3:17-19   [5258]3:20
   [5259]3:20   [5260]3:21   [5261]3:21   [5262]4:4   [5263]4:4-6
   [5264]4:4-6   [5265]4:5   [5266]4:7   [5267]4:7   [5268]4:11-12
   [5269]4:13   [5270]4:15-16   [5271]4:15-16   [5272]4:16   [5273]4:17
   [5274]4:21-23   [5275]4:22-23   [5276]4:22-24   [5277]4:22-24
   [5278]4:22-24   [5279]4:22-24   [5280]4:22-24   [5281]4:22-24
   [5282]4:30   [5283]4:30   [5284]4:31   [5285]5:5-6   [5286]5:9
   [5287]5:12   [5288]5:13   [5289]5:17   [5290]5:18   [5291]5:19
   [5292]5:21   [5293]5:25   [5294]5:25   [5295]5:30   [5296]5:30
   [5297]6:5   [5298]6:5   [5299]6:6-8   [5300]6:24

   Philippians

   [5301]1:4   [5302]1:6   [5303]1:8   [5304]1:8   [5305]1:9
   [5306]1:10-11   [5307]1:11   [5308]1:11   [5309]1:11   [5310]1:20
   [5311]1:21   [5312]1:25-26   [5313]1:25-26   [5314]2:1   [5315]2:1
   [5316]2:1-2   [5317]2:3   [5318]2:6   [5319]2:6-11   [5320]2:6-11
   [5321]2:7   [5322]2:7-8   [5323]2:7-8   [5324]2:7-9   [5325]2:8
   [5326]2:8   [5327]2:8-9   [5328]2:8-9   [5329]2:8-9   [5330]2:8-9
   [5331]2:10   [5332]2:10-11   [5333]2:11   [5334]2:12   [5335]2:18
   [5336]2:21   [5337]2:21-22   [5338]3   [5339]3   [5340]3   [5341]3
   [5342]3   [5343]3:1   [5344]3:1   [5345]3:3   [5346]3:3   [5347]3:6
   [5348]3:7-8   [5349]3:7-10   [5350]3:8   [5351]3:8-9   [5352]3:8-9
   [5353]3:9   [5354]3:9   [5355]3:10   [5356]3:10-11   [5357]3:10-11
   [5358]3:11   [5359]3:11   [5360]3:12-14   [5361]3:13   [5362]3:13-15
   [5363]3:15   [5364]3:18-19   [5365]4:1   [5366]4:1-2   [5367]4:2
   [5368]4:4   [5369]4:4   [5370]4:5   [5371]4:6   [5372]4:10
   [5373]4:19   [5374]4:20

   Colossians

   [5375]1:4   [5376]1:8   [5377]1:9   [5378]1:9   [5379]1:9
   [5380]1:11   [5381]1:11   [5382]1:15   [5383]1:15-18   [5384]1:16
   [5385]1:16-17   [5386]1:18   [5387]1:21-22   [5388]1:22-23
   [5389]1:24   [5390]1:24   [5391]1:24   [5392]1:26   [5393]1:27
   [5394]1:27   [5395]1:29   [5396]2:1   [5397]2:2   [5398]2:11-12
   [5399]2:11-12   [5400]2:11-13   [5401]2:11-13   [5402]2:13
   [5403]2:14-15   [5404]2:18   [5405]2:18   [5406]2:18   [5407]2:18
   [5408]2:23   [5409]3   [5410]3   [5411]3:1-2   [5412]3:4   [5413]3:4
   [5414]3:7-8   [5415]3:8-10   [5416]3:8-10   [5417]3:9-10   [5418]3:10
   [5419]3:10   [5420]3:11   [5421]3:12   [5422]3:12   [5423]3:12
   [5424]3:12-13   [5425]3:14   [5426]3:16   [5427]3:17   [5428]3:17
   [5429]3:17   [5430]3:17   [5431]4:10   [5432]4:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [5433]1:1   [5434]1:3   [5435]1:5   [5436]1:5-6   [5437]1:9
   [5438]1:10   [5439]2:2   [5440]2:4   [5441]2:7-8   [5442]2:8
   [5443]2:8-10   [5444]2:12   [5445]2:13-15   [5446]2:16   [5447]2:20
   [5448]2:26   [5449]3:9   [5450]4:9   [5451]4:11   [5452]4:13
   [5453]4:16   [5454]4:16-17   [5455]5   [5456]5:8   [5457]5:16
   [5458]5:26

   2 Thessalonians

   [5459]1:1   [5460]1:4   [5461]1:5   [5462]1:5   [5463]1:7   [5464]1:9
   [5465]1:9-10   [5466]1:10   [5467]1:10   [5468]1:11-12   [5469]2:3
   [5470]2:3   [5471]2:3-4   [5472]2:4   [5473]2:4   [5474]2:4
   [5475]2:7   [5476]2:7   [5477]2:7   [5478]2:8   [5479]2:8   [5480]2:9
   [5481]2:13   [5482]2:14

   1 Timothy

   [5483]1:2   [5484]1:3-5   [5485]1:4   [5486]1:5   [5487]1:15
   [5488]1:15-16   [5489]1:17   [5490]2:9   [5491]2:9   [5492]2:9
   [5493]2:9-10   [5494]2:11   [5495]2:11-12   [5496]2:12   [5497]2:12
   [5498]2:15   [5499]2:23   [5500]3:2   [5501]3:15   [5502]3:16
   [5503]3:16   [5504]3:16   [5505]4:3   [5506]4:7   [5507]4:10
   [5508]6:4-5   [5509]6:6   [5510]6:15   [5511]6:17

   2 Timothy

   [5512]1:4   [5513]1:6   [5514]1:7   [5515]1:7   [5516]1:7   [5517]1:7
   [5518]1:9   [5519]1:9   [5520]1:10   [5521]1:12   [5522]1:12
   [5523]1:12   [5524]2   [5525]2   [5526]2:3-5   [5527]2:10
   [5528]2:10   [5529]2:11-12   [5530]2:16   [5531]2:16   [5532]2:20
   [5533]2:24-25   [5534]2:24-26   [5535]2:25   [5536]2:25   [5537]2:25
   [5538]3:5   [5539]3:5   [5540]4:4-8   [5541]4:6-7   [5542]4:6-7
   [5543]4:7-8   [5544]4:8   [5545]4:11   [5546]4:16   [5547]4:18
   [5548]25   [5549]25

   Titus

   [5550]1:1   [5551]1:2   [5552]1:2   [5553]1:4   [5554]1:14
   [5555]1:16   [5556]1:16   [5557]2:8   [5558]2:13   [5559]2:14
   [5560]2:14   [5561]2:14   [5562]3:2   [5563]3:3   [5564]3:3
   [5565]3:3   [5566]3:3   [5567]3:3   [5568]3:3   [5569]3:3-5
   [5570]3:3-7   [5571]3:3-7   [5572]3:5   [5573]3:5   [5574]3:5
   [5575]3:5   [5576]3:5   [5577]3:5   [5578]3:7   [5579]3:7   [5580]3:9
   [5581]3:9

   Philemon

   [5582]1:1   [5583]1:5   [5584]1:5   [5585]1:7   [5586]1:12
   [5587]1:18   [5588]1:18   [5589]1:18   [5590]1:18   [5591]1:20
   [5592]1:24

   Hebrews

   [5593]1:3   [5594]1:6   [5595]1:8   [5596]1:14   [5597]1:14
   [5598]2:3   [5599]2:3   [5600]2:3   [5601]2:4   [5602]2:7
   [5603]2:9-14   [5604]2:10   [5605]2:10   [5606]2:12   [5607]2:12
   [5608]2:18   [5609]3:3   [5610]3:3   [5611]3:3   [5612]3:6
   [5613]3:6   [5614]3:6   [5615]3:6   [5616]3:6   [5617]3:8
   [5618]3:12   [5619]3:12   [5620]3:12   [5621]3:12-13   [5622]3:14
   [5623]3:14   [5624]3:14   [5625]4:8   [5626]4:15   [5627]5:8
   [5628]5:8   [5629]5:8   [5630]5:8   [5631]5:8-9   [5632]5:8-9
   [5633]5:11   [5634]5:14   [5635]6   [5636]6   [5637]6:4-5
   [5638]6:4-6   [5639]6:7-8   [5640]6:7-8   [5641]6:9   [5642]6:9
   [5643]6:9   [5644]6:9-10   [5645]6:9-10   [5646]6:10   [5647]6:10
   [5648]6:11-12   [5649]6:13   [5650]6:17-18   [5651]6:17-18
   [5652]6:18   [5653]6:19   [5654]6:20   [5655]6:20   [5656]7:25
   [5657]8:6   [5658]8:7-8   [5659]8:7-8   [5660]8:11   [5661]9:9
   [5662]9:10   [5663]9:10   [5664]9:12   [5665]9:14   [5666]9:15
   [5667]9:15   [5668]9:26   [5669]9:26   [5670]9:28   [5671]10:5-9
   [5672]10:21   [5673]10:22   [5674]10:25   [5675]10:27   [5676]10:35
   [5677]10:35   [5678]10:36   [5679]10:38-39   [5680]10:38-39
   [5681]11   [5682]11:1   [5683]11:1   [5684]11:1   [5685]11:1
   [5686]11:3   [5687]11:4   [5688]11:5   [5689]11:8   [5690]11:8
   [5691]11:8   [5692]11:8-9   [5693]11:8-10   [5694]11:11-12
   [5695]11:13   [5696]11:13   [5697]11:17   [5698]11:17   [5699]11:17
   [5700]11:17   [5701]11:17   [5702]11:17   [5703]11:17-19
   [5704]11:23   [5705]11:23   [5706]11:26   [5707]11:26   [5708]11:27
   [5709]11:29   [5710]11:31   [5711]11:31   [5712]11:36-38   [5713]12
   [5714]12   [5715]12:1   [5716]12:1-2   [5717]12:1-3   [5718]12:2
   [5719]12:6-8   [5720]12:8   [5721]12:10   [5722]12:10   [5723]12:10
   [5724]12:15   [5725]12:21   [5726]12:22   [5727]12:22-23   [5728]13
   [5729]13:1   [5730]13:5   [5731]13:5-6   [5732]13:9   [5733]13:15
   [5734]13:17   [5735]13:17   [5736]13:21   [5737]13:21   [5738]13:21
   [5739]17   [5740]24

   James

   [5741]1:2-3   [5742]1:3   [5743]1:6-8   [5744]1:8   [5745]1:12
   [5746]1:12   [5747]1:15   [5748]1:18   [5749]1:19   [5750]1:19
   [5751]1:25   [5752]1:26   [5753]1:27   [5754]1:27   [5755]2
   [5756]2:5   [5757]2:8   [5758]2:8   [5759]2:10   [5760]2:13-16
   [5761]2:14   [5762]2:18   [5763]2:18   [5764]2:18   [5765]2:18
   [5766]2:19   [5767]2:19   [5768]2:20   [5769]2:21   [5770]2:21
   [5771]2:21-24   [5772]2:22   [5773]2:25   [5774]2:25   [5775]2:26
   [5776]2:26   [5777]2:26   [5778]3   [5779]3   [5780]3:1-2
   [5781]3:1-2   [5782]3:2   [5783]3:2   [5784]3:7   [5785]3:13
   [5786]3:14-15   [5787]3:14-15   [5788]3:14-17   [5789]3:15
   [5790]3:17   [5791]3:17   [5792]3:21   [5793]3:21   [5794]3:24
   [5795]3:24   [5796]3:25   [5797]3:25   [5798]4:4   [5799]4:4
   [5800]4:5   [5801]4:11   [5802]4:12   [5803]5:11   [5804]9:10

   1 Peter

   [5805]1:2   [5806]1:3   [5807]1:3   [5808]1:3   [5809]1:3-9
   [5810]1:6   [5811]1:7   [5812]1:7   [5813]1:8   [5814]1:8   [5815]1:8
   [5816]1:10-11   [5817]1:10-12   [5818]1:12   [5819]1:12   [5820]1:13
   [5821]1:13-14   [5822]1:17   [5823]1:18   [5824]1:19-20   [5825]1:20
   [5826]1:22-23   [5827]1:23   [5828]1:24   [5829]1:70   [5830]2:2
   [5831]2:2-3   [5832]2:2-3   [5833]2:4   [5834]2:4-5   [5835]2:4-5
   [5836]2:5   [5837]2:6-8   [5838]2:7   [5839]2:9   [5840]2:9
   [5841]2:12   [5842]2:17   [5843]2:17   [5844]2:18   [5845]2:18
   [5846]2:19-20   [5847]2:20   [5848]2:23   [5849]3:2   [5850]3:2
   [5851]3:2   [5852]3:4   [5853]3:8   [5854]3:10-11   [5855]3:15
   [5856]3:15   [5857]3:15   [5858]3:15   [5859]3:18   [5860]3:18
   [5861]3:18   [5862]3:19-20   [5863]3:20-21   [5864]4:1-3   [5865]4:2
   [5866]4:3   [5867]4:7   [5868]4:8   [5869]4:11   [5870]4:11
   [5871]4:12   [5872]4:12   [5873]4:13   [5874]4:14   [5875]4:16-18
   [5876]4:16-18   [5877]4:17   [5878]4:17-18   [5879]5:4   [5880]5:5
   [5881]5:5   [5882]5:5   [5883]5:7   [5884]5:8   [5885]5:10
   [5886]5:12   [5887]5:13   [5888]5:14   [5889]11   [5890]21

   2 Peter

   [5891]1:2   [5892]1:2   [5893]1:3   [5894]1:4   [5895]1:4   [5896]1:4
   [5897]1:5-8   [5898]1:5-11   [5899]1:12-13   [5900]1:16
   [5901]1:16-17   [5902]1:16-18   [5903]1:17   [5904]1:17   [5905]2:13
   [5906]2:17   [5907]2:20   [5908]2:20   [5909]2:21   [5910]3:1
   [5911]3:3   [5912]3:3-4   [5913]3:7   [5914]3:9   [5915]3:9
   [5916]3:9   [5917]3:13   [5918]3:16   [5919]3:18

   1 John

   [5920]1:3   [5921]1:3   [5922]1:5   [5923]1:6   [5924]1:6   [5925]1:7
   [5926]1:7-10   [5927]1:8-10   [5928]1:9   [5929]1:9   [5930]1:9
   [5931]2:3   [5932]2:3   [5933]2:3   [5934]2:3   [5935]2:3   [5936]2:3
   [5937]2:3   [5938]2:4   [5939]2:4   [5940]2:4   [5941]2:4-5
   [5942]2:5   [5943]2:5   [5944]2:5   [5945]2:5   [5946]2:5-6
   [5947]2:7-8   [5948]2:7-11   [5949]2:7-11   [5950]2:9-10   [5951]2:10
   [5952]2:12   [5953]2:12   [5954]2:12   [5955]2:12-14   [5956]2:15
   [5957]2:15   [5958]2:19   [5959]2:19   [5960]2:19   [5961]2:19
   [5962]2:20   [5963]2:20   [5964]2:21   [5965]2:27   [5966]2:28
   [5967]2:28   [5968]2:29   [5969]3:1   [5970]3:2   [5971]3:3
   [5972]3:3   [5973]3:3   [5974]3:3   [5975]3:3   [5976]3:3   [5977]3:6
   [5978]3:6-10   [5979]3:7-8   [5980]3:8   [5981]3:8   [5982]3:9
   [5983]3:9   [5984]3:10   [5985]3:10   [5986]3:10   [5987]3:13
   [5988]3:14   [5989]3:14   [5990]3:14   [5991]3:14   [5992]3:14-19
   [5993]3:17   [5994]3:18   [5995]3:18-19   [5996]3:18-19
   [5997]3:18-19   [5998]3:18-19   [5999]3:18-19   [6000]3:19
   [6001]3:19   [6002]3:19-21   [6003]3:21   [6004]3:23   [6005]3:23
   [6006]3:23   [6007]3:23   [6008]3:23   [6009]3:23-24   [6010]3:23-24
   [6011]3:24   [6012]3:24   [6013]4:1   [6014]4:4   [6015]4:5
   [6016]4:7   [6017]4:7   [6018]4:7-8   [6019]4:8   [6020]4:9-10
   [6021]4:9-10   [6022]4:12   [6023]4:12   [6024]4:12-13
   [6025]4:12-13   [6026]4:13   [6027]4:13   [6028]4:13-16   [6029]4:14
   [6030]4:15   [6031]4:15   [6032]4:15   [6033]4:15   [6034]4:15-16
   [6035]4:16   [6036]4:16   [6037]4:17-18   [6038]4:18   [6039]4:18
   [6040]4:19   [6041]4:20   [6042]4:20   [6043]4:24   [6044]5:1
   [6045]5:1   [6046]5:1   [6047]5:2   [6048]5:3   [6049]5:3   [6050]5:3
   [6051]5:4-5   [6052]5:8   [6053]5:10   [6054]5:10   [6055]5:10
   [6056]5:12   [6057]5:12   [6058]5:12   [6059]5:12   [6060]5:12-13
   [6061]5:19   [6062]5:19   [6063]5:19

   2 John

   [6064]1:6   [6065]1:6

   3 John

   [6066]1:3   [6067]1:3-6   [6068]1:3-6   [6069]1:7   [6070]1:10
   [6071]1:11   [6072]1:11

   Jude

   [6073]1:3   [6074]1:4   [6075]1:4   [6076]1:4   [6077]1:7   [6078]1:7
   [6079]1:12   [6080]1:12   [6081]1:13   [6082]1:14   [6083]1:15
   [6084]1:16   [6085]1:17   [6086]1:18   [6087]1:19   [6088]1:19
   [6089]1:19   [6090]1:25   [6091]2:22   [6092]3:1   [6093]4:12

   Revelation

   [6094]1   [6095]1   [6096]1:5   [6097]1:5-6   [6098]1:7   [6099]1:7
   [6100]1:8   [6101]1:8   [6102]1:10   [6103]1:10-11   [6104]1:11
   [6105]1:17   [6106]1:17   [6107]1:18   [6108]2   [6109]2   [6110]2:3
   [6111]2:7   [6112]2:11   [6113]2:13   [6114]2:13   [6115]2:17
   [6116]2:17   [6117]2:17   [6118]2:17   [6119]2:23   [6120]2:23
   [6121]2:23   [6122]2:26   [6123]3   [6124]3   [6125]3:1   [6126]3:1
   [6127]3:4   [6128]3:4   [6129]3:4   [6130]3:4   [6131]3:5   [6132]3:7
   [6133]3:10   [6134]3:10   [6135]3:10   [6136]3:12   [6137]3:15-16
   [6138]3:15-16   [6139]3:17   [6140]3:17-18   [6141]3:19   [6142]3:19
   [6143]3:20   [6144]3:20   [6145]3:20-21   [6146]3:21   [6147]3:21
   [6148]4:8   [6149]4:9   [6150]4:11-14   [6151]5:2-5   [6152]5:5-6
   [6153]5:8   [6154]5:8-12   [6155]5:9   [6156]5:9   [6157]5:9-12
   [6158]5:10   [6159]5:10   [6160]5:12   [6161]6   [6162]6
   [6163]6:9-10   [6164]6:10   [6165]6:10   [6166]6:10   [6167]6:11
   [6168]6:11   [6169]7   [6170]7:1-3   [6171]7:3   [6172]7:12
   [6173]7:14   [6174]7:17   [6175]8   [6176]8:4   [6177]8:13   [6178]9
   [6179]9   [6180]9   [6181]9:12   [6182]9:15   [6183]9:23   [6184]10
   [6185]11   [6186]11   [6187]11   [6188]11   [6189]11   [6190]11
   [6191]11   [6192]11   [6193]11:1   [6194]11:2   [6195]11:2
   [6196]11:7   [6197]11:7-8   [6198]11:7-8   [6199]11:8   [6200]11:8
   [6201]11:8   [6202]11:8-9   [6203]11:13   [6204]11:13   [6205]11:14
   [6206]11:14   [6207]11:14-15   [6208]11:15   [6209]11:18
   [6210]11:19   [6211]12   [6212]12   [6213]12   [6214]12   [6215]12
   [6216]12   [6217]12:1   [6218]12:1-2   [6219]12:2   [6220]12:6
   [6221]12:6   [6222]12:7   [6223]12:9   [6224]12:9   [6225]12:14
   [6226]12:14   [6227]12:15   [6228]13   [6229]13:3   [6230]13:3
   [6231]13:5   [6232]13:5   [6233]13:5   [6234]13:6-7   [6235]13:7
   [6236]13:7   [6237]13:7   [6238]13:7   [6239]13:8   [6240]13:10
   [6241]13:13-14   [6242]13:17   [6243]14   [6244]14:1   [6245]14:3-4
   [6246]14:4   [6247]14:4   [6248]14:4   [6249]14:4   [6250]14:4-5
   [6251]14:6-7   [6252]14:6-8   [6253]14:8   [6254]14:10   [6255]14:12
   [6256]14:13   [6257]14:13   [6258]14:14   [6259]14:14-16
   [6260]14:19-20   [6261]15:3   [6262]15:4   [6263]15:8   [6264]16
   [6265]16   [6266]16   [6267]16   [6268]16   [6269]16   [6270]16
   [6271]16   [6272]16:9   [6273]16:10   [6274]16:10-11   [6275]16:13-14
   [6276]16:14   [6277]16:15   [6278]16:16   [6279]16:16
   [6280]16:16-17   [6281]16:17   [6282]16:17-18   [6283]16:18
   [6284]16:19-20   [6285]16:21   [6286]17:3-4   [6287]17:4   [6288]17:6
   [6289]17:6   [6290]17:9   [6291]17:12-13   [6292]17:14   [6293]17:15
   [6294]17:16   [6295]17:17   [6296]17:18   [6297]18   [6298]18:1
   [6299]18:6-7   [6300]18:7   [6301]18:12   [6302]18:13   [6303]18:13
   [6304]18:16   [6305]18:20   [6306]18:20   [6307]18:24   [6308]19
   [6309]19   [6310]19   [6311]19   [6312]19   [6313]19   [6314]19
   [6315]19   [6316]19:1-3   [6317]19:6   [6318]19:6-7   [6319]19:7
   [6320]19:7   [6321]19:7-8   [6322]19:7-9   [6323]19:8   [6324]19:9
   [6325]19:10   [6326]19:10   [6327]19:11   [6328]19:11   [6329]19:16
   [6330]19:16   [6331]19:17   [6332]19:17-18   [6333]19:19
   [6334]19:20   [6335]20   [6336]20   [6337]20:1-3   [6338]20:3
   [6339]20:3   [6340]20:4   [6341]20:4   [6342]20:4   [6343]20:6
   [6344]20:7-8   [6345]20:8   [6346]20:8-9   [6347]20:11   [6348]20:12
   [6349]20:12   [6350]20:13   [6351]20:13   [6352]20:14   [6353]21
   [6354]21   [6355]21   [6356]21:1   [6357]21:1   [6358]21:1
   [6359]21:1   [6360]21:2   [6361]21:3   [6362]21:6   [6363]21:6
   [6364]21:6   [6365]21:6   [6366]21:6   [6367]21:6   [6368]21:6
   [6369]21:6-7   [6370]21:8   [6371]21:10   [6372]21:11   [6373]21:11
   [6374]21:14   [6375]21:14   [6376]21:18   [6377]21:21   [6378]21:23
   [6379]21:24   [6380]21:24   [6381]21:24   [6382]21:24   [6383]21:26
   [6384]21:27   [6385]21:27   [6386]22   [6387]22:1   [6388]22:1
   [6389]22:1   [6390]22:3   [6391]22:7   [6392]22:7   [6393]22:12
   [6394]22:12-13   [6395]22:13   [6396]22:14-15   [6397]22:14-15
   [6398]22:15   [6399]22:16   [6400]22:16   [6401]22:16
   [6402]22:16-17   [6403]22:16-17   [6404]22:17   [6405]22:17
   [6406]22:17   [6407]22:17   [6408]22:17   [6409]22:18   [6410]22:19

   2 Esdras

   [6411]3:21   [6412]4:30   [6413]7:46
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [6414]iii  [6415]iv  [6416]v  [6417]vi  [6418]vii  [6419]xi  [6420]xii
   [6421]xiii  [6422]xiv  [6423]xv  [6424]xvi  [6425]xvii  [6426]xviii
   [6427]xix  [6428]xx  [6429]xxi  [6430]xxii  [6431]xxiii  [6432]xxiv
   [6433]xxiv  [6434]xxv  [6435]xxvi  [6436]xxvii  [6437]xxviii
   [6438]xxix  [6439]xxx  [6440]xxxi  [6441]xxxii  [6442]xxxiii
   [6443]xxxiv  [6444]xxxv  [6445]xxxvi  [6446]xxxvii  [6447]xxxviii
   [6448]xxxix  [6449]xl  [6450]xli  [6451]xlii  [6452]xliii  [6453]xliv
   [6454]xlv  [6455]xlvi  [6456]xlvii  [6457]xlviii  [6458]xlix  [6459]l
   [6460]li  [6461]lii  [6462]liii  [6463]liv  [6464]lv  [6465]lvi
   [6466]lvii  [6467]lviii  [6468]lix  [6469]lx  [6470]lxi  [6471]lxii
   [6472]lxiii  [6473]lxiv  [6474]lxv  [6475]lxvi  [6476]lxvii
   [6477]lxviii  [6478]lxix  [6479]lxx  [6480]lxxi  [6481]lxxii
   [6482]lxxiii  [6483]lxxiv  [6484]lxxv  [6485]lxxvi  [6486]lxxvii
   [6487]lxxviii  [6488]lxxix  [6489]lxxx  [6490]lxxxi  [6491]lxxxii
   [6492]lxxxiii  [6493]lxxxiv  [6494]lxxxv  [6495]lxxxvi  [6496]lxxxvii
   [6497]lxxxviii  [6498]lxxxix  [6499]xc  [6500]xci  [6501]xcii
   [6502]xciii  [6503]xciv  [6504]xcv  [6505]xcvi  [6506]xcvii
   [6507]xcviii  [6508]xcix  [6509]c  [6510]ci  [6511]cii  [6512]ciii
   [6513]civ  [6514]cv  [6515]cvi  [6516]cvii  [6517]cviii  [6518]cix
   [6519]cx  [6520]cxi  [6521]cxii  [6522]cxiii  [6523]cxiv  [6524]cxv
   [6525]cxvi  [6526]cxvii  [6527]cxviii  [6528]cxix  [6529]cxx
   [6530]cxxi  [6531]cxxii  [6532]cxxiii  [6533]cxxiv  [6534]cxxv
   [6535]cxxvi  [6536]cxxvii  [6537]cxxviii  [6538]cxxix  [6539]cxxx
   [6540]cxxxi  [6541]cxxxii  [6542]cxxxiii  [6543]cxxxiv  [6544]cxxxv
   [6545]cxxxvi  [6546]cxxxvii  [6547]cxxxviii  [6548]cxxxix  [6549]cxl
   [6550]cxli  [6551]cxlii  [6552]cxliii  [6553]cxliv  [6554]xlv
   [6555]cxlvi  [6556]cxlvii  [6557]cxlviii  [6558]cxlix  [6559]cl
   [6560]cli  [6561]clii  [6562]cliii  [6563]cliv  [6564]clv  [6565]clvi
   [6566]clvii  [6567]clviii  [6568]clix  [6569]clx  [6570]clxi
   [6571]clxii  [6572]clxiii  [6573]clxiv  [6574]clxv  [6575]clxvi
   [6576]clxvii  [6577]clxviii  [6578]clxix  [6579]clxx  [6580]clxxi
   [6581]clxxii  [6582]clxxiii  [6583]clxxiv  [6584]clxxv  [6585]clxxvi
   [6586]clxxvii  [6587]clxxviii  [6588]clxxix  [6589]clxxx  [6590]clxxxi
   [6591]clxxxii  [6592]clxxxiii  [6593]clxxxiv  [6594]clxxxv
   [6595]clxxxvi  [6596]clxxxvii  [6597]clxxxviii  [6598]clxxxix
   [6599]cxc  [6600]cxci  [6601]cxcii  [6602]cxciii  [6603]cxciv
   [6604]cxcv  [6605]cxcvi  [6606]cxcvii  [6607]cxcviii  [6608]cxcix
   [6609]cc  [6610]cci  [6611]ccii  [6612]cciii  [6613]cciv  [6614]ccv
   [6615]ccvi  [6616]ccvii  [6617]ccviii  [6618]ccix  [6619]ccx
   [6620]ccxi  [6621]ccxii  [6622]ccxiii  [6623]ccxiv  [6624]ccxv
   [6625]ccxvi  [6626]ccxvii  [6627]ccxviii  [6628]ccxix  [6629]ccxx
   [6630]ccxxi  [6631]ccxxii  [6632]ccxxiii  [6633]ccxxiv  [6634]ccxxv
   [6635]ccxxvi  [6636]ccxxvii  [6637]ccxxviii  [6638]ccxxix  [6639]ccxxx
   [6640]ccxxxi  [6641]ccxxxii  [6642]ccxxxii  [6643]ccxxxv  [6644]3
   [6645]4  [6646]5  [6647]6  [6648]7  [6649]8  [6650]9  [6651]10
   [6652]11  [6653]12  [6654]13  [6655]14  [6656]15  [6657]1  [6658]17
   [6659]18  [6660]19  [6661]20  [6662]21  [6663]22  [6664]23  [6665]24
   [6666]25  [6667]26  [6668]27  [6669]28  [6670]29  [6671]30  [6672]31
   [6673]32  [6674]33  [6675]34  [6676]35  [6677]36  [6678]37  [6679]38
   [6680]39  [6681]40  [6682]41  [6683]42  [6684]43  [6685]44  [6686]45
   [6687]46  [6688]47  [6689]48  [6690]49  [6691]50  [6692]51  [6693]52
   [6694]53  [6695]54  [6696]55  [6697]56  [6698]57  [6699]58  [6700]59
   [6701]60  [6702]61  [6703]62  [6704]63  [6705]64  [6706]65  [6707]66
   [6708]67  [6709]68  [6710]69  [6711]70  [6712]71  [6713]72  [6714]73
   [6715]74  [6716]75  [6717]76  [6718]77  [6719]78  [6720]79  [6721]80
   [6722]81  [6723]82  [6724]83  [6725]84  [6726]85  [6727]86  [6728]87
   [6729]88  [6730]89  [6731]90  [6732]91  [6733]92  [6734]93  [6735]94
   [6736]95  [6737]96  [6738]97  [6739]98  [6740]99  [6741]100  [6742]101
   [6743]102  [6744]103  [6745]104  [6746]105  [6747]106  [6748]107
   [6749]108  [6750]109  [6751]110  [6752]111  [6753]112  [6754]113
   [6755]114  [6756]115  [6757]116  [6758]117  [6759]118  [6760]119
   [6761]120  [6762]121  [6763]122  [6764]123  [6765]124  [6766]125
   [6767]126  [6768]127  [6769]128  [6770]128  [6771]129  [6772]131
   [6773]132  [6774]133  [6775]135  [6776]136  [6777]137  [6778]138
   [6779]139  [6780]140  [6781]141  [6782]142  [6783]143  [6784]144
   [6785]145  [6786]146  [6787]147  [6788]148  [6789]149  [6790]150
   [6791]151  [6792]152  [6793]153  [6794]154  [6795]155  [6796]156
   [6797]157  [6798]158  [6799]159  [6800]160  [6801]161  [6802]162
   [6803]163  [6804]164  [6805]165  [6806]166  [6807]167  [6808]168
   [6809]169  [6810]170  [6811]171  [6812]172  [6813]173  [6814]174
   [6815]175  [6816]176  [6817]177  [6818]178  [6819]179  [6820]180
   [6821]181  [6822]182  [6823]183  [6824]184  [6825]185  [6826]186
   [6827]187  [6828]188  [6829]189  [6830]190  [6831]191  [6832]192
   [6833]93  [6834]194  [6835]195  [6836]196  [6837]197  [6838]198
   [6839]199  [6840]200  [6841]201  [6842]202  [6843]203  [6844]204
   [6845]205  [6846]206  [6847]207  [6848]208  [6849]209  [6850]210
   [6851]211  [6852]212  [6853]213  [6854]214  [6855]215  [6856]216
   [6857]217  [6858]218  [6859]219  [6860]220  [6861]221  [6862]222
   [6863]223  [6864]224  [6865]225  [6866]226  [6867]227  [6868]228
   [6869]229  [6870]230  [6871]231  [6872]232  [6873]233  [6874]234
   [6875]235  [6876]236  [6877]237  [6878]238  [6879]239  [6880]240
   [6881]241  [6882]242  [6883]243  [6884]244  [6885]245  [6886]246
   [6887]247  [6888]248  [6889]249  [6890]250  [6891]251  [6892]252
   [6893]253  [6894]254  [6895]255  [6896]256  [6897]257  [6898]258
   [6899]259  [6900]260  [6901]261  [6902]262  [6903]263  [6904]264
   [6905]265  [6906]266  [6907]267  [6908]268  [6909]269  [6910]270
   [6911]271  [6912]272  [6913]273  [6914]274  [6915]275  [6916]276
   [6917]277  [6918]278  [6919]279  [6920]280  [6921]281  [6922]282
   [6923]283  [6924]284  [6925]285  [6926]286  [6927]287  [6928]288
   [6929]289  [6930]290  [6931]291  [6932]292  [6933]293  [6934]294
   [6935]295  [6936]296  [6937]297  [6938]298  [6939]299  [6940]300
   [6941]301  [6942]302  [6943]303  [6944]304  [6945]305  [6946]306
   [6947]307  [6948]308  [6949]309  [6950]310  [6951]311  [6952]312
   [6953]313  [6954]314  [6955]315  [6956]316  [6957]317  [6958]318
   [6959]319  [6960]320  [6961]321  [6962]322  [6963]323  [6964]324
   [6965]325  [6966]326  [6967]327  [6968]328  [6969]329  [6970]330
   [6971]331  [6972]332  [6973]333  [6974]334  [6975]335  [6976]336
   [6977]337  [6978]338  [6979]339  [6980]340  [6981]341  [6982]342
   [6983]343  [6984]344  [6985]345  [6986]346  [6987]347  [6988]348
   [6989]349  [6990]350  [6991]351  [6992]352  [6993]353  [6994]354
   [6995]355  [6996]356  [6997]357  [6998]358  [6999]359  [7000]360
   [7001]361  [7002]362  [7003]363  [7004]364  [7005]366  [7006]367
   [7007]368  [7008]369  [7009]370  [7010]371  [7011]372  [7012]373
   [7013]373  [7014]374  [7015]375  [7016]376  [7017]377  [7018]378
   [7019]379  [7020]379  [7021]381  [7022]382  [7023]383  [7024]384
   [7025]385  [7026]386  [7027]387  [7028]388  [7029]389  [7030]390
   [7031]391  [7032]392  [7033]393  [7034]394  [7035]395  [7036]396
   [7037]397  [7038]398  [7039]399  [7040]400  [7041]401  [7042]402
   [7043]403  [7044]404  [7045]405  [7046]406  [7047]407  [7048]408
   [7049]409  [7050]410  [7051]411  [7052]412  [7053]413  [7054]414
   [7055]415  [7056]416  [7057]417  [7058]418  [7059]419  [7060]420
   [7061]421  [7062]422  [7063]423  [7064]424  [7065]425  [7066]426
   [7067]427  [7068]428  [7069]429  [7070]430  [7071]431  [7072]432
   [7073]433  [7074]434  [7075]435  [7076]436  [7077]437  [7078]438
   [7079]439  [7080]440  [7081]441  [7082]442  [7083]443  [7084]444
   [7085]445  [7086]446  [7087]447  [7088]448  [7089]449  [7090]450
   [7091]451  [7092]452  [7093]453  [7094]454  [7095]455  [7096]456
   [7097]457  [7098]458  [7099]459  [7100]460  [7101]461  [7102]462
   [7103]463  [7104]464  [7105]465  [7106]466  [7107]467  [7108]468
   [7109]469  [7110]470  [7111]471  [7112]472  [7113]473  [7114]474
   [7115]475  [7116]476  [7117]477  [7118]478  [7119]479  [7120]480
   [7121]481  [7122]482  [7123]483  [7124]484  [7125]485  [7126]486
   [7127]487  [7128]488  [7129]489  [7130]490  [7131]491  [7132]492
   [7133]493  [7134]494  [7135]495  [7136]496  [7137]497  [7138]498
   [7139]499  [7140]500  [7141]501  [7142]502  [7143]503  [7144]504
   [7145]505  [7146]506  [7147]507  [7148]508  [7149]509  [7150]510
   [7151]511  [7152]512  [7153]513  [7154]514  [7155]515  [7156]516
   [7157]517  [7158]518  [7159]519  [7160]520  [7161]521  [7162]522
   [7163]523  [7164]524  [7165]525  [7166]526  [7167]527  [7168]528
   [7169]529  [7170]530  [7171]531  [7172]532  [7173]533  [7174]534
   [7175]535  [7176]536  [7177]537  [7178]538  [7179]539  [7180]540
   [7181]541  [7182]542  [7183]543  [7184]544  [7185]545  [7186]546
   [7187]547  [7188]548  [7189]549  [7190]550  [7191]551  [7192]552
   [7193]553  [7194]554  [7195]555  [7196]556  [7197]557  [7198]558
   [7199]559  [7200]560  [7201]561  [7202]563  [7203]564  [7204]565
   [7205]566  [7206]567  [7207]568  [7208]569  [7209]570  [7210]571
   [7211]572  [7212]573  [7213]574  [7214]575  [7215]576  [7216]577
   [7217]578  [7218]579  [7219]580  [7220]581  [7221]582  [7222]583
   [7223]584  [7224]585  [7225]586  [7226]587  [7227]588  [7228]589
   [7229]590  [7230]591  [7231]592  [7232]593  [7233]594  [7234]595
   [7235]596  [7236]597  [7237]598  [7238]599  [7239]600  [7240]601
   [7241]602  [7242]603  [7243]604  [7244]605  [7245]606  [7246]607
   [7247]608  [7248]609  [7249]610  [7250]611  [7251]612  [7252]613
   [7253]614  [7254]615  [7255]616  [7256]617  [7257]618  [7258]619
   [7259]620  [7260]621  [7261]622  [7262]623  [7263]624  [7264]625
   [7265]626  [7266]627  [7267]628  [7268]628  [7269]630  [7270]631
   [7271]632  [7272]633  [7273]634  [7274]635  [7275]636  [7276]637
   [7277]638  [7278]639  [7279]640  [7280]641  [7281]642  [7282]643
   [7283]644  [7284]645  [7285]646  [7286]647  [7287]648  [7288]649
   [7289]650  [7290]651  [7291]652  [7292]653  [7293]654  [7294]655
   [7295]623  [7296]624  [7297]625  [7298]626  [7299]627  [7300]628
   [7301]628  [7302]630  [7303]631  [7304]632  [7305]633  [7306]634
   [7307]635  [7308]636  [7309]637  [7310]638  [7311]639  [7312]640
   [7313]641  [7314]642  [7315]643  [7316]644  [7317]645  [7318]646
   [7319]647  [7320]648  [7321]649  [7322]650  [7323]651  [7324]652
   [7325]653  [7326]654  [7327]655  [7328]656  [7329]657  [7330]658
   [7331]659  [7332]660  [7333]661  [7334]662  [7335]663  [7336]664
   [7337]665  [7338]666  [7339]667  [7340]668  [7341]669  [7342]670
   [7343]671  [7344]672  [7345]673  [7346]674  [7347]675  [7348]676
   [7349]677  [7350]678  [7351]679  [7352]680  [7353]681  [7354]682
   [7355]683  [7356]684  [7357]685  [7358]686  [7359]687  [7360]688
   [7361]689  [7362]690  [7363]691
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
